PICES Scientific Report No. 20 
2002 
 
 
 
 
PICES-GLOBEC INTERNATIONAL PROGRAM ON 
CLIMATE CHANGE AND CARRYING CAPACITY 
 
 
 
REPORT OF  
2001 BASS/MODEL, MONITOR and REX Workshops,  
and THE 2002 MODEL/REX Workshop 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Edited by 
Harold P. Batchelder (CCCC IP), Gordon A. McFarlane (BASS), Bernard A. Megrey (MODEL), 
David L. Mackas (MONITOR), William T. Peterson (REX) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
August 2002 
Secretariat / Publisher 
North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES) 
c/o Institute of Ocean Sciences, P.O. Box 6000, Sidney, B.C., Canada. V8L 4B2 
E-mail:  secretariat@pices.int       Home Page:  http://www.pices.int    
 
- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 Page 
 
Executive Summary.......................................................................................................................v 
 
Report of the 2001 BASS/MODEL Workshop 
To review ecosystem models for the subarctic gyres ................................................................1 
 
Report of the 2001 MONITOR Workshop 
 To review progress in monitoring the North Pacific .................................................................9 
Sonia D. Batten 
 PICES Continuous Plankton Recorder pilot project.................................................................10 
 Phillip R. Mundy 
 GEM (Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Trustee Council`s “Gulf Ecosystem Monitoring” 
 initiative) and U.S. GOOS plans in the North Pacific ..............................................................12 
Ron McLaren and Brian O`Donnell 
 A proposal for a North Pacific Action group of the international Data Buoy 
 Cooperation Panel ................................................................................................................13 
Gilberto Gaxiola-Castrol and Sila Najera-Martinez 
 The Mexican oceanographic North Pacific program:  IMECOCAL..........................................14 
Sydney Levitus 
 Building global ocean profile and plankton databases for scientific research.............................17 
 
Report of the 2001 REX Workshop 
 On temporal variations in size-at-age for fish species in coastal areas around 
 the Pacific Rim.........................................................................................................................19 
Brian J. Pyper, Randall M. Peterman, Michael F. Lapointe and Carl J. Walters 
 Spatial patterns of covariation in size-at-age of British Columbia  
 and Alaska sockeye salmon stocks and effects of abundance and ocean temperature .................20 
R. Bruce MacFarlane, Steven Ralston, Chantell Royer and Elizabeth C. Norton 
 Influences of the 1997-1998 El Niño and 1999 La Niña on juvenile Chinook salmon  
 in  the Gulf of the Farallones.................................................................................................25 
Olga S. Temnykh and Sergey L. Marchenko 
 Variability of the pink salmon sizes in relation with abundance of Okhotsk Sea stocks..............29 
Ludmila A. Chernoivanova, Alexander N. Vdoven and D.V. Antonenko 
 The characteristic growth rate of herring in Peter the Great Bay (Japan/East Sea) .....................34 
Nikolay I. Naumenko 
 Temporal variations in size-at-age of the western Bering Sea herring.......................................37 
Evelyn D. Brown 
 Effects of climate on Pacific herring, Clupea pallasii, in the northern Gulf of Alaska 
 and Prince William Sound, Alaska.........................................................................................44 
Jake Schweigert, Fritz Funk, Ken Oda and Tom Moore  
 Herring size-at-age variation in the North Pacific....................................................................47 
Ron W. Tanasichuk 
 Implications of variation in euphausiid productivity for the growth, production and 
 resilience of Pacific herring (Clupea pallasi) from the southwest coast of Vancouver Island......57 
Chikako Watanabe, Ahihiko Yatsu and Yoshiro Watanabe 
 Changes in growth with fluctuation of chub mackerel abundance in the Pacific waters off 
 central Japan from 1970 to 1997............................................................................................60 
Yoshiro Watanabe, Yoshiaki Hiyama, Chikako Watanabe and Shiro Takayana 
 Inter-decadal fluctuations in length-at-age of Hokkaido-Sakhalin herring and Japanese 
 sardine in the Sea of Japan ....................................................................................................63 
Pavel A. balykin and Alexander V. Buslov 
 Long-term variability in length of walley pollock in the western Bering Sea and 
 east Kamchtka......................................................................................................................67 
Alexander A. Bonk 
 Effect of population abundance increase on herring distribution in the western Bering Sea........69 
Sergey N. Tarasyuk 
 Survival of yellowfin sole (Limanda aspera Pallas) in the northern part of the Tatar Strait 
th
 (Sea of Japan) during the second half of the 20 century .........................................................71 
 
Report of the 2002 MODEL/REX Workshop 
 To develop a marine ecosystem model of the North Pacific Ocean including 
 pelagic fishes............................................................................................................................77 
Summary ..................................................................................................................................77 
Workshop overview ..................................................................................................................77 
Workshop presentations ...........................................................................................................80 
Bernard A. Megrey, Kenny Rose, Francisco E. Werner, Robert A. Klumb and  
Douglas E. Hay 
  A generalized fish bioenergetics/biomass model with an application to Pacific herring ........ 80 
Robert A. Klumb 
 Review of Clupeid biology with emphasis on energetics ...................................................88 
Douglas E. Hay 
 Reflections of factors affecting size-at-age and strong year classes of herring in 
 the North Pacific ............................................................................................................94 
Shin-ichi Ito, Yutaka Kurita, Yoshioki Oozeki, Satoshi Suyama, Hiroya Sugisaki  
and  Yongjin Tian 
 Review for Pacific saury (Cololabis saira) study under the VENFISH project ....................97 
Alexander V. Leonov and Gennady A. Kantakov 
 Formalization of interactions between chemical and biological compartments in  
 the mathematical model describing the transformation of nitrogen, phosphorus,  
 silicon and carbon compounds ..............................................................................................100 
Herring group report and model results .................................................................................107 
Saury group report and model results ....................................................................................114 
Model experiments and hypotheses.........................................................................................119 
Recommendations...................................................................................................................120 
Achievements and future steps................................................................................................122 
Acknowledgements .................................................................................................................122 
References ..............................................................................................................................122 
Appendix 1 List of participants............................................................................................129 
Appendices 2-5 FORTRAN codes .......................................................................................131 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
 
This report summarizes the results of three PICES-GLOBEC Climate Change and Carrying Capacity 
(CCCC) Task Team (TT) workshops held at the PICES Tenth Annual Meeting in October 2001, in 
Victoria, British Columbia, Canada and a joint MODEL/REX workshop held in Nemuro, Japan, in 
January 2002.  The three workshops during the Annual Meeting were:  1) a 1-day joint BASS/MODEL 
workshop to review ecosystem models for the subarctic Pacific gyres, 2) a 1-day MONITOR workshop to 
review progress in monitoring the North Pacific, and 3) a 1-day REX workshop on temporal variations in 
size-at-age for fish species in coastal areas around the Pacific rim.  Each of these workshops addressed 
the core activities of these Task Teams;  moreover, they continue a trend of having joint workshops of 
multiple Task Teams, which provides opportunities to broaden the scope of the discussions and lead to 
synthesis.  This trend to multi-Task Team workshops is timely because during the coming year, and 
particularly at the PICES Eleventh Annual Meeting (Qingdao, People’s Republic of China), CCCC will 
be examining progress achieved during the past decade, documenting its successes and failures in 
answering the scientific questions posed initially, and evaluating whether the current structure of Task 
Teams and Advisory Panels is the most suitable to carry CCCC research forward into the next decade. 
 
The joint BASS/MODEL workshop focused on two ECOPATH equilibrium models describing energy 
flow through the eastern and western subarctic gyres, and explored the dynamics of energy flow in these 
two systems using ECOPATH/ECOSIM formulations.  The equilibrium models suggest that biomass in 
the western subarctic gyre (WSA) is higher than in the eastern subarctic gyre (ESA).  Biomasses of 
several species (flying squid, pomfret, chaetognaths and salmon) were higher in the WSA than in the 
ESA.  A conclusion of these ECOPATH investigations was that estimates of diet compositions for many 
of the species were poorly known.  Several recommendations regarding future research resulted from the 
workshop, including improving the quality of available input data sets (like diet).  BASS and MODEL 
plan to continue their joint work on this project by linking the ECOPATH/ECOSIM higher trophic model 
to the NEMURO model of lower trophic levels dynamically.  Since the NEMURO model is forced by 
ocean conditions (mixed layer depth, temperature, insolation, etc.), this linking of models will provide a 
method for exploring the results of various climate change scenarios on higher trophic levels in the WSA 
and ESA.  
 
The MONITOR workshop was focused on reviewing the need and capability of sustained, long-term 
monitoring of ocean and ecosystem conditions in the PICES region, especially considering the recent 
emphasis within PICES on producing a North Pacific Ecosystem Status Report.  Presentations at the 
workshop summarized some of the tools that are available now or could be put into place to assist this 
effort - including both regional networks of coastal observing systems, Continuous Plankton Recording 
(CPR) across the gyres, and data management.  Among other recommendations, MONITOR would like to 
develop a closer liaison with regional (Gulf Ecosystem Monitoring [GEM]) and international (Data Buoy 
Cooperation Panel [DBCP], Coastal Global Ocean Observing System [C-GOOS]) providers of ocean 
data, and extend CPR observations of the subarctic gyres to other ancillary data types beyond zooplankton 
biomass and species composition. 
 
The REX workshop summarized historical datasets on salmon and herring populations across the Pacific, 
with additional contributions on a few other species.  Several key themes that emerged from the workshop 
were:  1) the importance of understanding the spatial coherence and scales of size-at-age patterns, 2) the 
search for mechanistic (causal) as opposed to correlational explanations of common temporal trends 
between the environmental variables and size-at-age data, and 3) the influence of density-dependence and 
the mechanisms through which it affects size-at-age changes through time. 
 
The fourth report is the result of a joint MODEL/REX workshop that brought scientists involved in 
developing the NEMURO model together with experts on saury and herring growth.  The principal 
objective was to include a fish growth model into the lower trophic level NEMURO model.  For 
efficiency, the group focused on modeling the growth of a single fish using input data on prey abundances 
and temperature provided by the NEMURO model.  A previously published clupeid bioenergetics model 
(from the Atlantic) was adapted to two different important fish in the North Pacific, Pacific herring and 
Pacific saury.  These two species have contrasting life histories and growth rates;  however, by tuning the 
parameters of the model to each species, growth curves were obtained that match observations reasonably 
well.  A few longer term, multicohort (where each year one fish is modeled) simulations of the saury 
model indicated some interannual variability in growth as a result of environmental forcing of 
temperature and prey fields.   
 
The four Task Teams of CCCC are beginning to coordinate their activities in ways that will hopefully 
provide answers to many of the CCCC scientific questions, and to develop or coordinate an ecosystem 
monitoring network.  This network will provide information to PICES that is essential in preparing 
regularly updated North Pacific Ecosystem Status Reports.  The final recommendations from each of the 
CCCC Task Teams can be found in the PICES 2001 Annual Report. 
 
 
Harold P. Batchelder and Makoto Kashiwai 
CCCC-IP Co-Chairmen 
BASS/MODEL WORKSHOP TO REVIEW ECOSYSTEM MODELS FOR 
THE SUBARCTIC PACIFIC GYRES 
(Co-convenors:  Gordon A. McFarlane, Andrei S. Krovnin, Bernard A. Megrey and Michio 
J. Kishi) 
 
 
Workshop objectives best only guesses.  Some observations were 
 derived from coastal ecosystems and therefore 
The BASS/MODEL workshop on higher trophic may not be applicable to gyre ecosystems. 
level modeling (March 5-6, 2001, Honolulu,  
U.S.A.) recommended to convene a 1-day In general, the total biomass estimated for the 
workshop to evaluate the results of the inter- WSA was higher than for the ESA.  Major 
sessional workshop (for details see PICES differences between the two model regions include 
Scientific Report No. 17, 2001) and initiate higher biomasses of flying squid and Pacific 
hypothesis testing using the models developed.  pomfret in the ESA, higher biomass of 
 chaetognaths in the WSA, and higher salmon 
This follow-up BASS/MODEL workshop was biomass in the WSA (pink salmon) than in the 
held October 5, 2001, immediately preceding the ESA (sockeye salmon).  Marine mammal biomass 
PICES Tenth Annual Meeting in Victoria, British estimates were identical for each region since they 
Columbia, Canada.  The objectives of the were derived from basic-scale North Pacific 
workshop were to: estimates.  No biomass estimates of forage fish 
 and micronektonic species groups were available 
null assess the results of the March 2001 from the literature or from research survey data, so 
workshop, these were evaluated by top-down balancing of 
null review progress on model development and each model.  Biomass estimates for lower trophic 
updated models;  and level plankton groups were derived from outputs 
null begin to develop scenarios to test key of the NEMURO model that had been calibrated 
hypotheses. for Ocean Station P in the ESA. 
  
Review of baseline models Productivity values were derived from mortality 
 rates.  Consumption rates were obtained from diet 
The two ECOPATH/ECOSIM baseline models composition and laboratory descriptions of 
developed at the March 2001 workshop on higher calories/gram for prey species.  Both production 
trophic level modeling should be viewed as work and consumption estimates were weighted by 
in progress.  Estimates of biomass, productivity to residence time for migratory species.  The 
biomass, consumption rate to biomass and diet estimates for lower trophic levels (e.g. large 
composition were compiled from the literature and zooplankton) were taken from other ECOPATH 
from research data provided by PICES member models and, in some cases, from the NEMURO 
countries.  In general, information available for model. 
1990 (or 1990-1993) was used such that the two  
models could be viewed as representative of the All information on diet composition was poor.  
early 1990s conditions.  In total, 56 species groups 
Marine mammal diets were not as detailed as fish 
(with three detrital groups) were included in the diets.  Salmon diets were specific and detailed 
models, however some species were not common with many stomachs sampled over large areas and 
to both regions.  Minke whales, common dolphin, seasons, however, only summer estimates were 
Japanese sardines and anchovies were present in available for the WSA.  The major difference 
the Western Subarctic Gyre (WSA) model, but not between the WSA and ESA were the seasonal 
in the Eastern Subarctic Gyre (ESA) model.  differences in the diet of salmon since WSA 
Conversely, elephant seals were present in the included sockeye salmon in May.  Early spring 
ESA model only.  Many of the estimates are at diet estimates for the early 1990s were not 
1
available for the ESA.  Physical forcing inputs to the eastern and western Pacific subarctic gyres.  
the NEMURO model can be generated to produce These models were initially constructed from data 
phytoplankton and zooplankton outputs.  assembled at the March 2001 BASS/MODEL 
Maximum photosynthetic rates, zooplankton workshop and updated by including results of 
growth efficiencies and microbial loops can be lower trophic level modeling by the MODEL Task 
modified and initiated to provide various climate Team and upper trophic level data from a wide 
change scenarios.  These outputs can be used in range of sources on both sides of the Pacific.   
ECOSIM.  
 Future adjustments to the models based on 
additional data presented at the Victoria workshop 
Update of ECOPATH/ECOSIM models 
 will be incorporated into the final versions of these 
Kerim Aydin reviewed the updated models and presented at an inter-sessional 
ECOPATH/ECOSIM baseline models.  Figures 1 BASS/MODEL workshop to be convened in April 
and 2 show composite images of the food webs for 2002.  This will lead to a PICES Scientific Report  
 
West 8x+ 
higher 
West 4x 
higher 
West 2x 
higher 
West and 
east same 
East 2x 
higher 
East 4x 
higher 
East 8x+ 
higher 
 
Fig. 1 A combined quantitative food web of the eastern and western Pacific subarctic gyres 
constructed from data assembled at the March 2001 BASS/MODEL workshop and presented at the 
PICES Tenth Annual Meeting.  Species in both the western and eastern gyres are shown.  The area of 
2
each compartment is proportional to log of average biomass density (t/km ), and the width of each 
2
connecting flow is proportional to the square root of the averaged yearly flow volume (t/km /year).  
Coloration shows the ratio of west vs. east biomass density and flow volume:  where the ratio of west/east 
is higher (red) and where the ratio of east/west is higher (blue). 
2
West 8x+ 
higher 
West 4x 
higher 
West 2x 
higher 
West and 
east same 
East 2x 
higher 
East 4x 
higher 
East 8x+ 
higher 
 
Fig. 2 An enlargement of the upper trophic level flows and biomass densities shown in Figure 1.  
Minor flows (the lowest 10% (cumulative) of prey mortality and predator diet) are removed for clarity.  
See Figure 1 for explanation of coloration. 
 
 
to document the models and assess the overall Another key direction for future work lies in 
state of knowledge of food web interactions and developing methods to integrate gyre processes 
critical dynamic links in subarctic gyre with boundary currents and near-shore processes.  
ecosystems.  In addition, the April 2002 meeting Specifically, concurrently examining the dynamics 
will focus on the potential to incorporate dynamic of boundary current species such as the Pacific 
simulations of climate into these models. sardine and Japanese anchovy in relation to the 
 dynamics of the salmon-dominated subarctic gyre 
This continuing synthesis highlighted some key ecosystems that were simulated by these models, 
areas for future research, for example, the will increase our understanding of North Pacific-
exploration of dynamics of the intermediate wide climate systems and their interrelations with 
trophic levels such as micronektonic squid, small coastal systems. 
forage fish, and mesopelagic fish (Fig. 2).  The  
biology of these species is currently poorly Recent improvements to NEMURO model 
understood and yet central to the functioning of  
the subarctic food web. Bernard Megrey reviewed recent progress and 
 improvements on the NEMURO lower trophic 
level modelling efforts.  
3
Diagnostic calculations  efficiency of the system because a large portion of 
 the primary production passes through a microbial  
Several diagnostic calculations were added to the  
NEMURO model.  These included Production/ 
Biomass (P/B) ratios for phytoplankton and 
zooplankton, Food Consumption/Biomass (C/B) 
ratios for small, large and predatory zooplankton, 
and Ecotrophic Efficiency (a measure of how 
much primary production transfers up the food 
web to the zooplankton species and ultimately to 
higher trophic level species). 
 
Validation to Station P 
 
The NEMURO model was parameterized for 
Ocean Station P and output was compared to data 
collected from that site.  Results were favourable.  
NEMURO provides reasonable C/B and P/C 
ratios.  Annual primary production from the model 
2
(149 gC/m /yr) is only 6% higher than the best 
2
current estimate (140 gC/m /yr) by Wong et al. 
(1995).  Average chlorophyll concentration from 
3
the model (0.42 mg/m ) is only 5% higher than the 
3
long-term value (0.4 mg/m ) measured by Wong et 
al. (1995).  An f-ratio (assuming that the 
production of the large phytoplankton is primarily 
fuelled by “new” nitrogen) is in a good agreement 
with the estimate by Wong et al. (1995):  0.23 and 
0.25 respectively. 
 
 
Zooplankton vertical migration 
Fig. 3 Comparison of NEMURO output with  
 
(bottom panel) and without (top panel) ontogenetic 
Results without ontogenetic migration of 
migration of large zooplankton. 
predatory zooplankton (ZP) show a large diatom 
 
bloom around day 73 (Fig. 3, top panel).  The 
prevailing view is that there is no spring bloom at 
Station P.  Thus the bloom is an artifact of the 
“box” nature of the model.  Adding ZP migration, 
decreases biomass of phytoplankton by a factor of 
2 (Fig. 3, bottom panel) and generates more 
reasonable diagnostics.  The estimates of 
Ecotropic Efficiency are not significantly affected. 
 
Microbial loop  
 
Inclusion of a microbial loop had only a small 
impact on the standing stocks of small and large 
zooplankton (Fig. 4).  Predatory zooplankton were 
 
reduced by about one half, reducing potentially 
Fig. 4 Comparison of NEMURO output with and 
available biomass for fish production.  These 
without the microbial loop approximation. 
differences are due to the decreased net trophic 
4
community before entering the zooplankton the models developed at the 2001 workshop 
community. and refined at the Tenth Annual Meeting; 
 2. Parameterize the western gyre model, in 
Recent progress particular finalize the boundary to exclude the 
 transition area; 
MODEL Task Team also conducted a sensitivity 3. Calibrate and validate the NEMURO model to 
analysis and data assimilation for Station A7 and Station A, which is more appropriate for the 
added carbon fluxes to the LTL model.   western gyre; 
 4. For both the eastern and western gyre models, 
The most recent improvements to the NEMURO 
incorporate time series (from the NEMURO 
model include: model) for light, SST, etc. to generate primary 
 productivity and zooplankton time series; 
5. Hypotheses to be tested should be developed 
• Acquired SST time series from Station P 
prior to the inter-sessional workshop and 
1951-1988; 
should focus on climate change scenarios; 
• Acquired equations to permit calculation of 
6. Complete final data synthesis (including 
light at the surface; 
marine birds and mammals) prior to the inter-
• Modified primary production equations to 
sessional workshop; 
explicitly include mixed layer depth (MLD) to 
7. Following the inter-sessional workshop; 
permit simulation of regime shift scenarios. 
prepare the two baseline models for 
 
publication as a PICES scientific Report, 
In addition, S. Lan Smith presented work being 
including the results of hypotheses testing, and 
conducted in support of the NEMURO model, and 
a data inventory; 
this overview is appended as Endnote 2. 
8. PICES provide a means of accessing these 
 
models, and other workshop products on the 
Hypothesis testing scenarios 
web; 
 
9. BASS/MODEL/REX Task Teams convene a 
The following scenarios were suggested: 
joint session (with GLOBEC) at the PICES 
 
Eleventh Annual Meeting to examine 
null Examine impact of changes in primary and 
“Approaches for linking basin scale models to 
secondary production on each gyre.  Do they 
coastal ecosystem models”;  
respond similarly or differently? 
10. Given the limited data on diet of many species 
null Examine seasonality of changes in each 
inhabiting the gyres, PICES should encourage 
system; 
researchers to collect and collate diet data for 
null Examine the role of primary production 
species in these areas and sponsor the 
increases on sockeye salmon abundance; 
development of “Diet database” which would 
null Examine role of predation in the regulation of 
be peer-reviewed and citable. 
population abundance: 
 
o shark/salmon 
References 
o marine mammal/salmon 
 
null Examine role of marine birds in each gyre; 
Wong, C.S., Whitney, F.A., Iseki, K., Page, J.S., 
null Examine role of forage fish in each gyre; 
and Zeng, J.  1995.  Analysis of trends in 
null Examine species competition for prey, e.g. 
primary productivity and chlorophyll-a over 
pink/sockeye salmon;  pomfret/squid, etc. 
two decades at Ocean Station P (50˚N 145˚W) 
 
in the Subarctic Northeast Pacific Ocean.  In 
Recommendations 
R.J. Beamish (ed.) Climate Change and 
 
Northern Fish Populations.  Canadian Special 
1. Convene a joint BASS/MODEL workshop in 
Publication in Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 
April 2002 to continue hypotheses testing of 
121: 107-117. 
 
5
Endnote 1 
 
Simulating the cycling of organic matter using a nitrogen-based oceanic 
ecosystem model:  carbon to nitrogen ratios 
 
1 2 3 
S. Lan Smith , Yasuhiro Yamanaka and Michio J. Kishi
1 
Frontier Research System for Global Change, Global Warming Division, 3173-25 Showa Machi, 
Kanazawa-ku, Yokahama, Kanagawa 236-0001, Japan.  E-mail:  lanimal@jamstec.go.jp 
2 
Graduate School of Environmental Earth Science, Hokkaido University, N10W5 Kita-Ku, Sapporo, 
Japan.  060-0810  E-mail: galapen@ees.hokudai.ac.jp  
3 
Hokkaido University, Graduate School of Fisheries Sciences, 3-1-1 Minato-cho, Hakkodate 041-
8611, Japan.  E-mail:  kishi@salmon.fish.hokudai.ac.jp 
 
Efforts are beginning to include oceanic ecosystem the North Pacific.  This was done consistently with 
models in global simulations of the carbon cycle, the findings of Kawamiya et al. (1997) and Hurtt 
to improve the representations of primary and Armstrong (1996), that slower sinking rates 
production and of the resulting oceanic uptake of are necessary to simulate substropical locations.  
carbon dioxide.  Coupling complicated ecosystem Parameters for the ecosystem model were based 
models with three dimensional physical models to on those of Kishi et al. (2001)’s simulation of a 
obtain meaningful simulations poses several site in the northwestern Pacific, and parameters for 
challenges.  Before proceeding to a three the DOM model were based on those of Anderson 
dimensional implementation, we undertook this and Williams (1999). 
study using a one dimensional model to address  
challenges relevant to simulating the fate of While the average vertical profiles of nutrients and 
dissolved and particulate organic matter. DOM were well simulated, seasonal variations 
 were not well resolved by this one dimensional 
We embedded a formulation for the cycling of model.  The model simulated too steep a decline in 
dissolved organic matter (DOM) via the microbial DON with depth below the photic zone, as did 
food web (MFW) into a nitrogen-based oceanic Anderson and Williams’ model.  The simulated 
ecosystem model [the NEMURO model developed C:N ratio of DOM was also too low in the near 
by the PICES program;  see Yamanaka et al. surface waters.  We found that the assumption of 
(2001)].  The formulation of Anderson and Redfield stoichiometry was inconsistent with the 
Williams (1999) for the cycling of dissolved data for non-refractory DOM and for POM at 
organic carbon (DOC) was converted to a Station ALOHA.  Data from other locations also 
nitrogen-based formulation including the same reveal C:N ratios higher than Redfield values.  To 
three fractions of DOM:  labile (L-), semi-labile use nitrogen-based models such as this to simulate 
(S-) and refractory (R-), as dissolved organic the carbon cycle with confidence, we must 
nitrogen (DON).  With this ecosystem model, improve their representations of the C:N ratios of 
coupled to a one dimensional physical model, we DOM and POM.  These issues of stoichiometry 
simulated the Hawaii Ocean Time-series Station are also relevant to the PICES program’s goal of 
ALOHA for 1997 and 1998. coupling lower trophic level models to models of 
 
fish production.  Accurate simulations of fish 
We compared our simulations to data for nitrate, production and biomass will require correct 
silicate, DON, DOC, PON, and POC.  Despite the stoichiometries in these models. 
deficiencies of the physical model, the ecosystem  
model reasonably simulated the vertical References 
distribution of total DON, without tuning of  
parameters for this site.  Only the sinking velocity Anderson, T.R., and Williams, P.J.B.  1999.  
of POM was reduced to 10 m per day from the Global Biogeochemical Cycles 13 (2): 337-
default value of 50 m per day from NEMURO for 349. 
6
Hurtt, G.C., and Armstrong, R.A.  1996.  Deep- Kishi, M.J., Motono, H., Kashiwai, M., and Tsuda, 
Sea Res. 43 (2-3): 653-683. A.  [in press].  J. Oceanogr.  
Kawamiya, M., Kishi, M.J., Yamanaka, Y., and Yamanaka, Y., Yoshie, N.A., Fujii, M., Aita-
Suginohara, N.  1997.  J. Oceanogr. 53: 397- Noguti, M., and Kishi, M.J.  [in press].  
402. Journal of Oceanography. 
 
 
Endnote 2 
List of participant 
 
Canada Akihiko Yatsu 
 Hiroshi Yoshinari 
Jacqueline R. King  
Gordon A. McFarlane Russia 
R. Ian Perry  
Marc Trudel Natalia Klovatch 
 Andrei S. Krovnin 
Japan Alexei Orlov 
  
Makoto Kashiwai U.S.A. 
Toshio Katsukawa  
Michio J. Kishi  Kerim Aydin 
Takahiro Ida Patricia Livingston 
Kohei Mizobata Thomas Loughlin 
Sei-ichi Saitoh Bernard A. Megrey 
Hiroaki Sato Thomas C. Wainright 
S. Lan Smith Francisco E. Werner 
 
 
7
 
8
MONITOR WORKSHOP TO REVIEW PROGRESS IN MONITORING 
THE NORTH PACIFIC 
(Co-convenors David L. Mackas and Sei-Ichi Saitoh) 
 
 
A half-day workshop was convened by the 
• Progress report from the PICES 
MONITOR Task Team on the afternoon of Continuous Plankton Recorder (CPR) pilot 
October 6, 2001, immediately preceding the 
project (Sonia Batten, Sir Alistair Hardy 
PICES Tenth Annual Meeting in Victoria, British 
Foundation, UK;  soba@wpo.nerc.ac.uk)  
Columbia, Canada.  The overall workshop goal  
was to familiarize participants with the range of 
This report summarized for a broader audience the 
present monitoring activities in the PICES region, 
material previously presented to the CPR Advisory 
and with both near-future and longer-term plans 
Panel (see Endnote 1 to the MONITOR Task 
and opportunities.  
Team report in the 2001 PICES Annual Report).  
 
The CPR is towed behind commercial ships of 
The group heard and discussed seven presentations 
opportunity and samples mesozooplankton 
on the March 2001 PICES/CoML/IPRC workshop 
abundance and species composition in the upper 
in Honolulu, on ongoing or soon-to-begin time 
layer.  Group discussion focused on potential 
series data collection programs in the North 
value-added measurements which might be 
Pacific, and on some of the challenges and 
included, e.g. ship-mounted sensors for 
opportunities in archival and analysis of historic 
temperature, salinity, fluorescence, nutrients, 
time series data.  Presentation titles and topics are 
ocean color, and acoustic backscatter;  depth 
very briefly summarized in the following bulleted 
profiles of temperature and/or salinity using 
paragraphs.  Extended abstracts for some expendable probes;  visual observations of 
presentations follow. 
seabirds and marine mammals;  and collation of 
 
measurements along the CPR track with broader 
• Overview of the Workshop on “Impact of surrounding spatial coverage from satellites and 
climate variability on observation and drifting buoys. 
prediction of ecosystem and biodiversity  
changes in the North Pacific” (Patricia 
• Updates on GEM (Exxon Valdez Oil Spill 
Livingston, Alaska Fisheries Science Center, 
Trustee Council’s “Gulf Ecosystem 
NOAA, U.S.A.;  Pat.Livingston@noaa.gov) 
Monitoring” Initiative) and U.S. GOOS 
 
plans in the North Pacific (Phillip Mundy, 
A 3-day workshop co-sponsored by PICES, the 
Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Restoration Office, 
Census of Marine Life program (through Alfred P. U.S.A.;  phil_mundy@oilspill.state.ak.us) 
Sloan Foundation) and the International Pacific 
 
Research Center, was held March 7-9, 2001, in 
A large endowment fund is now in place to 
Honolulu.  The workshop (proceedings published 
support (on a permanent basis) long-term time 
as PICES Scientific Report No. 18) catalogued 
series observations in the coastal ocean off Alaska.  
existing time series observation programs in the 
Requests for proposals are being issued, and 
North Pacific, and discussed plans for future North 
monitoring activities, both partnered and fully-
Pacific operational monitoring activities, and the 
funded, will increase steadily through the 
roles of international organizations and programs 
remainder of this decade.  GEM is a regional 
with interests in these activities.  An important 
program within the larger PICES area.  GEM 
outcome of the meeting was a proposal for a 
welcomes PICES expertise (and example) in the 
regularly-updated “North Pacific Ecosystem Status 
optimal design of the program.  U.S. GOOS is 
Report”, coordinated through PICES, and perhaps 
developing additional regional programs centered 
involving the development of “Regional Analysis 
in the Gulf of Maine, the California Current, and 
Centres” to facilitate analysis of ongoing time 
the Gulf of Mexico. 
series. 
 
9
• A proposal for a North Pacific Action 
• Report on the August 2001 NEAR-GOOS 
Group of the international WMO/IOC Data Workshop (Yoshioki Oozeki, National 
Buoy Cooperation Panel (Ron McLaren, Research Institute of Fisheries Science, Japan;  
Environment Canada;  ron.mclaren@ec.gc.ca) oozeki@affrc.go.jp) 
  
A network of moored and drifting buoys provides The NEAR-GOOS Ocean Environment 
real-time meteorological and near-surface Forecasting Workshop was held August 27-31, 
oceanographic data from various locations 2001, in Seoul, Republic of Korea.  The overall 
throughout the ocean.  Coverage in the oceanic workshop goal was to discuss the status and need 
North Pacific is very sparse.  A proposed North of a forecasting capability in the NEAR-GOOS 
Pacific Action Group, sponsored collaboratively region.  NEAR-GOOS obtains operational 
by PICES and the International Data Buoy physical oceanographic and meteorological time 
Cooperation Panel, would provide a forum for series in the marginal seas of Northeast Asia.  
sharing information on deployment opportunities There is a strong emphasis on rapid availability of 
and data use. data, some in real time, and more detailed data as 
 “delayed mode” through the Japan Oceanographic 
Data Center.  NEAR-GOOS databases are not yet 
• Review of Mexican oceanographic 
IMECOCAL program (Gilberto Gaxiola, set up to handle biological and chemical data, and 
PICES advice for practical and useful data 
Centro de Investigación Científica y de 
collection systems for these variables would be 
Educación Superior de Ensenada, Mexico;  
useful. 
ggaxiola@cicese.mx) 
 
 
IMECOCAL (Investigaciones Mexicanas de la • Building global ocean profile and plankton 
Corriente de California) is a new program which databases for scientific research (Sydney 
extends the spatial coverage of the present Levitus, National Oceanographic Data Center, 
CalCOFI program to the southern part of the 
NOAA, U.S.A.;  Sydney.Levitus@noaa.gov) 
California Current off Baja California (roughly 22- 
32ºN).  The program completes quarterly cruises, The Global Oceanographic Data Archaeology and 
coordinated in time with CalCOFI surveys, and Rescue (GODAR) project (historical data) and the 
samples a broad range of hydrographic, planktonic IOC World Ocean Database project (new data) 
and fisheries oceanographic variables.  Training of were described and evaluated for the PICES 
graduate students is an important component of audience.  Quality screening methods, and 
the program.  Data reports and a more detailed transcription and formatting protocols are 
program description are posted at the IMECOCAL important issues for these large databases.  The 
web site (http://ecologia.cicese.mx/~imecocal). presentation described some useful approaches, 
 and also gave examples of applications.  
 
 
PICES Continuous Plankton Recorder pilot project 
 
Sonia D. Batten 
Sir Alistair Hardy Foundation for Ocean Science, 1, Walker Terrace, The Hoe, Plymouth, UK.  PL1 3BN  
E-mail:  soba@wpo.nerc.ac.uk 
 
Background 
 
The Continuous Plankton Recorder (CPR) is and 2001, a total of 12 transects were carried out 
towed behind commercial ships of opportunity and in the North Pacific (Fig. 1).  Samples have been 
samples mesozooplankton abundance and species processed up to spring 2001, together with a pilot 
composition in the surface ~10 m.  During 2000 transect in summer 1997.  The north-south (N/S) 
10
route was operated by an oil tanker and the east- the most common taxa were carried out and 
west (E/W) route by a container vessel.  Over 95% showed that the decorrelation length scale is about 
of planned sampling was successfully achieved 60 km.  This analysis suggests that the current 
and some additional temperature data were routine sampling resolution of the CPR (sample 
collected on most of the north-south transects. spacing of 72 km) is appropriate for the Gulf of 
 Alaska.  
Results summary  
 As expected, an analysis of the mesozooplankton 
Species distribution data through 2000 were community on the east-west transect revealed 
presented for the north-south transect for key distinguishable differences in community structure 
copepod species.  One significant finding was that between geographic regions such as the Bering 
the surface development duration of Neocalanus Sea, Aleutian shelf and the Gulf of Alaska.  This 
plumchrus copepodites varied along the transect result supports the idea that CPR data can be used 
by up to 5 weeks, and was probably influenced by to detect shifts in community composition on a 
temperature (Batten et al., in press).  This species temporal as well as a spatial basis.  With currently 
spends only about 3 to 4 months in the surface available data, interannual comparisons are 
waters but is probably the most important limited, however, comparison of mesozooplankton 
copepod, in terms of biomass, in the Gulf of abundance between the pilot north-south sampling 
Alaska in spring/early summer. in summer 1997 with the same period in 2000 
 showed large changes, with zooplankton 
The April 2000 transect was selected for a more abundances in 1997 about 5 times higher in the 
intensive spatial analysis.  Instead of every fourth open Gulf of Alaska.  Although interpretation 
sample being processed (which is the normal needs to be tempered by the limited sampling 
practice), almost every sample was processed.  available for 1997, the results may be related to 
Autocorrelations of abundance against distance for the 1997/98 El Niño event. 
  
1997 
21st July-6th August 
2000               2001  
st th nd th
21 –26 March      22 -27 April   
th th th th
29 April-5 May    20 -25 May   
th nd th nd
17 -22 June         27 June-2 July  
th th th th
19 -24 July            10 -16 August 
rd th st th
23 -29 August      21 -25 September    
24th June-3rd July 2000
 10th-20th June 2001
Fig. 1 Upper panel shows the N/S transect, run 5 times in 2000 and 2001, and once in 1997.  Lower 
panel shows the E/W transect, run once in 2000 and 2001.  Symbols indicate sample positions. 
11
Group discussion adding sea-bird/mammal observers to the vessel as 
 a potential way to obtain trophic interaction 
The main focus of the discussion was the possible information (including inferences on intermediate 
future enhancement of the CPR program.  Value- levels such as squid and forage fish).  
added measurements were proposed which might  
be included, e.g. ship-mounted sensors for There was support within the group for holding an 
temperature, salinity, fluorescence, nutrients, inter-sessional workshop on the design and 
ocean colour, and acoustic backscatter; depth implementation of a possible ship-of-opportunity 
profiles of temperature and/or salinity using monitoring package, which might include many of 
expendable probes; visual observations of seabirds the parameters listed above. 
and marine mammals;  and collation of  
measurements along the CPR track with broader Reference 
surrounding spatial coverage from satellites and  
drifting buoys. Batten, S.D., Welch, D.W., and Jonas, T. 
 Latitudinal differences in the duration of 
The fitting of a thermosalinograph to the vessel development of Neocalanus plumchrus 
was given a high priority since much of the copepodites.  Fisheries Oceanography. (in 
physical processes occurring in the North Pacific press). 
are salinity-driven.  There was also enthusiasm for 
 
 
GEM (Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Trustee Council’s “Gulf Ecosystem 
Monitoring” initiative) and U.S. GOOS plans in the North Pacific 
 
Phillip R. Mundy 
Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Restoration Office, #401-645 G Street, Anchorage, AK 99501-3451, U.S.A.   
E-mail:  phil_mundy@oilspill.state.ak.us 
 
A new endowment has been put in place by the Advisory Panel were instrumental in obtaining the 
Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Trustee Council to fund support of GEM for the CPR project.  GEM 
(on a permanent basis) long-term time series welcomes, and hopes to rely upon, PICES 
observations in the coastal ocean of the Gulf of expertise and recommendations in the optimal 
Alaska.  The Gulf of Alaska Ecosystem design and implementation of the GEM program.  
Monitoring and Research Program (GEM) is one Starting in 2003, GEM monitoring activities, both 
of three U.S. government endowments established partnered and fully-funded, will increase steadily 
within the past five years to provide for marine through the remainder of this decade, until the 
research and long-term monitoring in Alaskan annual income stream is fully allocated. 
waters.  GEM is a regional program focusing  
primarily on the northern Gulf of Alaska within GEM design and implementation is being closely 
the larger PICES area.  The first GEM invitation coordinated with the newly constituted North 
for proposals will be issued in August 2002, for Pacific Research Board (NPRB), which 
funding in calendar year 2003, however two pilot administers an endowment supporting marine 
projects are already underway.  The research in all Alaskan waters.  NPRB has 
oceanographic mooring at station 1 of the Seward indicated interest in partnering with GEM on an 
Line (GAK-1), and the continuous plankton extended CPR project during calendar year 2002, 
recorder (CPR), operated on a vessel of and is expected to issue an invitation for proposals 
opportunity between Valdez and Long Beach, are sometime next year.  The third research 
being evaluated on a trial basis for their abilities endowment which GEM is following closely is 
to contribute to the permanent monitoring the Northern Fund of the Pacific Salmon Treaty, 
program.  Recommendation of the PICES CPR which is now amassing capital, and which 
12
presently has no plans to start funding work.  The Committee is also assisting development of other 
three funds together should contribute in excess of regional marine observing programs centered in 
U.S. $20 million annually to research and the Gulf of Maine, the California Current, and the 
monitoring in the PICES area when all are fully Gulf of Mexico.  In the long-term, U.S. GOOS 
operational, about 2004. hopes to contribute to marine research in the 
 PICES region by providing the scientific basis for 
In addition to the help received from PICES, a continuing appropriation from the U.S. Congress 
GEM development is being assisted by the for a system of ocean observing tools consisting 
steering committee of the U.S. Global Ocean of Argo profiling floats, a remotely telemetered 
Observing System (U.S. GOOS).  U.S. GOOS is drifting buoy array, coastal moorings, GPS-
providing recommendations on the basic capable tide gauge stations, volunteer observing 
components of an observing system to support ship transects, and data management and 
modeling of climatic and oceanographic processes assimilation that will support oceanographic 
in the coastal environment.  The Steering modeling and forecasting. 
 
 
A proposal for a North Pacific Action Group of the international Data Buoy 
Cooperation Panel  
 
Ron McLaren and Brian O'Donnell 
rd
Meteorological Service of Canada, Pacific and Yukon Region, Environment Canada, #700-1200 W. 73 
Avenue, Vancouver, B.C. Can ada.  V6P 6H9.  Email:  ron.mclaren@ec.gc.ca 
 
Established in 1985, the Data Buoy Cooperation of data via the GTS and to promote the exchange 
Panel (DBCP) is an official joint body of the of information on buoy activities and technology. 
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission  
(IOC) and the World Meteorological Organization Action groups exist for the North Atlantic, South 
(WMO).  The Panel consists of representatives of Atlantic, Arctic, Indian and Antarctic oceans.  The 
the WMO and member states of the IOC work of Action Groups is reflected in the number 
interested in participating in its activities.  of buoy observations in their relevant areas of 
 responsibility.  Compare with other regions, the 
The most important task of the DBCP is to co- North Pacific is relatively undersampled.  At the 
ordinate drifting and moored buoy programmes at October 2000 meeting of the DBCP, Canada made 
the international level, with a view to increase the a commitment to determine the level of interest 
number of buoys deployed and maintain high within the scientific community currently doing 
quality archived and real time oceanic and research in the North Pacific Ocean to form an 
atmospheric data.  The Panel encourages the free Action Group for this area. 
exchange of data and international co-operation  
by the formation of regional and global Action 
The demonstrated success of other Action Groups 
Groups, such as the European Group on Ocean would indicate that the co-operative efforts of 
Stations and the International South Atlantic Buoy agencies already working in the North Pacific, 
Program.  An Action Group within the DBCP is could contribute substantially to increasing the 
an independent self-funded body that maintains an number of oceanographic and meteorological 
observational buoy programme providing observations over what is currently available.  
meteorological and oceanographic data for real  
time and/or research purposes in support of PICES members are encouraged to discuss the 
relevant WMO and IOC programs.   The goals of formation of such an Action Group with their 
an Action Group are to provide good quality and colleagues within their own, or other 
timely data to users, to encourage the distribution oceanographic or meteorological agencies, who 
might be able to contribute to and benefit by 
13
membership in an Action Group for the North buoys and other ocean buoy programs can be 
Pacific.  Additional information on the work of found at the DBCP web site located at 
the Panel, as well as technical information on http://dbcp.nos.noaa.gov/dbcp/. 
 
 
The Mexican oceanographic North Pacific program:  IMECOCAL 
 
Gilberto Gaxiola-Castrol and Sila Najera-Martinez 
Centro de Investigación Científica y de Educación Superior de Ensenada (CICESE), Carr. Tijuana-
Ensenada, Km. 107, Ensenada 22800, Baja California, Mexico.  E-mail:  ggaxiola@cicese.mx 
 
The main goal of the IMECOCAL program is to 
understand how physical processes regulate the 
32
ENSENADA changes in the pelagic ecosystem of the southern 
region of the California Current.  For that 
objective we are developing a long-term 
monitoring project to study the climatic and 
PUNTA
30
BAJA
oceanographic variability effect in this region, 
maintaining core oceanographic measurements 
ISLA
during the surveys, and collecting sea level and 
BAHIA
GUADALUPE
VIZCAINO
atmospheric data on island and land stations (Fig. 
28
2).  We are conducting modelling studies to 
PUNTA
explore plankton and small pelagic fish response 
EUGENIA
to regional and global physical forcing as well as 
to local anthropogenic perturbations on the coastal 
26
areas.  Also, we are looking to develop a new 
generation of research oceanographers for the 
program, with fellowships for graduate students 
doing their thesis in physical oceanography, 
IMECOCAL  Grid
24 plankton, paleoecology, small pelagic fisheries, 
100
0 200   km
nutrient chemistry, primary production, and 
climate change.  
120º 118º 116º 114º 112º
 
LONGITUDE
 
We followed the CalCOFI (California 
Fig. 2 IMECOCAL surveys station locations. 
Cooperative Fisheries Investigations) sampling 
 
grid off Baja California, which was abandoned in 
In September 1997, a consortium of seven 
the 1980s by U.S. marine scientists.  Quarterly 
Mexican academic institutions began a new 
IMECOCAL cruises are conducted using the 
oceanographic program off Baja California 
CICESE R/V Francisco de Ulloa, in January, 
Mexico, as named IMECOCAL (Investigaciones 
April, July, and October.  These cruises are 
Mexicanas de la Corriente de California).  The 
coordinated in time with the CalCOFI surveys, in 
IMECOCAL program was initiated with a 3-year 
order to have an integrated description of the 
grant from the Inter-American Institute of Global 
pelagic ecosystem of the California Current, from 
Change Research (IAI), and a four-year grant 
Point Conception, California, to the southern 
from the National Council of Science and 
region of Baja California.  The core 
Technology (CONACYT-Mexico).  This grant 
oceanographic observations at each station 
was extended to five more years, covering the 
include CTD profiles to a 1000-meter depth to 
oceanographic surveys at least until 2004.  Some 
measure temperature, salinity, dissolved oxygen, 
funds came from the National Science Foundation 
and fluorescence, and 200-meter Rosette casts to 
(NSF-USA), under a joint grant with the Scripps 
collect water samples with 5-litre Niskin bottles.  
Institution of Oceanography (SIO-UCSD).  
14
100.60       .50       .40       .30
103.60
107.60
113.60
117.80       .70       .60 
      .50                   .30
120.80       .70  
     .60       .50                  .30
    .60       .50       .40
123.60
127.60
  .50       .40       .30
130.60    
133.60
137.60       .50       .40      .30
LATITUDE
0
0
0
0
0
0
Water is analysed to determine dissolved oxygen, production determinations as well as irradiance 
nutrients (NO , NO , SiO , PO ), phytoplankton and radiance profiling are carried out daily at the 
3 2 2 4
pigments (chlorophyll a, and phaeopigments), mid-day stations. Also, photosynthesis-irradiance 
phytoplankton cell counts, particle and curves are made, to have the first systematic 
phytoplankton light absorption, and pigment phytoplankton photosynthetic data in the southern 
phytoplankton composition (HPLC analysis).  California Current region.  These data are 
Oblique bongo net tows (505-micrometer mesh) expected to be used, together with bio-optical and 
are taken from the first 200-meters, using one satellite (SeaWiFS) information to estimate 
cod-end to estimate zooplankton (biomass and primary production over meso- and larger-scales.  
group analysis), and the other for ichthyoplankton Occasionally we using a SIMBAD to determine 
abundance.  In addition, 100-meter vertical near-surface water leaving radiance, in order to 
CALVET net tows are made to capture develop local pigment algorithms for remote 
macrozooplankton, including ichthyoplankton  colour sensors in collaboration with colleagues at 
(fish eggs and larvae).  Casts for in situ primary SIO-UCSD.  
 
 
Fig. 3 T-S diagrams in the IMECOCAL zone measured during the El Niño:  October 1997 to January 
1998 (red lines) and the La Niña:  October 1998 to January 1999 (blue lines).  Redrawn from Reginado 
Durazo. 
 
Near-surface temperature, salinity, and acoustic Doppler current profiler (ADCP).  A 
chlorophyll-fluorescence (Fig. 3) are monitored CUFES (Continuous Underway Fish Egg 
continuously underway, simultaneously with an Sampling) system is used between stations, and 
15
when the vertical net tows are made.  This system provide a measure of the along-shore mean flow 
allows to enhance our understanding of the small- in the region.  The instruments have been 
scale distribution of fish eggs in this region of the operating since January 1999 in collaboration with 
California Current (Fig. 4).  Together with the the Mexican Navy.  Also, meteorological stations 
CalCOFI program, we are studying the are maintained at several locations along the 
transboundary production and abundance small Peninsula of Baja California. 
pelagic fish in relation to the environmental  
variability. Preliminary information derived from our 1997-
 2002 surveys is held in a database for the program 
collaborators and the international scientific 
community.  We already have important results 
from our study area; derived from the seventeen 
surveys, the three meteorological stations, and the 
two sea level gauge stations.  About 60% of the 
samples are analysed, generating twelve data 
reports, more than ten scientific contributions, and 
four MSc theses.  Fourteen graduate students are 
working on their thesis related to information 
collected on the surveys, and six scientific papers 
should be published during the next two years. 
We expect to complete the database of all the core 
data by the end of this year.  For more information 
about sharing data, please contact with our Data 
Manager (loyasa@cicese.mx), and visit our web 
site (http://www.ecologia.cicese.mx/~imecocal). 
 
IMECOCAL Collaborators 
 
1 1
Timothy Baumgarter, Daniel Loya, Bertha 
1 2
Lavaniegos, Reginaldo Durazo, Martin 
3 1 4
Hernandez, Joaquin Garcia, Yanira Green , 
4 1
Tomas Campos , Jose Gomez , Eduardo Millan-
1 1
Nuñez, Ruben Lara-Lara, Carmen Bazan-
1 6 3
Guzman, Virgilio Arenas, Sergio Aguiñiga , 
 
3
Rene Funes , Affonso da Silveira Mascarenhas 
Fig. 4 Distribution of sardine eggs (CUFES 
2 5 5
Jr, Sergio Hernandez, Salvador Lluch-Cota , 
data) compared to zooplankton biomass from 
3
Ricardo Saldierna .  
CalCOFI (Ron Lynn) and IMECOCAL (Bertha 
 
Lavaniegos and Timothy Baumgartner) data in 
1
Centro de Investigación Científica y de 
April, 2000. 
Educación Superior de Ensenada (CICESE);  
 
2
Universidad Autónoma de Baja California 
In addition to the monitoring surveys, 
3
(UABC);  Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias 
IMECOCAL maintains sea level pressure gauges 
4
del Mar (CICIMAR);  Instituto Nacional de la 
at an oceanic island (Guadalupe Island, 29°N, 
5
Pesca (INP);  Centro de Investigaciones 
118°W), and at an onshore location (San Quintin 
6
Biologicas del Noroeste (CIBNOR);  Universidad 
Bay, ~31°N).  These paired instruments permit to 
Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM). 
monitor the sea surface pressure gradient between 
 
the island and the coastal station in order to  
 
 
 
16
Building global ocean profile and plankton databases for scientific research 
 
Sydney Levitus 
National Oceanographic Data Center, World Data Center for Oceanography, E/OC5, #4362-1315 East 
West Highway, Silver Spring, MD 20910-3282, U.S.A.  E-mail:  Sydney.Levitus@noaa.gov 
 
Founded in the International Geophysical Year Table 1 List of GODAR meetings. 
(IGY), the World Data Center (WDC) System was  
established to prevent the loss of valuable GODAR I Obninsk Russia May, 1993 
GODAR II Tianjin China Mar., 1994 
scientific data gathered during the IGY by 
GODAR III Goa India Dec., 1995 
providing a permanent archive for these data.  
GODAR IV Malta Apr., 1995 
During the past ten years, the World Data Center 
GODAR V Cartagena Colombia Apr., 1996 
for Oceanography, Silver Spring, has expanded its 
GODAR VI Accra Ghana Mar., 1997 
role by including all oceanographic data received 
 
as part of its archive, and by leading projects to 
The International GODAR Review Meeting held 
increase the comprehensiveness of its electronic 
in Silver Spring, Maryland, U.S.A., in July 1999 
database.  This presentation describes efforts at 
concluded that the project is successful with more 
the WDC to develop global, comprehensive, 
than 2 million temperature profiles, and 600,000 
integrated, scientifically quality-controlled 
plankton observations collected.  The next phase 
electronic ocean profile-plankton databases that 
is to add ‘sea level’ data to the project. 
are available internationally without restriction.  A 
 
description of upper ocean temperature changes 
Current GODAR projects include MEDBLACK 
using the data from World Ocean Database 1998 
and MEDAR/MEDATLAS by European 
will be given. 
Community and IOC/IODE GODAR-WESTPAC 
 
by countries bordering the western Pacific.  The 
IOC Global Oceanographic Data Archaeology 
Japan Oceanographic Data Center takes the lead 
and Rescue (GODAR) project 
in the GODAR-WESTPAC project. 
 
 
Data archaeology is the process of locating 
Data collected as a result of the GODAR project 
historical ocean data at risk of loss due to media 
were made available, both on-line and on CD-
decay.  In contrast, data rescue is the digitization, 
ROM, as part of World Ocean Atlas 1994, World 
quality control, and entry of historical data into 
Ocean Database 1998, and World Ocean Database 
global, regional, national comprehensive, 
2001 (available March 2002). 
integrated, electronic databases. 
 
 
IOC World Ocean Database project 
The GODAR project was approved in 1993 and is 
 
on-going.  International cooperation within the 
The IOC World Ocean Database Project was 
project continues to be excellent.  All countries 
approved in July 2001.  Its goal is the 
contacted are contributing data.  Six regional 
development of global and regional, 
GODAR workshops have been held worldwide 
comprehensive, integrated, scientifically quality-
that encompass all countries that make 
controlled ocean profile and plankton databases.  
oceanographic measurements (Table 1).  These 
The project hopes to encourage the exchange of 
meetings were attended by approximately 175 
modern ocean profile and plankton data, and to 
oceanographic data managers and scientists and 
emphasize the development of regional atlases 
have resulted in the identification of substantial 
and quality control procedures. 
amounts of data that are at risk of loss due to 
 
media decay (magnetic tape and paper). 
 
 
17
 
18
REX WORKSHOP ON TEMPORAL VARIATIONS IN SIZE-AT-AGE FOR 
FISH SPECIES IN COASTAL AREAS AROUND THE PACIFIC RIM 
(Co-convenors:  William T. Peterson and Douglas E. Hay) 
 
 
A one-day REX Workshop on Temporal work (NOAA/NMFS/Northwest Fisheries Science 
variations in size-at-age for fish species in coastal Center) that coho salmon from the Columbia River 
areas around the Pacific Rim was convened system and coastal Oregon streams tend to spend 
October 5, 2001, immediately preceding the their entire lives in continental shelf waters off 
PICES Tenth Annual Meeting in Victoria, British Washington and Oregon state.  Also, there are 
Columbia, Canada.  The workshop was very indications that some Sacramento River chinook 
popular with more than 50 scientists attending.  In salmon reside chiefly in coastal waters off central 
total, 11 papers were presented by speakers from 
California (MacFarlane).  A recommendation of 
Canada, Japan, Russia and the United States.  Four the workshop participants was that REX scientists 
presentations discussed salmon size-at-age, five should purse analysis of co-variation and spatial 
considered herring (one paper was on sardine- autocorrelation of size-at-age of other salmon 
herring comparison), one - sablefish and one - stocks and of herring stocks.  An alternate 
chub mackerel.  In addition, several posters approach would be to use cluster analysis, as 
presented data on size-at-age of other herring shown by Naumenko. 
stocks as well as data for pollock and yellowfin  
flounder.   The second common theme was the high degree of 
 correlation between time series of size-at-age and 
The keynote paper by Nikolay Naumenko various environmental (explanatory) variables.  
summarized vast amounts of data on length-at-age Temnykh showed the declining trends in size-at-
and weight-at-age for 19 populations of herring age for Okhotsk pink salmon from the 1970s 
from the western Bering Sea.  The overall through 1985.  However after 1985, pinks have 
conclusion of his work was that herring growth is gotten heavier.  This is in contrast to other North 
controlled by two main factors, food abundance American pinks which continued to grow smaller 
(zooplankton biomass) and total fish biomass through the 1990s.  She noted correlation between 
(density-dependent effects).  A similar conclusion size-at-age of pink salmon stocks from the Sea of 
was reached by other authors as well. Okhotsk and sardine and zooplankton biomass.  
 The period of time when pink salmon were small 
Several general themes were common to many 
in size was the time when sardines were abundant 
papers.  One was the need to understand better the and zooplankton biomass was low.  The 
spatial scales of co-variation in size-at-age for simultaneous collapse of the Japanese sardine and 
species of fish with populations distributed along increased size of pink salmon, though not 
great distances of the coast.  Prime candidates for necessarily causal, suggests the possibility of some 
such analysis are of course the salmonids and common forcing mechanism related to 
herring.  Peterman showed that there was strong zooplankton.  Positive correlations between 
co-variation in size-at-age time series for sockeye zooplankton biomass and both length-at-age and 
salmon from Bristol Bay and Fraser River; weight-at-age were found for several herring 
however there was even stronger co-variation at populations as well including the Korf-Karaginsk 
regional scales.  Eight Bristol Bay stocks were far (western Bering Sea) stock (Naumenko; Balykin 
better correlated with each other than with Fraser and Buslov), Prince William Sound (Brown), and 
stocks; the same was true for 20 Fraser River stocks from British Columbia (Schweigert; 
stocks.  This suggests the hypothesis that similar Tanasichuk).  Finally, Tarasyuk showed that 
stocks are more likely to occupy a similar habitat biomass of yellowfin sole from the Tatar Strait 
(i.e., feed in the same region of the ocean).  (Japan/East Sea) was correlated with zooplanton 
Though no data of this type were presented for biomass. 
other salmon species, it is known from ongoing  
 
19
Temporal and special changes in pattern in size-at- There are many data on length and weight of 
age were examined relative to climate variability fishes but not as much data on age and weight at 
and climate change.  Good correlations were also length.  Through analysis of otoliths and scales, 
found with climatic variables such as the Pacific one could determine age of fishes that have 
Decadal Oscillation, Aleutian Low Pressure Index, already been measured. 
or water temperature alone (Peterman,  
MacFarlane, Brown, Schweigert, Bonk, Finally, the workshop participants discussed the 
Tarasyuk).  Competition with other pelagic species value of comparative studies and of course - this is 
was suggested as a possible mechanism explaining what REX workshops are all about – providing a 
changes in growth of chub mackerel (Watanabe).  forum for discussion on differences in population 
Ecosystem change was implicated as a factor size, growth, and life history characteristics of 
explaining stock fluctuations in Hokkaido- species that are distributed widely around the 
Sakhalin herring whereas the co-occurring Pacific Rim.  This led to the recommendation that 
sardines stocks appear to be largely density PICES scientists need to do more comparisons of 
dependent (Watanabe).  populations that are distributed in the coastal 
 zones around the basin, but also need to compare 
Many papers demonstrated density dependence of response of fish, nekton and zooplankton 
size-at-age.  When population size was large, size- populations that are found within the deeper 
at-age was small and vice versa.  Discussion at the waters of the Kuroshio, Kuroshio Extension, 
workshop centered on the need to think more and Transition Zone and the California Current.  
work harder at identifying mechanisms that might Interesting, this thought arose independently of the 
control density dependence, with studies of the inter-sessional symposium proposed on 
forage base being one of the prime candidates. comparative studies of North Pacific transitional 
 areas (the symposium was held April 23-25, 2002, 
Discussion was also focused on the need to make in La Paz, Mexico).   
better use of existing samples to study size- and 
 
weight-at age through use of scales and otoliths to 
The following section contains extended abstracts 
generate new data sets on size- and weight-at-age.   
of papers given at the workshop. 
 
 
Spatial patterns of covariation in size-at-age of British Columbia and Alaska 
sockeye salmon stocks and effects of abundance and ocean temperature 
 
1 1 2 3 
Brian J. Pyper , Randall M. Peterman , Michael F. Lapointe and Carl J. Walters
1
 School of Resource and Environmental Management, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, B.C., 
Canada.  V5A 1S6.  E-mail:  peterman@sfu.ca 
2
 Pacific Salmon Commission, 600-1155 Robson St., Vancouver, B.C., Canada.  V6E 1B5.  E- mail:  
lepointe@psc.org 
3
 Fisheries Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, B.C., Canada.  V6T 1Z4.  E-mail:  
c.walters@fisheries.ubc.ca 
 
Introduction spatial covariation among age-specific body sizes 
 of numerous stocks in the Northeast Pacific.  The 
Body lengths of adult Pacific sockeye salmon observed spatial scale of covariation could suggest 
(Oncorhynchus nerka) have decreased the causes of that variation.  Secondly, we 
significantly in recent years, reducing the compared the extent of covariation among body 
reproductive potential of spawners and the size and survival rate of sockeye salmon to 
economic value of harvests.  To understand the determine whether these two variables were 
causes of these important trends, we pursued three influenced by similar processes.  Thirdly, we 
objectives.  Firstly, we quantified the extent of tested hypotheses about the relative importance of 
 
20
intraspecific competition and oceanographic re-computed correlations.  Comparing the results 
conditions on size of adult sockeye salmon.  This from these two approaches allowed us to quantify 
paper summarizes material already published;  see the potential importance of low-frequency causes 
Pyper et al. (1999) and Pyper and Peterman (1999) of the positive covariation that we found.  
for details.  
 Effects of oceanographic conditions and 
Methods intraspecific competition.  We also used principal 
 components analysis (PCA) to further examine 
We used 72 time series of body length at a given spatial and temporal covariation among lengths for 
adult age for 31 sockeye stocks from five 1967-1997.  The PCA was done on 13 regional 
geographically distinct regions in British average length-at-age series, which better depicted 
Columbia (Fraser River and Skeena River) and the “signal” shared by given age classes and stocks 
Alaska (Upper Cook Inlet, Copper River and in each region.  This method reduced patterns of 
Bristol Bay).  Ages included were 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 2.2 variability shared by each age class and region to a 
and 2.3 fish.  few defining time series (principal components).  
 Copper River data were omitted due to missing 
Patterns of covariation.  To examine patterns of data. 
covariation among length-at-age data both within  
and between regions, we calculated Pearson We then used the dominant principal component 
product-moment correlation coefficients for (PC1) to test hypotheses about the causes of 
pairwise comparisons among the 72 time series of variation in sockeye growth rate.  Because our 
lengths.  Size data were aligned to have return covariation results indicated that adult body size 
years in common (year in which they returned to was affected primarily by conditions in the last 
their natal streams), because Rogers and year of ocean life, we generated indices of 
Ruggerone (1993) and McKinnell (1995) suggest oceanographic conditions and intraspecific 
that interannual variability in body size of recruits competition during the final year at sea.  These 
is largely determined by growth in their final year indices were consistent with the area of overlap in 
at sea.  However, to estimate the importance of ocean distributions of B.C. and Alaska sockeye, 
conditions in early ocean life, we also computed which roughly encompasses the Alaskan Gyre and 
correlations after aligning the data series to have a is occupied by sockeye salmon from North 
common ocean entry year (OEY) but a different America but not Asia (French et al. 1976).  We 
return year (e.g. using size data for 1.2 and 1.3 used total ocean abundance of maturing North 
adults). 
American sockeye salmon as an index of 
 intraspecific competition, based on annual adult 
Positive autocorrelation and time trends were recruits (catch plus escapement) summed across 
present in many of the time series of body length, the major B.C. (Fraser, Skeena, and Nass River) 
indicating that low-frequency (i.e., slowly- and Alaska stocks (Copper River, Cook Inlet, and 
changing) variability is important.  However, such Bristol Bay), which together account for the vast 
autocorrelation and time trends increase the majority of sockeye abundance in the Gulf of 
chance that statistically significant but spurious Alaska (see Peterman et al. 1998 for details). 
correlations will occur in standard inference tests.   
Therefore, we used two approaches to examine To reflect ocean conditions that might affect 
correlations.  Firstly, we computed them using the growth, we generated time series of annual sea-
original time series and based significance tests on surface temperature (SST) deviations from the 
the method recommended by Pyper and Peterman long-term mean.  We used monthly SST data (ºC) 
(1998), which adjusts degrees of freedom to on a 5-by-5 degree latitude-longitude grid across 
account for autocorrelation and maintains Type I the area stated above of general overlap in ocean 
error rates near the specified α in the presence of distributions of B.C. and Alaska sockeye (see 
autocorrelation.  Secondly, we first-differenced the Pyper and Peterman 1999 for details).  Deviations 
time series (subtracting each data point from the were computed for a given grid cell and month by 
next) to remove the low-frequency variation and subtracting its long-term mean SST for 1947 
  
21
through 1997.  These deviations were then percent of variation in length shared by stocks in 
averaged to create two time series, with each the same region was about twice that shared by 
corresponding to a different period preceding the stocks from different regions (see Pyper et al. 
return (generally in July) of sockeye salmon to (1999) for detailed results). 
their rivers: 1) winter months (November through  
February), and 2) a combination of winter and 
spring months (November through June).  
Climatic forcing during winter months is thought 
to be an important determinant of ocean 
productivity in the subsequent spring and summer 
(e.g., Brodeur and Ware 1992), while in spring, 
maturing sockeye are feeding and growing at high 
rates before and during migrations back to their 
natal streams. 
 
We then used multiple regression to examine 
relationships among the dominant pattern of 
covariation for length (PC1), total sockeye 
abundance in millions of fish (A), and ocean 
temperature (SST) for either November-February 
or November-June: 
PC1 = a + b A + b SST + ε 
1 2
Because of positive autocorrelation in the 
residuals, we simultaneously computed maximum 
likelihood estimates of the lag-1 autocorrelation 
coefficient and regression parameters.  Due to time 
trends in the data, we first computed regressions 
using the original data and then repeated the 
regressions using detrended data (deviations from 
a linear time trend fit to each data series) to test for 
effects at shorter time scales.  
 
 
Results and discussion 
 
 
Fig. 1  Histograms of correlations between 
Patterns of covariation.  There was widespread 
lengths of age 1.2 sockeye:  A) among Bristol Bay 
positive covariation among the 72 body-length 
stocks (all 28 correlations positive;  23 significant 
time series, aligned by return year, across ages and 
at p<0.05);  B) among Fraser River stocks (all 190 
across stocks.  Of the 2,556 correlations, 91.4% 
correlations positive;  161 significant);  and  
were positive (and 43%, or 1,006, of the positive 
C) between Bristol Bay and Fraser River stocks 
ones were significant at p<0.05, whereas only 3 
(136 of 160 correlations positive;  25 significant 
negative cases were significant).  There was strong 
positive correlations).  Open bars represent 
evidence of positive covariation in age-specific 
negative correlations; solid bars are positive 
body size among sockeye stocks even between 
correlations.  Reprinted from Pyper et al. (1999). 
distant regions, as indicated by the predominance 
 
of positive correlations in these comparisons (e.g., 
 
Bristol Bay vs. Fraser River; Fig. 1C).  However, 
Correlations using first-differenced data support 
there was a stronger positive covariation among 
the suggestion from the PCA reported below that 
body length of stocks within regions (e.g., among 
slowly changing, low-frequency patterns of 
the 8 stocks in Bristol Bay and among the 20 in 
variability, such as the declining time trends in 
the Fraser River;  Fig. 1A and 1B).  Generally, the 
body size, were important sources of covariation 
  
22
among average lengths of stocks.  After Fig. 1C of Peterman et al. 1998).  These 
autocorrelation and time trends in the 72 stock- differences in spatial characteristics of covariation 
specific length series were removed by first- suggest that models for body size or forecasting 
differencing, widespread positive covariation was annual salmon abundance (reflecting survival rates 
still evident both within and between regions.  and changing age-at-maturity schedules) should be 
However, correlations were consistently and often based on appropriate measures of environmental 
substantially lower than those computed using the conditions that reflect this information about 
original data.  The average of the 2,556 spatial scales.  For example, we found that large, 
correlations was reduced from 0.37 to 0.23, the basin-scale SST was significantly associated with 
number of negative correlations increased to 578, variation in body size (see below), whereas Mueter 
and the number of significant (p<0.05) positive et al. (2001) found that smaller, regional-scale 
correlations decreased to 745.  Thus, there is little SST was much more important in explaining 
variation in survival rates of salmon. 
evidence that the general patterns of covariation in 
lengths could be solely a spurious result of  
unrelated time trends;  instead, to the extent that Effects of oceanographic conditions and 
the observed covariation in length-at-age of intraspecific competition.  Principal components 
sockeye salmon arises from shared processes, such analysis (PCA) of the 13 age-specific regional 
processes appear to be largely characterized by body length series defined the temporal 
low-frequency patterns of variability. characteristics of variation shared among regions.  
 The PCA yielded three principal components with 
In contrast to the above analyses, when the body- eigenvalues greater than one;  the best one 
length time series were aligned to share the same accounted for 65% of the total variance and the 
ocean entry year (OEY) but to have a different other two combined accounted for only 19%.  The 
return year (RY), the correlations among stocks time series (scores) of this dominant component, 
decreased dramatically (e.g. for Bristol Bay PC1, had an obvious declining trend from 1967-
stocks, the average correlation in the original data 1997 (p<0.001;  linear regression with 
series decreased from 0.67 when lined up by RY autocorrelated error) (Fig. 2A).  All 13 length 
to 0.29 when lined up by OEY).  This decrease series correlated strongly with PC1 (range 0.64 to 
was even greater when possible confounding 0.89), suggesting that much of the covariation 
among lengths of Alaska and B.C. sockeye salmon 
effects of autocorrelation were removed from both 
analyses (see Pyper et al. 1999).  Like other resulted from a similar declining trend over this 
analyses, (Rogers and Ruggerone 1993; period.  
McKinnell 1995), these findings imply that  
variable growth conditions during early marine life The multiple regression for the PC1 (reflecting 
are not nearly as important a determinant of shared variation among body size) using the 
2
 
temporal variation in final sockeye body length as original data was highly significant (multiple r = 
conditions during late marine life.  0.71, p<< 0.001), as was the estimated slope on 
 
abundance (b = -0.03 ± 0.005 [±1 standard error], 
1
Comparison of body size and survival rates.  We 
p<< 0.001) (Fig. 2B).  The slope on November-
found weak and inconsistent correlations between 
February SST was also significant (b = -0.72 ± 
2
2
average length and survival rate, suggesting that 
0.29, p = 0.014) (Fig. 2C).  Partial r values were 
different processes drive interannual variability in 
0.56 for abundance and 0.18 for SST.  
these components of recruitment.  This conclusion 
 
is further supported by evidence that 
The multiple regression using detrended data (to 
environmental processes influence these two 
remove possible confounding due to time trends in 
variables at different spatial scales.  Whereas both 
the original data) showed similar results.  Both 
adult body size and survival rate show strong 
abundance and November-February SST were 
positive covariation among stocks within regions, 
significant (b = -0.035 ± 0.007, p << 0.001 and b 
1 2
 
2
only body size shows strong between-region  
= -0.87 ± 0.31, p = 0.004).  Overall, the multiple r
covariation (e.g., compare Fig. 1C here with  
= 0.54, p << 0.001, and multicollinearity was 
 
  
23
2
 
negligible (r = 0.04).  Partial r values were 0.48 Because November-February and November-June 
for abundance and 0.23 for SST.  SST data were highly correlated (r = 0.86), all 
 results for the latter were similar to those for 
November-February, with the exception that 
November-June SST was not significant in either 
the multiple regression with original data (p = 
0.11) or with detrended data (p = 0.08). 
 
These results indicate that reduced adult body 
length of both B.C. and Alaska sockeye salmon 
are associated with increases in total sockeye 
abundance in the Northeast Pacific and November-
February sea-surface. 
 
Abundance and SST together account for 71% of 
the variability in the first principal component 
(PC1) of body length among the major sockeye 
stocks of the northeastern Pacific Ocean during 
1967-1997.  Furthermore, abundance appears to 
have a much greater effect on body size than 
2
 
temperature.  Its partial r was considerably larger 
(0.56 vs. 0.18), and when data in each series were 
transformed into standard deviation units so that 
slopes were in the same units, the standardized 
slope for abundance (-0.68) was greater than the 
slope for SST (-0.27).  This indicates that for each 
standard deviation increase, abundance had about 
2.5 times the contribution to reducing adult body 
size as did November-February SST.  
 
In addition, both abundance and SST were 
significantly related to the dominant pattern of 
 
variability in body length at both long and short 
 
time scales (i.e., in the original, as well as 
Fig. 2  (A) Scores for the dominant principal 
detrended data).  Thus, although it is possible that 
component (PC1) of length-at-age data for B.C. 
relationships among the original data might be 
and Alaska sockeye salmon -- lower values of 
coincidental due to their co-occurring time trends 
PC1, for example, reflect the tendency toward 
(i.e., that some other omitted variable actually 
reduced body length that is shared among these 
explains the trend in PC1), the evidence in support 
stocks;  (B) Total annual abundance of adult 
of the effects of abundance and SST was 
recruits (catch plus escapement) of the major B.C. 
strengthened by their very similar slopes in both 
and Alaska sockeye stocks;  and (C) Average 
the original data analysis and the analysis once 
yearly winter (November through February) sea-
time trends were removed.  
surface temperature (SST) deviations in °C from 
 
the long-term (1947-1997) mean for those months 
Although several authors have documented 
(6.8°C) for the Northeast Pacific Ocean over the 
increased secondary productivity in the 
region where distributions of B.C. and Alaska 
northeastern Pacific Ocean in recent decades (e.g., 
sockeye salmon overlap.  Dotted lines are the 
zooplankton and squid - Brodeur and Ware 1992, 
fitted linear time trends used to detrend the data. 
1995), which should improve growth rates for 
Reprinted from Pyper and Peterman (1999). 
sockeye salmon, abundance of sockeye recruits 
also increased (Fig. 2B).  We therefore 
  
24
hypothesize that increased food supply was more Mueter, F.J., Pyper, B.J., and Peterman, R.M.  
than offset by increased sockeye abundance, 2001.  Effects of coastal sea surface 
which resulted in greater competition and smaller temperatures on survival rates of sockeye, 
body size in recent years. pink, and chum salmon stocks from 
 Washington, British Columbia, and Alaska. 
Acknowledgments Poster #S11-203 in Session S11: "Results of 
 GLOBEC and GLOBEC-like programs," at 
the PICES Tenth Annual Meeting, Victoria, 
We are extremely grateful to the numerous 
B.C., October, 5-13, 2001. 
biologists and technicians in various management 
Peterman, R.M., Pyper, B.J., Lapointe, M.F., 
agencies who gathered, processed, and provided 
Adkison, M.D., and Walters, C.J.  1998.  
the time series of data analyzed here. Funding was 
Patterns of covariation in survival rates of 
provided by a grant to R.M. Peterman from the 
British Columbia and Alaskan sockeye 
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research 
salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka) stocks.  Can. J. 
Council of Canada. 
Fish. Aquat. Sci. 55: 2503-2517. 
 
Pyper, B.J., and Peterman, R.M.  1998.  
References 
Comparison of methods to account for 
 
autocorrelation in correlation analyses of fish 
Brodeur, R.D., and Ware, D.M.  1992.  Long-term 
data.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 55: 2127-2140 
variability in zooplankton biomass in the 
plus the erratum printed in Can. J. Fish. 
subarctic Pacific Ocean.  Fisheries Oceanog. 
Aquat. Sci. 55: 2710. 
1: 32-38. 
Pyper, B.J., and Peterman, R.M.  1999.  
Brodeur, R.D., and Ware, D.M.  1995.  Inter-
Relationship among adult body length, 
decadal variability in distribution and catch 
abundance, and ocean temperature for British 
rates of epipelagic nekton in the Northeast 
Columbia and Alaska sockeye salmon, 1967-
Pacific ocean.  In R.J. Beamish (Ed.)  Climate 
1997.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 56: 1716-1720.  
change and northern fish populations.  Can. 
Rogers, D.E., and Ruggerone, G.T.  1993.  Factors 
Spec. Publ. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 121, pp. 329-356. 
affecting marine growth of Bristol Bay 
French, R., Bilton, H., Osaka, M., and Hartt, A.  
sockeye salmon.  Fisheries Research 18: 89-
1976.  Distribution and origin of sockeye 
103. 
salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka) in offshore 
Pyper, B.J., Peterman, R.M., Lapointe, M.F., and 
waters of the North Pacific Ocean.  INPFC 
Walters, C.J.  1999.  Patterns of covariation in 
Bulletin 34.  
length and age at maturity of British Columbia 
McKinnell, S.  1995.  Age-specific effects of 
and Alaska sockeye salmon (Oncorhynchus 
sockeye abundance on adult body size of 
nerka) stocks.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 56: 
selected British Columbia sockeye stocks.  
1046-1057. 
Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 52: 1050-1063. 
 
 
Influences of the 1997-1998 El Niño and 1999 La Niña on juvenile chinook 
salmon in the Gulf of the Farallones 
 
R. Bruce MacFarlane, Steven Ralston, Chantell Royer, and Elizabeth C. Norton 
NOAA Fisheries, Southwest Fisheries Science Center, Santa Cruz Laboratory, 110 Shaffer Road, Santa 
Cruz, CA 95060, U.S.A.  E-mail: Bruce.MacFarlane@noaa.gov 
 
El Niño, the warm phase of El Niño/Southern north as Alaska.  Less is known of the influences 
Oscillation (ENSO) events, has been shown to of La Niña, the cool phase of ENSO events that 
produce dramatic effects on marine communities.  follows an El Niño.  During the 1982-83 El Niño, 
Alterations in physical oceanographic properties anomalous plankton distributions, altered fish 
of the marine environment can be observed as far community structure, and reduced fish catch 
  
25
occurred in coastal waters of southern California 60 million chinook salmon smolts spawned from 
(Simpson, 1992).  Along the central California four runs (fall, late fall, winter, spring) in streams 
coast, the 1992-93 El Niño corresponded to and hatcheries in the Central Valley.  The purpose 
delayed phytoplankton blooms, changes in the of the information presented here is to document 
abundance and distribution of invertebrates, juvenile salmon development, and how it was 
improved recruitment of southern fish species, but influenced by the environment in the Gulf of the 
recruitment failure in the northerly rockfish Farallones during the 1997-98 El Niño and 1999 
species (Lenarz et al. 1995).  More recently, the La Niña. 
largest decline in macrozooplankton abundance  
off central and southern California in the 50-year Juvenile salmon were captured by surface trawl at 
series of CalCOFI cruises was recorded during the locations in the Gulf of the Farallones in June to 
1997-98 El Niño (Lynn et al. 1998). October of 1998 and 1999.  El Niño was evident 
 in the Gulf of the Farallones in August  1997 and 
In addition to ecosystem impacts, changes in persisted to August 1998 (Fig. 3).  By late 1998, 
physiology and behavior of fishes, including La Niña was apparent and continued into spring 
salmon, have been noted during ENSO events.  2000.  Plankton samples were taken by Tucker 
Poor growth and low condition, ascribed to low Trawl at 5 m and 15-25 m below the surface to 
fat content, were found in adult rockfish off estimate secondary productivity and zooplankton 
central California during 1992-93 (Lenarz et al. composition. 
1995).  And in a study of widow (Sebastes  
entomelas) and yellowtail rockfish (S. flavidus) in Relative growth for juveniles caught in 1998 and 
coastal waters of central and northern California, 1999 was estimated by microstructural analysis of 
Woodbury (1999) reported reduced otolith otoliths.  Growth rates and size-at-age of juvenile 
growth, a conservative measure of somatic growth chinook salmon can be estimated by measuring 
history, during the 1982-83 El Niño.  Reduced daily otolith increment widths (Bradford and Geen 
condition and growth of sockeye salmon 1987).  We calculated mean otolith increment 
(Oncorhynchus nerka) in the Gulf of Alaska widths as an index for somatic growth between 
during the 1997-98 El Niño event were related to increments 160 and 260, representing the first 100 
feeding on zooplankton, prey of lower caloric days after leaving the estuary.  Juvenile salmon 
content than squid, their primary food in 1998 exited San Francisco Estuary at 160±1 days old in 
following the El Niño (Kaeriyama et al. 2000).  In 1998 and at 168±3 days old in 1999.  Growth rate 
a review of El Niño effects on fisheries, Mysak indices for salmon caught in 1998, during the El 
(1986) detailed other impacts to sockeye, 
Niño period, were significantly greater than for 
including changes in migration patterns and the fish collected in 1999 (P<0.0001).  Mean growth 
timing of returns to streams.  Lower survival in rates of otolith increments were 3.37±0.03 µm in 
juvenile coho salmon (O. kisutch) following ocean fish sampled in 1998 and 3.02±0.03 µm in 1999 
entry, great mortality in adult coho, and reduced (Fig. 4). 
size in both coho and chinook salmon (O.  
tshawytscha) were described off Oregon during Whole body concentrations of triacylglycerols 
the 1982-83 El Niño (Pearcy and Schoener 1987). (TAG), the primary metabolically-available form 
 of stored energy in salmonids and other fishes, 
We report here the results of a study of juvenile differed between the two years.  Upon entering 
chinook salmon in the Gulf of the Farallones, an the Gulf of the Farallones, juvenile salmon had 
embayment on the central California coast.  The greater levels of TAG in 1999 than in 1998, 
Gulf of the Farallones, a broad expanse of 30.5±3.1 mg/g and 11.5±1.8 mg/g wet weight, 
continental shelf extending from Pt. Reyes to respectively.  However, lipid stores of salmon in 
Pillar Pt. out to the Farallon Islands, receives the gulf were depleted to a greater extent in 1999.  
freshwater outflow through the Golden Gate from Juveniles collected from the gulf in 1999 had 
the Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers and their TAG levels of 4.4±1.4 mg/g, whereas those from 
tributaries in California’s Central Valley.  It is 1998 were 7.9±1.0 mg/g.  These data support 
also the point of ocean entry for an estimated 50- previous research that found depleted TAG  
  
26
NOAA Weather Buoys
Bodega Bay  (1981-96)
Halfmoon Bay  (1980-96)
5.00
San Francisco  (1982-96)
4.00
3.00
2.00
1.00
0.00
-1.00
-2.00
-3.00
-4.00
JFMAMJJASO NDJFMAMJJAS O NDJ FMAMJ JA
1997 1998 1999
 
 
Fig. 3 Sea surface temperature anomalies from buoys at Bodega Bay, San Francisco, and Half Moon 
Bay.  Anomalies were calculated from longer-term averages shown in parentheses in the legend.  All 
three buoys were out of operation from December 1997 to mid-March 1998 when El Niño conditions 
were most evident. 
 
4.5
4
1998
3.5
3
1999
2.5
2
150 160 170 180 190 200 210 220 230 240 250 260 270
Increment # (days)
 
 
Fig. 4 Mean otolith increment widths for juvenile chinook salmon from the Gulf of the Farallones in 
1998 (solid circles) and 1999 (open triangles).  Lines represent least squares fit of daily mean increment 
widths;  solid line - 1998, dashed line - 1999.  Vertical dashed lines at 160 and 260 increments represent 
estimated first 100 days in the ocean after leaving the San Francisco Estuary. 
  
27
Mean Increment Width (um)
o
SST Anomaly  (C)
concentrations in juvenile salmon after exiting the did not reveal such a pattern.  Currents in the gulf 
estuary (MacFarlane and Norton, 2002). were forced by tidal circulation and persistent 
 northwesterly winds, which also produced positive 
Juvenile salmon in the Gulf of the Farallones not upwelling index anomalies throughout the summer 
only grew faster and maintained a greater TAG and fall of 1998 (April - November mean monthly 
concentration during the 1998 El Niño period, anomaly for 39°N 125°W: +44.5±25.6).  As 
their condition (Fulton’s K-factor) was better as expected, strong northwesterly winds during the 
well.  In 1998, mean K increased to 1.42±0.01 for summer and fall of the 1999 La Niña event 
gulf salmon from 1.03±0.01 at ocean entry, resulted in intense upwelling with a mean April to 
compared with a change from 1.04±0.01 at ocean November monthly index anomaly of 104.6±35.1. 
entry to 1.32±0.01 in the gulf during 1999.  
 Biological productivity is highly variable in the 
Although there were differences in growth, energy Gulf of the Farallones region and modulated to 
status, and condition between the two years, varying degrees by upwelling, advection, wind-
feeding data did not resolve the disparity.  This is driven and tidal circulation, and freshwater 
not unexpected because stomach contents reflect outflow.  Primary productivity, estimated by 
only recent feeding, whereas growth and lipid chlorophyll a concentrations in May and June, was 
accumulation integrate metabolic processes over similar between the two years, but the distribution 
longer time scales.  Stomach fullness was of phytoplankton differed.  In 1998, phytoplankton 
estimated to be 45.5% in juveniles sampled in were distributed within the gulf on the continental 
1998 and 56.7% in 1999.  In both years, fish were shelf whereas during the 1999 La Niña they were 
the primary food item, comprising greater than primarily off the shelf, seaward of the gulf.  
50% of the stomach contents volume.  Decapod Greater nutrient-rich freshwater influx coupled 
early life stages were of secondary importance, with higher temperatures in 1998 may have 
especially for salmon later in the season in August accounted for greater primary productivity within 
to October. the gulf during the El Niño event.  Greater 
 phytoplankton biomass within the Gulf of the 
The marine environment in the Gulf of the Farallones in 1998 was accompanied by greater 
Farallones differed between the two years.  From secondary production.  Mean zooplankton biomass 
3
 in 
May through August, mean sea surface in the near-surface waters was 0.30±0.12 ml/m
temperatures were about 1.0°C warmer in 1998 May and September 1998.  In contrast, 
and about 1.3°C cooler in 1999 than long-term zooplankton mean settled volume was 0.13±0.03 
3
averages (Fig. 3).  The 1997-98 El Niño was ml/m in August and October 1999. 
characterized by heavy precipitation in California  
and this was evident in freshwater outflow from In summary, during the 1997-98 El Niño, juvenile 
the Central Valley.  Freshwater outflow into the salmon in the Gulf of the Farallones grew at a 
3
gulf averaged 2,940 cubic meters per sec (m /s) greater rate, maintained higher TAG reserves, and 
from January to June 1998, whereas outflow in were in better condition than those during the 1999 
1999 was much reduced during the dryer La Niña La Niña.  This profile may be attributed to 
3
to 1,330 m /s. somewhat higher biological  productivity in the 
 gulf in 1998, due to increased nutrient input from 
The Gulf of the Farallones is buffered from large- freshwater inflow, and the protection afforded by 
scale oceanic influences because it is in the Pt. Reyes and the Farallon Islands, which buffered 
upwelling shadow of Pt. Reyes to the north, the embayment from the full impacts of oceanic 
bounded by the Farallon Islands and associated processes.  But, for all measures of salmon 
marine banks on the west, and subjected to the development the differences were not great.  The 
effects of freshwater outflow from San Francisco data do support the contention, however, that the 
Bay.  Although El Niño typically produces 1997-98 El Niño was not detrimental to juvenile 
enhanced poleward flow of the California Current, chinook salmon development in this region during 
near-surface current data from an Acoustic the early stage of the ocean phase of their life 
Doppler Current Profiler in May and June 1998 cycle. 
  
28
References MacFarlane, R.B,. and Norton, E.C. 2002. 
 Physiological ecology of juvenile chinook 
Bradford, M.J., and Geen, G.H.  1987.  Size and salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) at the 
growth of juvenile chinook salmon back- southern end of their distribution, the San 
calculated from otolith growth increments, p. Francisco Estuary and Gulf of the Farallones, 
453-461.  In  R.C. Summerfeldt and G.E. Hall California.  Fishery Bulletin 100 (2) (In 
[eds.]  The age and growth of fish.  Iowa State press). 
University Press, Ames, IA. Mysak, L.A.  1986.  El Niño, interannual 
Kaeriyama, M., Nakamura, M., Ueda, H., Anma, variability and fisheries in the northeast 
G., Takagi, S., Aydin, K.Y., Walker, R.V., and Pacific Ocean.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 43: 
Myers, K.W.  2000.  Feeding ecology of 464-497. 
sockeye and pink salmon in the Gulf of Pearcy, W.G., and Schoener, A.  1987.  Changes 
Alaska.  NPAFC Bulletin 2: 55-63. in the marine biota coincident with the 1982-
Lenarz, W.H., Ventresca, D.A., Graham, W.M., 1983 El Niño in the northeastern subarctic 
Schwing, F.W., and Chavez, F.  1995.  Pacific Ocean.  J. Geophys. Res. 92: 14,417-
Explorations of El Niño events and associated 14,428. 
biological population dynamics off central Simpson, J.J.  1992.  Response of the Southern 
California.  CalCOFI Report 36: 106-119. California current system to the mid-latitude 
Lynn, R.J., Baumgartner, T., Garcia, J., Collins, North Pacific coastal warming events of 
C.A., Hayward, T.L., Hyrenbach, K.D., 1982-1983 and 1940-1941.  Fisheries 
Mantyla, A.W., Murphree, T., Shankle, A., Oceanogr. 1: 57-79. 
Schwing, F.B., Sakuma, K.M., and Tegner, Woodbury, D.  1999.  Reduction of growth in 
M.J.  1998.  The state of the California otoliths of widow and yellowtail rockfish 
Current, 1997-1998:  transition to El Niño (Sebastes entomelas and S. flavidus) during 
conditions.  CalCOFI Report 39: 25-49. the 1983 El Niño.  Fishery Bulletin 97: 680-
689. 
 
 
Variability of the pink salmon sizes in relation with abundance of Okhotsk 
Sea stocks 
 
1 2 
Olga S. Temnykh and Sergey L. Marchenko
1
 Pacific Research Fisheries Center (TINRO-center), 4, Shevchenko Alley, Vladivostok, Russia, 
690600.  E-mail: tinro@tinro.ru 
2
 MoTINRO, Magadan, Russia.  E-mail: tinro@online.magadam.su 
 
Beginning in the mid-1970s there was an increase 
reduction of the fecundity of females (Ishida et al. 
in abundance of all Pacific salmon species.  It was 1993, Welch and Morris 1994; Bigler at.al. 1996).  
shown that global climatic factors may have Nevertheless, there are some exceptions to the 
caused changes in salmon abundance in the North general trend of Pacific salmon productivity in 
Pacific (Beamish and Bouillon 1993, Klyashtorin relation to stock abundance.  For example, a 
and Sidorenkov 1996, Radchenko and decrease in abundance was observed for the 
Rassadnikov 1997, Shuntov et al. 1997).  The rise Japan/East Sea pink salmon stocks (especially for 
in abundance of Asian and American stocks of the Primorye stock) while the average size of the 
salmon was accompanied by a decrease in the Primorye pink salmon decreased during the 1970-
average size of fish, by an increase in age at 1980s (Temnykh 1998).  At the same time, 
maturity (due to the growth rate reduction during abundant pink salmon from Sakhalin maintained a 
marine period of their life cycle), and by a  large size (Nagasawa 1998). 
  
29
The main objectives of this research were to: abundance in 1940-1960s, an increase in pink 
 salmon number was observed in the Okhotsk Sea 
null Compare growth of pink salmon from from the late 1970s.  From the early 1990s, the 
“continental” (northern coast of the Okhotsk    total odd-year pink salmon catch increased 1.8 
Sea) and “island” (Sakhalin, southern Kuril times when compared to the late 1970s and 1980s, 
islands) regions during periods of high and and amounted to 62-133 thousand tons (Fig. 6).  
low pink salmon abundance;  and This was mainly due to a considerable rise of pink 
null Determine those factors responsible for size  salmon abundance from the south-western 
differences among pink salmon stocks, Okhotsk Sea, particularly from eastern Sakhalin.  
particularly in the northern and southern During the last decade the share of those groups in 
Okhotsk Sea, during periods of low and high the odd years reached 55-96% in the total number 
abundance from the 1970s-1990s. in the Okhotsk Sea.  
  
Materials and methods Total even-year pink salmon catch increased 3.4 
 times when compared to the 1970-1980s, and 
Statistical data on pink salmon catches collected amounted to 83-192 thousand tons (Fig. 6).  On 
by TINRO-Centre, SakhTINIRO, and MoTINRO, the Sakhalin and southern Kuriles, the number of 
are used in this study.  These include the average pink salmon increased 2.2 times, while in the 
size of spawners from rivers on the Okhotsk Sea western Kamchatka and northern Okhotsk Sea 
coast of Sakhalin (north and south Sakhalin as regions it increased 4.6 and 4.3 times, 
well as Terpenya and Aniva bays), from Iturup Is. respectively.  Beginning in 1994, pink salmon 
(southern Kuriles), and from the mainland rivers from western Kamchatka was the most numerous 
of the northern coast of the Okhotsk Sea (Gizhiga, among the odd-year generations (46-60% of the 
Kukhtuy, and Tauy rivers) (Fig. 5). total number of the Okhotsk Sea stocks). 
  
65
odd-year
200000
Gizhiga
180000
160000
Kukhtuy Tauy
60
140000
120000
100000
80000
55
60000
40000
N-E Sakhalin
20000
0
50 Terpeniya Bay
S-E Sakhalin
Aniva Bay
West Kamchatka North coast of the Okhotsk sea Southern Kuril East Sakhalin
 
45
Iturup
 
even-year
200000
40
180000
130 140 150 160 170 180
 
160000
 
140000
Fig. 5 Map of the location of Okhotsk Sea pink 
120000
100000
salmon regions studied. 
80000
 
60000
40000
Results 
20000
 
0
Catch dynamics for the Okhotsk Sea stocks of 
pink salmon 
West Kamchatka North coast of the Okhotsk sea Southern Kuril East Sakhalin
 
 
 
Eastern Sakhalin, western Kamchatka, southern 
Fig. 6 Total annual catch of pink salmon in the 
Kurile, and northern Okhotsk Sea stocks of pink 
main regions of coastal fisheries. 
salmon are highly abundant stocks within the 
 
Okhotsk Sea.  Following a period of low 
  
30
1960
1964
1968
1972
1976
1980
1984
1988
1992
1996
2000
Catch, t Catch, t
1961
1963
1965
1967
1969
1971
1973
1975
1977
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
Changes of body weight of the Okhotsk Sea abundance and average size of pink salmon from 
stocks of pink salmon southern and northern Okhotsk Sea stocks is 
 unequivocal evidence that favorable conditions 
During the 1990s, both southern and northern pink prevailed for fish reproduction during the late 
salmon populations from the Okhotsk Sea were 1980s - early 1990s. 
characterized by peculiar changes in mean size.   
Among the southern Okhotsk Sea stocks (eastern Weakening of the Aleutian Low led to 
Sakhalin, southern Kuriles), there was a trend considerable warming of the northwestern Pacific 
toward increasing body weight both in even-year, after 1989.  The carrying capacity for the Okhotsk 
and especially in odd-year generations over the Sea pink salmon increased.  Unlike the North 
last decade (Fig. 7, Table 1). American pink salmon, the average size of the 
 Okhotsk Sea pink salmon increased during a 
As for the increased abundance of pink salmon period of high abundance.  We can only guess 
from the northern Okhotsk Sea coast, the average what was the main reason for that.  It could be due 
weight was also growing in the odd-year broods, to increased productivity as a consequence of 
that were more abundant than even-year general warming in the northwestern Pacific 
generations, though it was somewhat smaller in and/or improvements of forage reserves at the 
the even years.  Average size changes within the expense of significant decreases in abundance of 
“northern” and “southern” groups of pink salmon other plankton consumers.  In the 1980s, the total 
were synchronous.  The increase in both biomass of pelagic fishes amounted to  
 
2
1,8
1,6
1,4
1,2
1
0,8
SE Sakhalin Anuva Bay South Kuril
 
1.80
1.70
1.60
1.50
1.40
1.30
1.20
1.10
1.00
0.90
0.80
Gizhiga Tauy Kukhtuy
 
 
Fig. 7 Average pink salmon weight in Sakhalin-Kuril region (top panel) and northern coast of the 
Okhotsk Sea (bottom panel). 
  
31
Weight, kg
Weight, kg
  т
1970
1962
1972
1964
1966
1974
1968
1976
1970
1978
1972
1980 1974
1976
1982
1978
1984
1980
1986
1982
1984
1988
1986
1990
1988
1992
1990
1992
1994
1994
1996
1996
1998
1998
2000
2000
Table 1 Average Okhotsk Sea pink salmon catches and fish weight in the 1970-1980s and in the 1990s. 
 
Average weight Average catches Average total catches 
    kg ,000 t ,000 t 
Region 
1978- 1978-
    1989 1990-2000 1988 1990-2000 1978-1988 1990-2000 
Northern coast Gizhiga 1,12 1,13 
of the Sea of 
1,72 5,58 
Okhotsk Tauy 1,12 1,13 
 Kukhtuy 1,27 1,18 
Even years  43,1 123,3 
Sakhalin Island Aniva Bay 1,17 1,25 
 S-E Sakhalin 1,08 1,27 
21,03 48,52 
Terpeniya 
 Bay* 1,02 1,14 
South Kuril Islands Iturup 1,16 1,36 
Northern coast Gizhiga 1,09 1,3 
of the Sea of 
4,64 6,29 
Okhotsk Tauy 1,3 1,41 
 Kukhtuy 1,3 1,42 
Odd years 61,9 103,5 
Sakhalin Aniva Bay 1,15 1,31 
 S-E Sakhalin 1,2 1,36 
39,52 85,64 
Terpeniya 
Bay* 
 1,2 1,32 
South Kuril Islands Iturup 1,18 1,51 
 
million tons in the Kuroshio Current region.  In the It is interesting to note that the average weight of 
1990s, the abundance of these fishes decreased by pink salmon was larger in the northern Okhotsk 
7-8 times, mainly at the expense of Japanese Sea during the 1980s compared to the southern 
sardine (Belyaev 2000).  During this period, total Okhotsk Sea stocks, in spite of the fact that the 
plankton consumption by pelagic fishes decreased marine life period of northern stock fishes is 30-45 
by up to 20 times compared to the 1980s in Pacific days shorter than southern Okhotsk Sea stocks.  In 
waters of Kuril islands (Naydenko, in press). winter, pink salmon from different Okhotsk Sea 
 stocks dwell within the same region of the 
The increase in number and size of pink salmon northwestern Pacific but these stocks are partly 
from the southern Okhotsk Sea population took separated in time and space during migrations 
place together with the drop in abundance of (Fig. 8).  The range of the northern Okhotsk Sea 
Pacific sardine after the 1990s.  The low pink salmon is less connected with feeding areas 
abundance and small size of pink salmon took of subtropical migrants in the Subarctic Front 
place together with decrease in abundance of Zone, especially at the beginning and at the end of 
Japanese sardine after 1989.  The low abundance marine period of pink salmon life. 
and small size of pink salmon were observed for  
stocks both in the southern Okhotsk Sea, and in During the last decade, there is some evidence that 
Japan/East Sea during high abundance of Japanese density-dependent factors caused the decrease in 
sardine (Temnykh 1998). It is unlikely that sardine average weight of highly abundant pink salmon 
are a direct competitor with pink salmon.  It generations within the Okhotsk Sea.  In the 1990s, 
appears that a high abundance of the predator a permanently high weight difference was 
results in enhanced pressure on planktonic observed between even- and odd-year generations 
organisms.  A decrease in zooplankton abundance of pink salmon from rivers of the northern 
in the western North Pacific during the 1970 - Okhotsk Sea coast, Sakhalin and Iturup (Fig. 7, 
1980s (Odate 1994) could be due to both climate Table 1).  In the Sakhalin-Kuril region, even-year 
and oceanological changes, and predation of pink salmon were 100-200 g lighter than odd-year.  
abundant nektonic species. The average weight of eastern pink salmon is 
  
32
lower at low stock abundance in even years, We have suggested a hypothesis explaining the 
compared to fish size observed in odd years when dynamics of fish size and stock abundance of pink 
Sakhalin population number was twice higher. salmon.  To develop our knowledge in this field, it 
Pink salmon sizes depend on the total abundance is of primary importance to look more carefully 
in the Okhotsk Sea, but not abundance of each into the basic parameters of carrying capacity for 
stock. pink salmon during marine period of the life cycle. 
 
 
 65
65 
60
60 
55
55 
50
50 
 45
45
 40
40
35 35
30 30
130 140 150 160 170 180
130 140 150 160 170 180
June 
May 
 
65
 
60
55 
50 
45 
40 
35 
30 
130 140 150 160 170 180
July 
 
 
Fig. 8 Seasonal distribution of the Okhotsk Sea pink salmon and Japanese sardine in the northwestern 
Pacific.  (■) pink salmon from Sakhalin-Kuril stocks, ( ▲) pink salmon from the northern Okhotsk Sea, 
( ) pink salmon from western Kamchatka stocks (tagging data from Ogura 1994).  The shaded area 
indicates Japanese sardine distribution during the period of high abundance in the 1970-1980s. 
 
References Ishida, Y., Ito, S., Kaeriyama, M., McKinnell, S., 
 and Nagasawa, K.  1993.  Recent changes in 
Beamish, R.J., and Bouillon, D.R.  1993.  Pacific age and size of chum salmon (Oncorhynchus 
salmon production trends in relation to keta) in the North Pacific Ocean and possible 
climate.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 50: 1002- causes.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 50: 290-295. 
1016. Klyashtorin, L.B., and Sidorenkov, N.S.  1996.  
Bigler, B.S., Welch, D.W., and Helle, J.H.  1996. The long-term climatic changes and pelagic 
A review of size trends among North Pacific fish stock fluctuations in the Pacific.  Izv. 
salmon (Oncorhynchus spp.).  Can. J. Fish. TINRO. 119: 33-54 (in Russian). 
Aquat. Sci. 53: 455-465. 
  
33
null
Nagasawa, K.  1998.  Long-term changes in resources of the Far Eastern Russian economic 
climate, zooplankton biomass in the western zone: structure of pelagic and bottom 
North Pacific, and abundance and size of the communities, up-to-data status, tendencies of 
East Sakhalin pink salmon. NPAFC Technical long-term dynamics.  Izv. TINRO 122: 3-15 
Report, Vancouver, Canada, pp. 35-36. (in Russian). 
Ogura, M.  1994.  Migratory behavior of Pacific Temnykh O.S.  1998.  Primorye pink salmon 
salmon (Oncorhynchus spp.) in the open sea.  growth at high and low abundance. NPAFC 
Bull. Nat. Res. Inst. Far Seas Fish. 31: 1-138. Technical Report, Vancouver, Canada, pp. 20-
Radchenko, V.I., and Rassadnikov, O.A.  1997. 22. 
Long-term dynamics trends of Asian stocks of Welch, D.W., and Morris, J.F.T.  1994.  Evidence 
Pacific salmon and factors determing it.  Izv. for density-dependent marine growth in 
TINRO 122: 72-94 (in Russian). British Columbia pink salmon populations.  
Shuntov, V.P., Radchenko, V.I., Dulepova, E.P., NPAFC Doc. 97. 33 p.  
and Temnykh, O.S.  1997.  Biological 
 
 
The characteristic growth rate of herring in Peter the Great Bay (Japan/East 
Sea) 
 
Ludmila A. Chernoivanova, Alexander N. Vdovin and D.V. Antonenko 
Pacific Research Fisheries Center (TINRO-center), 4, Shevchenko Alley, Vladivostok, Russia, 690950.  
E-mail: tinro@tinro.ru 
 
Pacific herring are subarctic species forming It is necessary to determine how the size-age 
several local populations within its extensive characteristics and population structure changed 
natural habitat.  The Peter the Great Bay herring in connection with the present depressed 
form one of most southerly groups, and are condition of Peter the Great Bay herring stocks.  
typically characterized by a high growth rate.  The biostatistical data from annual monitoring 
There is no uniform opinion about the of the Peter the Great Bay herring stocks from 
hierarchical status of this group, but it has the 1971 to 2001 were analyzed.  The data were 
highest biopotential among other herring groups collected from control catches by gill nets, 
of the Japan/East Sea (Posadova 1988, Gavrilov seines and traps exposed directly on the 
1998, Rybnikova 1999). spawning grounds.  The data were processed 
 using standard ichthyological techniques.  The 
The life cycle of Peter the Great Bay herring scales from a middle part of fish body under a 
occurs within the Bay and in adjacent waters in dorsal fin were used for age interpretation.  The 
the northwestern part of the Japan/East Sea. following formula (Alimov 1989) was used for 
Considering its restricted distribution and growth rate:  
spawning grounds, the potential level of biomass 
lg() l − lg( l )
1 0
of this population does not exceed 150 thousand 
C = ×100% 
l
tons. From 1910 till now, three peaks of high 0.4343() t − t
1 0
abundance have been observed:  in the mid 
where C  is the average speed of linear growth, 
l
1920s, the mid 1950s, and the late 1970s/early 
l is length at the initial time, t , and l is length 
0 0 1
1980s.  Each rise was associated with one or 
at a later time, t . 
1
several dominant generations (Posadova 1988).  
 
In the 1990s, the abundance and productivity of 
The Peter the Great Bay herring are the fastest 
Peter the Great Bay herring have come near to 
growing of all herring populations in the western 
the historical minimum, and its biomass during 
Pacific (Posadova 1985).  Growth is most rapid 
these years varied from 5 - 10 thousand tons. 
during the first and second years of life.  At age 
 
  
34
0+, herring in Peter the Great Bay have an The relative daily linear growths of herring for 
average body length of 110 mm and weight of the first year of life vary from 0.74 to 0.76% and 
9.9 g at the end of October.  The average length appear to be constant during the periods of 
and weight of age 1+ fish are 220 mm and 100.1 variable abundance (Table 2).  The highest 
g, respectively at the end of October.  After the growth rate of herring during ontogenesis is 
second year of life the growth rate quickly 1.5% per day during the first six months of life 
decreases and, after the fifth year, does not (from May to October).  The decreasing growth 
exceed 10 % of the increase in the first year. rate after the first year of life was associated 
 with the process of sexual maturation. 
 
Table 2 The relative daily linear growth (annual average, %) of Peter the Great Bay herring. 
 
Period of Age (years) 
observation 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
1999-2001 0.74 0.10 0.02 0.03 0.01 0.006 0.006 0.006
1971-1990 0.76 0.14 0.05 0.02 0.01 0.010 0.006 0.006
 
Table 3 Age structure (%) of herring catches in different parts of Peter the Great Bay in 1998-2001. 
 
Period of Age (years) 
observation 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 M 
Amurskiy Bay 
1998   62.036.0 2.0  3.9
1999  6.4 68.319.13.52.20.5  3.8
2000  4.6 35.945.413.70.4  4.2
2001  8.3 20.527.135.87.10.70.5  4.2
Pos’et Bay 
1998   26.25.54.023.628.810.0 1.6 0.36.1
1999  1.8 14.114.327.629.011.12.1  5.6
2000  5.3 13.618.121.423.214.83.1 0.5 5.6
2001 0.7 13.8 24.86.937.28.31.43.4 1.4 2.14.9
 
 
A separate population of Pacific herring comprises part of the population on a background of a low 
83% of genetic variability (Rybnikova 1999) reproduction level have been characterized by the 
which causes significant variability of the whole low rate of growth from 1995 till now.  The 
complex of its biological features. average body length of fish at age two and three 
 years does not reach long-term value (Fig. 9). 
The high interannual variability in mean body  
length among generations in Peter the Great Bay Lower recruitment of Peter the Great Bay herring 
was connected with the annual cohort strength.  In during the last decade has been accompanied by a 
the period of high abundance during the 1970s and reduction of the maximal age of spawners and 
1980s, high yield generations (e.g. 1974 and 1980) variable age structure among sites.  In the 
were distinguished by low growth rates (Gavrilov northwestern part of Peter the Great Bay 
and Posadova 1982).  That tendency was not (Amurskiy Bay) fish at age of 2-4 years comprised 
shown during the last 15 years in Peter the Great more than 80% of herring catches, whereas at the 
Bay.  First of all, the alternation of weak and southwestern part (Pos'et Bay) the herring were 
strong cohorts was disrupted (during that period from 2 to 10 years of age from 1998-2000 (Table 
there were no strong cohorts).  Secondly, all 3).
generations of herring consisted of a spawning 
  
35
  
  
Fig. 9 Average length of Peter the Great Bay Fig. 10 The rate of maturation of herring in 
herring: generations at age 2 (left panel) and age 3 Peter the Great Bay in 1999-2001 (1) and 1978-
(right panel) years in 1974-1997.  Dotted lines 1990 (2). 
show long term average values (age 2:  25.2 cm, 
age 3:  29.5). 
 
 
Evidently, the distortion of a complex age Gavrilov, G. M.  1998.  Seasonal and interannual 
structure was consequence of the deterioration of variability of herring distribution in waters off 
reproduction conditions of Peter the Great Bay the northern Prymorye.  Izvestia TINRO-
herring.  It is quite probable that the decrease of Centre 124: 758-764. 
growth rate in recent years is defined not only by Gavrilov, G.M., and Posadova, V.P.  1982.  
any negative factors but also high rates of Dynamics of Pacific herring Clupea pallasi 
maturity.  As was stated above, the sharp decrease pallasi Valenciennes (Clupeidae) abundance 
of growth rate was caused by the maturation in Peter the Great Bay.  J. Ichthyology 22(5): 
process.  From 1999-2001, some herring (mainly 760-772. 
males) began to mature at 14-17 cm body length, Posadova, V.P.  1985.  Interannual variability in 
and 80% were mature by 18-19 cm.  While in the spawning of herring in Peter the Great 
1978-1990, the bulk of the population matured at Bay.  In Herring of the North Pacific Ocean. 
20-21 cm body length (Fig. 10).  Accumulation of TINRO, Vladivostok, pp. 22-29. 
slow growing and early-maturing individuals in Posadova, V.P.  1988.  Stock assessment of 
the spawning part of Peter the Great Bay herring herring in Peter the Great Bay.  In Variability 
population during low abundance contributes to of ichthyofauna composition, yield year 
increased reproductive potential and, probably, is classes and forecasting techniques of fishes in 
one of mechanisms promoting the restoration of the western Pacific. TINRO, Vladivostok, pp. 
abundance. 64-69. 
 Rybnikova, I.G. 1999. Population structure of 
Pacific herring Clupea pallasi (Valenciennes) 
References 
in the Japan and Okhotsk seas.  Abstract of the 
 
Ph.D thesis (marine biology).  Vladivostok, 23 
Alimov, A.F.  1989.  Introduction to the 
pp. 
productional hydrobiology.  Hydrometeoizdat, 
Leningrad, 152 pp. 
 
  
36
Temporal variations in size-at-age of the western Bering Sea herring 
 
Nikolay I. Naumenko 
Kamchatka Research Institute of Fisheries and Oceanography (KamchatNIRO), 18 Naberezhnaya Street., 
Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky, 683600, Russia.  E-mail: nnaumenko@kamniro.kamchatka.ru 
 
U S  USA A
7
Ро сс и я
RUSSIA 8
6
5
Bering
Б ери нго в о
Россия
4 Sea
Охот ское
Sea
of Okhotsk
Marine herring
Coastal herring
3
Korean
1
Lake-lagoon herring
Great Peter Bay
Great Peter Bay
2
2
Sakhalin-Hokkaido
Sakhalin-Hokkaido
Кор е я 3
Я Japan п онское
KOREA
4 Ok Okhotsk hotsk
мSea оре
Gizhiga-Kamchatka
5 Gizhiga-Kamchatka
Korf-Karaginsk
6 Korf-Karaginsk
JAPAN Япо н ия
Anadyrsk
7 Anadyrsk
1
Eastern Bering sea
8 Eastern Bering sea
 
 
Fig. 11 Distribution of herring populations in the Far Eastern Seas. 
 
Pacific herring inhabiting the Russian Far East extensive variability of size and growth 
Seas are represented by three ecological morphs: parameters for this species. 
marine, offshore (coastal) and lagoon-lacustrine.   
Marine herring spend their whole life in higher Current information is based on many years of the 
salinity ocean waters where they undergo long  author’s personal observations of the growth in 
migrations.  The feeding area of this morph several herring populations inhabiting the Bering 
includes both  shelf and bathypelagial waters.  Sea and Pacific Ocean waters adjacent to 
Off-shore herring inhabit only the shelf seas, Kamchatka:  Korf-Karaginsky Bay, Eastern 
particularly inlets and bays.  This morph usually Bering Sea, Anadyr Bay, Yuzhnaya Lagoon, 
does not migrate long distances.  Lagoon- Nepichye Lake, Kalygyr Lake and Viluy Lake.  
lacustrine herring spend significant parts of their The data on the growth of herring in the Sea of 
lives in brackish waters and migrate to feed in Japan and in the Sea of Okhotsk have been taken 
adjacent marine waters.  from literature.  Forage base conditions are 
 analyzed from annual standard surveys, each of 
Russian waters in the northwest part of the Pacific them consisting of 7 stations sampled within 
Ocean are inhabited by 6 marine populations and Olyutorsky Bay in June.  
by 22 off-shore and lagoon-lacustrine populations  
(Fig. 11).  This ecological diversity provides The data on the size-at-age of herring taken from 
maximum exploitation of forage resources for the 19 areas within the northern part of the Pacific 
species within the area and determines the Ocean clearly indicate a significant difference in 
  
37
the growth of fish (Tables 4 and 5).  Off-shore and herring inhabiting the waters adjacent to Sakhalin 
lagoon-lacustrine herring have been classified as Island, Korf-Karaginsky Bay herring, Bristol Bay 
moderate or slow growing (Fig. 12).  Marine herring) and moderate-growing (Okhotsk Sea 
herring are the most divergent in the growth.  For herring, Gijiga-Kamchatkan herring, Anadyr Bay 
example, there are extremely fast-growing herring, Nunivak Island herring and Norton Bay 
(Sakhalin-Hokkaido herring inhabiting the waters herring) herrings.  In general, the marine morph 
adjacent to Hokkaido Island and Peter the Great has a higher growth rate (Fig. 13). 
Bay herring), fast-growing (Sakhalin-Hokkaido 
 
Sakhalin-Hokkaido(H)
Great Peter Bay
Sakhalin-Hokkaido(S)
Korf-Karaginsk
Bristol Bay
Okhotsk
Anadirsk
Dekastri
Yuzhnaya Lagoon
Norton Sound
Nyisk Bay
Nelson Island
Lake Nerpichie
Terpenia Bay
Gizhiga-Kamchatka
Lake Kalygir
Chaivo Bay
Lake Vilui
Lake Tonnai
012345678910111213141516
Linkage Distance
Sakhalin-Hokkaido(H)
Great Peter Bay
Sakhalin-Hokkaido(S)
Korf-Karaginsk
Bristol Bay
Lake Nerpichie
Okhotsk
Gizhiga-Kamchatka
Terpenia Bay
Lake Vilui
Yuzhnaya Lagoon
Anadyrsk
Chaivo Bay
Norton Sound
Lake Kalygir
Dekastri
Nyisk Bay
Nelson Island
Lake Tonnai
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450
Linkage Distance
 
Fig. 12 Cluster analysis of length-at-age (upper panel) and weight-at-age (lower panel) of different Far 
East herring populations. 
  
38
Table 4 Fork length-at-age (cm) of herring in different Far Eastern Seas. 
 
              
Pupulation Sea Area              Age                   Source 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
            
        Marine herring        
Sakhalin-Hokkaido Japan Sea Hokkaido Island 15,0 22,0 26,0 29,0 30,5 32,0 33,0 34,0 34,5 35,0 35,3 35,6   1   
Sakhalin-Hokkaido Japan Sea Sakhalin Island 12,3 19,4 23,8 26,1 28,3 29,7 31,0 32,0 32,5 33,0 33,3 34,0 34,5 2,3,4,5,6  
The Great Piter Bay Japan Sea Western part 14,2 22,8 27,8 30,4 32,1 33,2 34,4 35,3 35,4 35,8 35,9 36,9 37,3 7,8,9   
Okhotsk Sea of Okhotsk North West 7,9 15,0 20,4 23,4 25,5 27,1 28,2 29,1 29,9 30,4 31,1 31,3 31,4
 6,10,11,12,13,14,15,16 
Gizhiga-Kamchatka Sea of Okhotsk North East 7,5 13,5 19,2 22,6 24,8 26,6 27,8 27,9 29,7 29,8 30,1 30,4 31,3
 6,17,18  
Korf-Karaginsky Bering Sea Western part 12,2 19,6 24,1 26,8 28,5 30,0 31,1 32,1 32,9 33,5 34,4 35,1 35,5 19,20,21,22  
Anadyrsky Bering Sea Gulg of Anadyr 8,2 15,6 20,7 23,3 25,0 26,6 27,9 28,9 29,7 30,8 31,4 31,8 32,2 19   
Eeastern Bering Sea Bering Sea Norton Sound 9,8 17,2 20,5 23,0 24,7 26,4 27,9 28,8 29,6        19,23   
Eeastern Bering Sea Bering Sea Nelson Island 9,1 16,2 20,9 23,6 25,9 27,5 28,7            19,23   
Eeastern Bering Sea Bering Sea Bristol Bay 10,3 19,0 22,3 24,8 27,1 29,0 30,1 31,0 31,9 32,5 32,8     
19,23   
Coastal herring 
              
Dekastri Japan Sea Northern part  8,3 15,2 19,6 23,2 25,1 26,6 27,5 28,5 30,0 31,3 31,8 32,5    6,24,25,26  
Nyisk Bay Sea of Okhotsk Sakhalin Island 8,9 15,7 20,2 22,5 24,5 26,6 27,9             7,27,28  
Chaivo Bay Sea of Okhotsk Sakhalin Island 8,7 15,4 20,0 22,8 24,0 25,1 28,0            
7,27   
Terpenia Bay Sea of Okhotsk Sakhalin Island 9,0 15,6 20,6 22,5 24,4 25,3 27,1            
27   
      Lake-lagoon herring 
            
Lake Vilui N-W Pacific Kamchatka 8,8 15 18,5 20,4 22,9 24 25,2 25,9 26,6 27 27,8 27,9 28,1
19   
Lake Kalygir N-W Pacific Kamchatka 8,4 14,7 19,5 22,4 24,4 25,4 26,5 27,3 28,1 27,8 28,4 29,1 29,3
19   
Lake Nerpichie N-W Pacific Kamchatka 9,1 15,4 21,4 24,5 26,3 27,3 28,2 29 29,9 30,5 31,1 31,5 32 
19   
Lake Tonnai Sea of Okhotsk Sakhalin Island 8,6 14,2 17,6 20,2 21,5 22,3 23,5            29   
Yuzhnaya Lagoon Bering Sea North West 8,5 14,7 19,4 22,4 24,3 25,3 26,5 27,1 28,1 28,8 29,4 30,1 30,6 19,30     
Sources: 1. Motoda, Hirano, 1963; 2. Kaganovsky, 1954; 3. Druzhinin, 1957; 4. Pushnikova, 1981; 5. Pushnikova, 1994; 6. Materials of Soviet-Japan 
Fisheries Commission, 1969-1976;  7. Ambroz, 1931; 8. Gavrilov, Posadova, 1982; 9. Posadova, 1985; 10. Kolesnik, Khmarov, 1970;    
11. Labetsky, 1975; 12. Tyurnin, Yolkin, 1975; 13. Tyurnin, Yolkin, 1977; 14. Vyshegorodtsev, 1976; 15. Vyshegorodtsev, 1978; 16. Smirnov, 1994; 
17. Piskunov, 1954; 18. Pravotorova, 1965; 19. Our data; 20. Kachina, 1967; 21. Kachina, 1969; 22. Kachina, 1981; 23. Wespestad, 1991;  
24. Ambroz, 1930; 25. Kozlov, 1968; 26. Kozlov, Frolov, 1973; 27. Ivankova, Kozlov, 1968; 28. Gritsenko, Shilin, 1979; 29. Probatov, Frolov, 1951; 
30. Prokhorov, 1965.                   
 
 
 
Table 5 Weight-at-age (g) of different populations of herring from Far Eastern Seas. 
            
Pupulation Sea Area              Age               
      1 23 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Marine herring 
             
24 72 140 191 242 279 317 360 375 398 416       
Sakhalin-Hokkaido Japan Sea Sakhalin Island
28 135 250 308 371 399 432 465 484 525 547       
The Great Piter Bay Japan Sea Western part 
Okhotsk Sea of Okhotsk North West 8 30 84 119 155 186 213 237 266 285 303 315 364  
Gizhiga-Kamchatka Sea of Okhotsk North East 8 29 80 119 151 177 206 234 256 285 295 305 323 337
Korf-Karaginsk Bering Sea Western part 12 49 109 178 245 299 341 366 404 424 452 472 510 564
Anadyrsk Bering Sea Gulf of Anadyr 7 32 67 104 139 175 223 243 272 312         
8 46 79 134 166 210 234 281 313 348 357 373 391 405
Eeastern Bering Sea  Bering Sea Norton Sound 
9 38 84 129 187 227 280 306 337 376 410 429     
Eeastern Bering Sea  Bering Sea Nelson Island 
12 62 118 174 229 283 331 376 414 445 470 492 508 523
Eeastern Bering Sea  Bering Sea Bristol Bay 
        Coastal herring       
8 44 102 125 153 194 215 242 274 304 305 323     
Dekastri Japan Sea Northern part 
8 42 70 100 182 198 224              
Nyisk Bay Sea of Okhotsk Sakhalin Island
  
Chaivo Bay Sea of Okhotsk Sakhalin Island 7 39 83 121 141 160 221            
Terpenia Bay Sea of Okhotsk Sakhalin Island 8 40 90 117 148 164 201              
             Lake-lagoon herring      
8 42 80 107 145 162 184 201 218 228 248 252 255 257
Lake Vilui N-W Pacific Kamchatka 
Lake Kalygir N-W Pacific Kamchatka 8 39 90 140 179 205 232 258 274 287 295 320 328 359
Lake Nerpichie N-W Pacific Kamchatka 8 50 116 180 220 251 287 311 341 354 377 397 406 423
Lake Tonnai Sea of Okhotsk Sakhalin Island 7 30 57 85 102 114 132              
Yuzhnaya Lagoon Bering Sea North West 7 34 76 115 146 164 188 201 223 240 255 273 286  
Comment: sources as table 1 
              
 
 
  
39
40
500
450
35
400
30
350
25
300
20
250
Marine herring
200
15
Coastal herring
150
10
Lake-lagoon herring
100
5
50
0
0
12345678910111213
1234567891011121314
Age
Age
 
 
Fig. 13 Length-at-age (left) and weight-at-age (right) of different morphs of Far East herring. 
 
A
The morphs differ in growth rate.  By the character 
of the length growth the populations studied can 
50
be clearly divided into 3 types (Fig. 14A): I
45
 II
40
III
I. fast annual growth in the first year of life and 35
30
rapid decrease of the growth in later years; 
25
II. relatively fast annual growth in two initial 
20
years; 
15
III slow growth in the first year of life and 
10
comparatively fast annual growth in later 
5
0
years. 
1234567
 
Age
Hokkaido Island herring have been classified to be 
of the first type.  Most marine, all off-shore and 
B
some lagoon-lacustrine herring populations have 
I
been classified to be of second type.  Most 
25
II
lacustrine and some marine herring populations 
III
are classified to be of the third type. 20
 
15
By the character of the mass growth, Far East 
herring populations have been divided into three 
10
types as well (Fig. 14B): 
 
5
I. almost similar rich annual mass growth in 
0
second and third years of life (Sakhalin-
1234567
Hokkaido herring inhabiting the waters 
Age
 
adjacent to Hokkaido Island and Peter the 
 
Great Bay herring); 
Fig. 14 Relative annual growth in length (A) 
II. maximum annual mass growth in the third 
and weight (B) in Far East herring morphs.  See 
year of life cycle (majority of herring 
text for descriptions of each morph (I, II and III). 
populations in the Sea of Japan and Okhotsk 
 
Sea); 
The most obvious trait of this species is significant 
III. maximum annual mass growth in the fourth 
year-to-year variations in size-at-age.  For 
year of life (all marine herring populations of 
example, the range in the mean length of Korf- 
Bering Sea). 
 
  
40
Mean length, cm
Mean weight, g
Relative annual weight growth, % Relative annual length growth, %
37
Karaginsky four-year-old fish is 4 cm (24.5-28.5 
age 4 age 5 age 6
36
age 7 age 8 age 9
cm), of 10-years-old fish - 5.1 cm (30.4-35.5 cm), 
35
age 10
34
of 13-years-old fish - 5.9 cm (31.6-37.5 cm).  The 
33
32 range in the mean mass of fish varies from 102 g 
31
in 4 year old fish to 227-255 g in 8-13 year old 
30
29
fish. 
28
 
27
26
The variation in the biological patterns of Korf-
25
Karaginsky herring demonstrates clear long-term 
24
cyclic dynamics (Figs. 15, 16, 17 and 18).  The 
Year class
 
size (length and mass) of mature fish in 
Fig. 15 Mean length-at-age of Korf-Karaginsky 
generations for the 1930-40s was a maximum in 
herring. 
all age groups for the whole observation period;  
3
the patterns were at a minimum for the 1950-70s 
age 4 age 5 age 6
2
age 7 age 8 age 9 and again relatively high for the 1980s.  In the 
age 10
1 1990s the size-at-age has been decreasing 
gradually, but being above the mean for many 
0
years, as early in the time series (Fig. 19). 
-1
 
-2
2,5
-3
2
-4
1,5
1
Year class
 
0,5
Fig. 16 Deviations from mean length-at-age. 
0
-0,5
550
-1
age 4 age 5
500
-1,5
age 6 age 7
age 8 age 9
-2
450
age 10
-2,5
400
350
Year
 
300
120
250
100
80
200
60
150
40
100 20
0
Year class
-20
 
-40
Fig. 17 Mean weight-at-age of Korf-Karaginsky 
-60
herring. 
-80
150
-100
age 4 age 5
100
age 6 age 7
age 8 age 9
Year
50
age 10
 
Fig. 19 Deviations of mean length (upper panel) 
0
and weight (lower panel) of age 4-10 Korf-
-50
Karaginsky herring from multi-year value. 
-100
 
For greater insight into the temporal pattern of the 
-150
cycles of size variations in herring we used 
Year class
 
transformed data.  We estimated deviations of the 
Fig. 18 Deviations in mean weight-at-age. 
annual length and mass growth of 4-10-years-old 
  
41
Mean weight, g
Mean fork length, cm
Deviation, cm
Deviation, g 
1929
1929
1929
1929
1932
1932
1932
1932
1935
1935
1935
1935
1938
1938
1938
1938
1941 1941
1941 1941
1944 1944
1944 1944
1947 1947
1947 1947
1950 1950
1950 1950
1953 1953
1953 1953
1956 1956
1956 1956
1959 1959
1959 1959
1962 1962 1962
1962
1965 1965 1965
1965
1968 1968 1968
1968
1971 1971
1971 1971
1974 1974
1974 1974
1977 1977
1977 1977
1980
1980
1980 1980
1983
1983
1983 1983
1986 1986
1986 1986
1989 1989
1989 1989
1992 1992
1992 1992
1995 1995
1995 1995
Deviation of mean weight , g
Deviation of mean length, cm
1939
1944 1942
1949 1947
1954 1952
1959 1957
1964 1962
1967
1969
1974 1972
1979 1977
1984 1982
1989 1987
1994
1992
1999 1997
4
fish from the mean for many years (Figs. 20 and 
21).  There are three periods which could be seen 3
clearly in the curve of the dynamics of the mean 
2
for 5-year periods of annual growth of mature 
1
herring.  
0
 
-1
The first period, bounded by generations of 1930 
-2
and 1951, was generally characterized by 
-3
accelerated growth; the second period (1950-
-4
1970s) was characterized by slower growth, and 
1970-1990s characterized by higher growth rates. 
Year class
 
Within the three twenty-year periods of high or 
Fig. 20 Deviations of mean annual length 
low growth, there are two cycles of about 10 
growth of 4-10 age Korf-Karaginsky herring from 
years.  Thus, the growth of Korf-Karaginsky 
multiyear value. 
herring has cyclic dynamics, with the cycle 
 
consisting of 10 or 22-years approximately.  
20
 
15
The growth of mature herring in the west part of 
10
Bering Sea has been regulated by several 
5
circumstances.  The length of 5-10-year-old fish 
0
depends on the length of recruits i.e. maturating 4-
-5
year-old fishes (Fig. 22).  The more definite length 
-10
of recruits is, the greater is the length of mature 
-15
fish in all older ages. 
-20
 
-25
Beyond doubt the growth of herring has been 
influenced by stock abundance or density factor. 
Year class
 
Although a reliable correlation between abundance 
Fig. 21 Deviations of mean annual weight 
of a certain generation and annual growth has not 
growth of 4-10 age Korf-Karaginsky herring from 
been observed – very abundant generations 
multiyear value. 
demonstrate evidently slower growth as compared 
 
to that in other generations.  The growth rate is 
38
very similar in generations of moderate and low 
36
abundance, also in general it is higher compared to 
34
that in abundant and highly abundant generations 
32
(Table 6).  Actually, biological characteristics are 
30
influenced much more by population condition.  
Start length of 4-age fishes, cm
The highest growth rates are observed in the 1940s 
28 24,1-24,5 24,6-25,0 25,1-25,
25,6-26,0 26,1-26,5 26,6-27,
and the early 1950s when the abundance of mature 
27,1-27,5 27,6-28,0 28,1-28,
26
fish has been moderate (Table 7). After several 
24
4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
abundant generations reproduced in 1951-1956 the 
Age
 
abundance of mature fish increased quickly.  To 
 
the late 1950s the abundance of mature fish 
Fig. 22 Growth of Korf-Karaginsky herring in 
reaches its’ historical maximum.  The size (length 
dependence on start length of 4-age fishes. 
and mass) of 4-6 year-old fish for this period has 
 
been minimum for the whole period of 
extremely low abundance of mature fish their 
observations.  Slow growth has been observed in 
growth stayed slow;  also the individuals older 
the fish of old age groups. 
than 6-years-old demonstrate the minimal growth 
 
for the whole historical period of the observations.  
From the mid-1960s until mid-1970s the 
In the late 1970s and in the 1980s the number of 
population underwent a depression.  Despite the  
mature fish has increased a little, but remained  
  
42
Length, cm
Deviation, g
Deviation, mm
1929
1929
1932
1932
1935
1935
1938
1938
1941
1941
1944
1944
1947
1947
1950
1950
1953
1953
1956
1956
1959
1959
1962
1962
1965
1965
1968
1968
1971
1971
1974
1974
1977
1977
1980
1980
1983
1983
1986
1986
1989
1989
1992
1992
1995
1995
Table 6 Growth of Korf-Karaginsk herring in dependence from year-class strength. 
 
Strength of year- Length/weight Age 
class 
4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Very strong Length, cm 26.3 27.4 28.6 29.9 30.8 31.2 31.5 31.8 32.0 32.4 
Weight, g 181 202 241 273 283 303 304 328 367 378 
Strong Length, cm 26.8 28.6 30.2 31.0 32.0 32.8 33.2 33.7 33.9 34.1 
Weight, g 192 239 273 313 355 379 401 412 414 416 
Average Length, cm 26.7 28.5 30.1 31.1 31.9 32.6 33.4 34.3 35.0 35.6 
Weight, g 198 245 284 324 348 385 414 444 475 506 
Poor Length, cm 27.0 28.8 30.2 31.6 32.6 33.4 34.2 35.1 36.0 36.2 
Weight, g 203 244 291 333 365 398 430 455 509 534 
 
Table 4.
Table 7  Table 7  Growth of Korf-Karaginsk herring in relation to stock abundance. 
Growth of Korf-Karaginsk herring in dependence from stock-size level 
 
Level of stock-size Length/weight Age 
4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
High Length, cm 25.8 27.3 28.6 30.3 31.3 32.3 33.4 33.9 34.2 - 
Weight, g 165 195 229 270 297 327 374 376 414 - 
Average Length, cm 27.3 29.1 30.7 32.0 33.0 34.0 34.6 35.3 36.1 36.4 
Weight, g 212 257 306 352 388 427 458 476 503 532 
Low Length, cm 26.9 28.8 30.2 31.3 32.1 32.7 33.1 33.7 34.4 34.9 
Weight, g 209 259 300 341 364 388 405 429 473 496 
Depression Length, cm 26.0 27.9 29.3 30.0 30.7 31.3 31.6 32.3 32.6 33.1 
Weight, g 180 220 261 277 300 335 345 352 358 365 
 
 
1200 400
1200 32,5
32
1000 1000 350
31,5
31
800
800 300
30,5
30
600
600 250
29,5
29
400
400 200
28,5
28
200
200 150
27,5
0 27
0 100
Year
Year
Zooplankton biomass
Zooplankton biomass
Smoothed for 5-year periods biomass Smoothed for 5-year periods biomass
Mean length
Mean weight
Smoothed for 5-year periods length
Smoothed for 5-year periods weight
32 400
y = 0,0025x + 28,813
380 y = 0,096x + 235,96
31,5
2
2
 = 0,4435 360
R R = 0,3791
31
340
320
30,5
300
30
280
260
29,5
240
29
220
200
28,5
0 200 400 600 800 1000
0 200 400 600 800 1000
3
3 Zooplankton biomass, mg/m
Zooplankton biomass, mg/m
 
 
Fig. 24 Relationship between June zooplankton 
Fig. 23 Relationship between June zooplankton 
biomass in Olutorsk Bay and mean weight of age 
biomass in Olutorsk Bay and mean length of age 
4-10 herring. 
4-10 herring. 
  
43
Mean length, cm
Zooplankton biomass, 
3
mg/m
1951
1955
1959
1963
1967
1971
1975
1979
1983
1987
Mean length, cm
Zooplankton biomass, 
Mean weight, g
mg/m3
1951
1954
1957
1960
1963
1966
1969
1972
1975
1978
1981
1984
1987
Mean weight, g
low.  In the 1990s the numbers have increased  and average dimension (length and mass) of 4-10 
moderately.  The size-at-age for 25 years (mid years-old fish demonstrate synchronic variations 
1960s- late 1980s) has been increased gradually.  (Fig. 23 and 24).  In the periods when the biomass 
To the early 1990s the size of herring has been of zooplankton was increasing,  the length and the 
similar to that for the 1940s.  Thus, the most mass of mature herring  increased as well, and vice 
favorable conditions for growth of Korf- versa.  A reliable direct correlation has been found 
Karaginsky herring usually have been created at a between these patterns.  The character of the 
moderate abundance of mature fish in the correlation indicates that a zooplankton biomass 
3
population.  Under the extreme conditions (too increase of 100 mg/m corresponds to a length 
high or too low stock abundance) individual increase of 2.5 mm and to the mass increase of 10 
growth has been slow. g in average in all age groups.  Thus, the size-at-
 age variations of Korf-Karaginsky herring 
The most important factor determining individual demonstrate cyclic dynamics. The stock 
growth is food supply.  In the 1950s - 1980s abundance and forage base conditions influence 
average zooplankton biomass in Olyutorsky Bay the growth of fish considerably.   
 
 
Effects of climate on Pacific herring, Clupea pallasii, in the northern Gulf of 
Alaska and Prince William Sound, Alaska 
 
Evelyn D. Brown 
University of Alaska Fairbanks, Institute of Marine Science, P.O. Box 757220, Fairbanks, AK 99775-
7220, U.S.A.  E-mail: ebrown@lms.uaf.edu 
 
Introduction production during warm years associated with an 
 intensified winter AL (Hollowed and Wooster 
Links between trends of North Pacific fish 1995).  Recruitment of Pacific herring in Southeast 
populations and climatic variations are well Alaska is positively associated with warm, wet 
documented.  One well-known example is the climate conditions (Zebdi and Collie 1995).  This 
exceptional salmon production in the North Pacific indicates a north-south bifurcation in climate 
that occurred during a period associated with an response by Pacific herring populations similar to 
intensified Aleutian Low:  high levels of salmon that observed in Pacific salmon. 
production are strongly correlated with the Pacific  
Decadal Oscillation (PDO) (Mantua et al. 1997), This study shows that the trend in abundance of 
with Alaskan stocks responding positively to the northern GOA Pacific herring appears to be in 
positive phases of the PDO. phase with decadal-scale climate indices.  
 Population parameters such as growth and spawn 
Pacific herring (Clupea pallasii) also appear to timing also appear to be related to climatic signals 
respond to climate.  A negative correlation exists and may be in opposition to responses by Pacific 
between southern British Columbia (BC) herring herring from more southern locations.  
year-class strength and warm conditions; warm  
conditions appear to increase piscivory on herring Results 
and reduce zooplankton food resources (Ware  
1992).  The same negative correlation was later An index of GOA herring abundance was 
reported by Hollowed and Wooster (1995) with developed by combining historic fisheries catches 
higher average recruitment for Vancouver Island with recent biomass estimate (Fig. 25).  Herring 
herring during cool years associated with a abundances were compared to several climate 
weakened winter Aleutian Low (AL).  However, indices and good, positive correlations were found 
the opposite effect occurred in northern BC and for the Atmospheric Forcing Index (AFI) and 
the Gulf of Alaska (GOA), with increased herring Aleutian Low Pressure Index (ALPI) (Beamish 
  
44
and Bouillon 1993), the Pacific Inter-Decadal 
Oscillation (PIDO) (Enfield and Mestas-Nunez 
1999) and the winter time Pacific Decadal 
Oscillation (PDO) (Mantua et al. 1997).   The 
abundance of herring in Prince William Sound 
over the period 1973-present was well-correlated 
with these indices (Fig. 26), as was the composite 
herring time series (from 1900-present) (Fig. 27).  
The common result was high population levels 
during the positive phases of the three indices. The 
positive phases correspond in general to  
intensification of the Aleutian Low, higher sea 
Fig. 26 A 4 year moving average (ma) 
surface temperatures, and increased storms and 
transformation of the Prince William Sound 
wind stress in the GOA.  A strong Aleutian Low 
(PWS) biomass index compared to the AFI, the 
causes above-average water column stability in the 
ALPI and the winter PDO for the period of 1973 
sub-arctic Pacific, creating conditions that 
to 1993. 
optimize primary and secondary production and 
 
thus may be the mechanism involved in the 
positive response of zooplankton and Pacific 
herring, as previously hypothesized for salmon. 
 
Herring size-at-age trends exhibited oscillatory 
behavior with a maximum spectral density at a 
period of 13 years for all ages (Fig. 28).  There 
was no evidence of density-dependence as plots of 
size and biomass levels were flat for each age 
examined.  The spectral peak was strongest in ages 
3-5.  The raw and smoothed (using the Hamming 
 
filter) size-at-age data was significantly correlated 
to peak zooplankton density lagged one year (p < 
0.05; r ≥ 0.50; Fig. 28).  Peak and average 
zooplankton biomass was significantly correlated 
to the winter PDO lagged 3 yrs (r = 0.52 and 0.65  
 
180
160
GOA Fishery Catches
140
N GOA Biomass
120
100
80 
60
Fig. 27 A 5 year moving average (ma) 
40
transformation of the Gulf of Alaska (GOA) 
20
Index, created by combining catch and biomass, 
0
compared (upper panel) to a 5 year ma of the 
 
Pacific Inter-Decadal Oscillation and (lower 
Fig. 25 The two types of fishery data used in 
panel), 5 year mas of the AFI, ALPI and winter 
this analysis.  The solid black line is total annual 
PDO plotted for the period of 1902 to 1995. 
Gulf of Alaska (GOA) fishery catches.  The grey 
 
line represents the annual biomass estimates for 
 
Prince William Sound (see Brown and Funk for 
 
details). 
  
45
1900
1904
1908
1912
1916
1920
4
192
1928
1932
1936
1940
1944
1948
1952
1956
1960
1964
1968
1972
1976
1980
1984
1988
1992
1996
Catch or Biomass (thousands of tonnes)
respectively). Size-at-age for ages 7 and 8 were timing is affected by maturity rate that is in turn 
also significantly correlated to both the PDO directly affected by ocean conditions, especially 6-
lagged 3 years (r = 0.55) and the PIDO lagged 2 9 months prior to spawning.   
years (r = 0.61).  
2.5 15
 
2
 
10
1.5
1
5
0.5
0 0
-0.5
-5
-1
-1.5
-10
-2
-2.5 -15
Sept-Oct Salinity Anomaly Lagged 6 mos. Mean Spawn Date Anomaly
 
Fig. 29 Surface salinity (at 20 m) anomalies 
with a 6 month lag, for the combined months of 
September and October are plotted with the mean 
date of spawning anomaly for PWS for the period 
nd
of 1973 to 1999.  The solid lines represent 2 
order polynomial transformations of the mean 
spawn date (black) and salinity (grey).  Note that 
nd
black line is polynomial (2 order) trend line for 
mean spawn date anomaly and the gray line is 
nd
polynomial (2 order) trend line for PWS Sept.-
Oct. SSS anomaly 
 
Spawning areas have also shifted over the same 
time period accompanied by a trend in reduced 
 
recruit per spawner rates.  The implications of 
Fig. 28 Size-at-age by weight (g) of age 3-8 these observations are discussed more fully in 
Pacific herring from PWS plotted with peak Brown and Funk (unpublished manuscript).  
 
zooplankton density anomalies (from southwestern 
PWS) for the period of 1973 to 1999.  The top References 
figure are the raw values.  The bottom figure  
Beamish, R.J., and Bouillon, D.R.  1993.  Pacific 
shows a spectral transformation (type Hamming) 
of the size-at-age data plotted with a 4 year salmon production trends in relation to 
moving average transformation of the peak climate. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 50: 1002-
zooplankton anomalies. 1016. 
 Brown, E.D., and Funk, F.  Effects of climate on 
There is an overall downward trend in spawn Pacific herring, Clupea pallasi, in the northern 
timing from 1973 to 1999 with mean spawn dates Gulf of Alaska and Prince William Sound, 
approximately 7 days earlier in the late 1990s than Alaska.  Unpublished manuscript available 
from the authors.   
in the early 1970s (Fig. 29).  Although not 
significantly correlated, there is a corresponding Enfield, D.B., and Mestas-Nuñez, A.M.  1999. 
downward trend in PWS surface salinity during Multiscale variabilities in global sea surface 
temperature and their relationships with 
September and October, lagged 6 months from 
spawning, over the same period. There was no tropospheric climate patterns.  J. Climate 12: 
apparent relationship between spawn timing and 2719-2733. 
either population size or climate trends.  Spawn 
  
46
Salinity Anomaly
1973
1975
1977
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
Mean Spawn Date Anomaly
Hollowed, A.B., and Wooster, W.S.  1995. Ware, D. M.  1992.  Climate, predators and prey: 
Decadal-scale variations in the eastern behaviour of a linked oscillating system.  In 
subarctic Pacific: II. Response of northeast Kawasaki T., Tanaka S., Yoahiaki T., and 
Pacific fish stocks.  Can. Spec. Publ. Fish. Taniguchi A. (eds).  Long-term variability of 
Aquat. Sci. 121: 373-385. pelagic fish populations and their 
Mantua, N. J., Hare, S.R., Zhang, Y., Wallace, environment.  Pergamon Press, Sendai, Japan, 
J.M., and Francis, R.C.  1997.  A Pacific pp. 279-291. 
interdecadal climate oscillation with impacts Zebdi, A., and Collie, J. S.  1995.  Effect of 
on salmon production. ,Bull. Am. Meteorol. climate on herring (Clupea pallasi) population 
Soc. 78: 1069-1079. dynamics in the northeast Pacific Ocean.  Can. 
Spec. Publ. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 121: 277-290. 
 
 
Herring size-at-age variation in the North Pacific 
 
1 2 3 
Jake Schweigert , Fritz Funk , Ken Oda and Tom Moore
1
 Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Pacific Biological Station, Nanaimo, BC, Canada.  V9R 5K6  E-mail: 
schweigertj@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
2
 Alaska Department of Fish and Game, P.O. Box 25526, Juneau, AK 99802-5526, U.S.A.  E-mail: 
fritz_funk@fishgame.state.ak.us 
3
 California Department of Fish and Game, Belmont and Bodega Bay, California, U.S.A.  
 
Introduction Methods 
  
Herring have been one of the more important Pacific herring weight-at-age data were collated 
components of the marine fisheries on the west for a number of stocks in the North Pacific (Fig. 
coast of North America over the past century. 30) ranging from the Bering Sea [Togiak] through 
Dramatic population fluctuations are common in the Gulf of Alaska (Kodiak], Prince William 
all stocks of herring but virtually all populations Sound [PWS]), SE Alaska [Sitka], British 
from Alaska to California declined dramatically Columbia (Queen Charlotte Islands [QCI], Prince 
and synchronously in the late 1960s and all have Rupert [PRD], Central Coast [CC], Strait of 
subsequently recovered.  Despite the impacts of a Georgia [GS], west coast of Vancouver Island 
significant harvest in most of these stocks, large [WCVI]), and California (San Francisco Bay 
scale environmental forcing appears to have been [SFB], Tomales Bay [TB]).  Unfortunately, the 
a significant factor in the observed population available data is sparse in many cases and 
fluctuations.  However, it is unclear what generally available for only limited time periods 
mechanisms were involved in affecting survival restricting the type and extent of statistical 
over such a broad geographical scale.  Long time analyses possible.  The time period investigated 
series of stock abundance estimates are not for this study ranges from 1940-2000.  For some 
available for most of these populations. Instead, populations both length and weight at age data are 
we investigated the available data on fish size and available and for those we examined changes in 
growth, reviewing trends in weight-at-age, condition factor.  For all populations trends in 
condition factor, and growth increments of Pacific weight at age 4 were examined as well as trends in 
herring from Alaska to California in relation to the annual growth increment at age over time.  
environmental conditions or food supply to assess  
whether these factors may have affected herring The condition factor was also calculated annually 
survival in the North Pacific. for each age-class in each stock following Tesch 
(1988), as: 
Weight
at
CF = 
t
3
Length
at
  
47
Spratt (1987) has previously used similar methods Results and discussion 
to examine growth variation in San Francisco Bay  
herring following the strong 1982-83 El Niño. Pacific herring generally exhibit a cline in size-at-
 age from south to north, with fish in the Bering 
The indices of environmental forcing that were Sea being far larger than fish from California.  
examined included the Pacific decadal oscillation Herring also mature at later ages as one progresses 
(PDO), atmospheric forcing index (AFI), the from south to north.  Therefore, comparison of 
Aleutian low pressure index (ALPI), the Pacific size, condition, and growth increment becomes 
circulation index (PCI) and the ENSO southern complicated as fish trade off growth for 
oscillation index (SOI).  All but the last index are reproduction once they are mature.  Consequently, 
available from http://www.pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/sci/ we chose to examine trends in the average weight 
sa-mfpd/english/clm_indx1.htm. The SOI index of fish at age 4 throughout the study area  
was obtained from ftp://ftp.ncep.noaa.gov/pub/ (Fig. 31).  However, this is of limited utility as an 
cpc/wd52dg/data/indices/soi.  Information on index of growing conditions because it represents 
plankton biomass is difficult to obtain since there an integration by the fish of growing and feeding 
have been few long-term efforts to collect these conditions over the preceding four years.  Fish 
data.  Recently, Hare and Mantua (2000) have from the Bering Sea are much larger and 
consolidated a large number of data series for the demonstrate greater fluctuation in size at age 4 
period 1965-1997 and we have used their results than herring from any of the other areas. Sitka and 
in this study. PWS indicate a long term decline in size since the 
 1940s.  It should be noted that the pre-1970 data 
from all areas represent fall reduction fisheries 
whereas recent data are from spring roe fisheries 
Be r i n g
and so may reflect some loss of weight by fish 
Se a
over the winter period.  British Columbia stocks 
and those from Sitka show a marked increase in 
EBSZO O
size at the time of the stock collapses in the early 
Ala ska
T ogiak Bay
1960s with a subsequent decline in the 1970s 
which may reflect a density-dependent response 
Ko d i a k
as the populations rebuilt.  California stocks do 
Pr i n c e
William
CPZOO
not show evidence of any trends except for 
Sound
reductions in size during the 1982-83 and 1997-98 
EPZO O
El Niño events. 
Si t k a
 
Queen
The condition factor at age is presented in Figures 
Pri n c e Ru p e rt
Charlotte
Isla nd s
32 and 33.  It represents an index of growing 
Br i t i sh
Central
conditions for herring the previous year.  
Colum bia
Georgia
However, it is possible that herring compensate 
St r a i t
W. C . Va n c o u v e r Is.
for reduced food availability by growing more 
slowly in length while maintaining an average 
condition.  Thus, it may not be a good indicator of 
growing conditions in the ocean except under 
extreme circumstances such as a severe El Niño 
Tomales which disrupted normal feeding patterns.  British 
California
Ba y
Columbia herring stocks do not show any marked 
Sa n Fra n c i sc o
Ba y
CCZOO
 trends in condition over time although the QCI, 
 
CC, and WCVI suggest a slight increase in 
Fig. 30 Map of the study area illustrating the 
condition from the 1950s through the 1990s. 
location of data sets for the analysis. 
 
 
 
  
48
TOGIAK
KODIAK
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
PWS
SITKA
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
QCI
PRD
CC
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
GS
WCVI
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
SF Bay
Tomales Bay
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
 
 
Fig. 31 Trends in weight-at-age 4 in Pacific herring from 1940-2000. 
  
49
Weight at Age 4
Weight at Age 4 Weight at Age 4 Weight at Age 4 Weight at Age 4
60 80 100 120 140 60 80 100 120 140 60 80 100 120 140 60 80 100 120 140 100 120 140 160 180 200
100 120 140 160 180 200
60 80 100 120 140 60 80 100 120 140 60 80 100 120 140 60 80 100 120 140
QCI
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
PRD
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
CC
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
GS
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
WC
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
 
 
Fig. 32 Condition factor at age for British Columbia herring from 1940-2000. 
  
50
Condition at Age Condition at Age
Condition at Age Condition at Age Condition at Age
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7
PWS
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
SITKA
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
SFB
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
TB
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
 
 
Fig. 33 Condition factor at age for Alaska and California herring from 1940-2000. 
  
51
Condition at Age Condition at Age Condition at Age Condition at Age
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8
TOGIAK
Age 5
Age 6
Age 7
Age 8
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
KODIAK
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
PWS
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
SITKA
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
 
 
Fig. 34 Trends in the growth increment at age for Alaska herring stocks from 1940-2000. 
 
  
52
Growth Inc at Age Growth Inc at Age Growth Inc at Age Growth Inc at Age
-20 0 20 40 60 0204060 0204060 -50 0 50 100
-20 0 20 40 60 0204060 0204060
-50 0 50 100
QCI
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
PRD
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
CC
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
 
 
Fig. 35 Trends in growth increment at age for northern BC herring stocks from 1940-2000. 
  
53
Growth Inc at Age Growth Inc at Age Growth Inc at Age
-20 0 20 40 -20 0 20 40
-20 0 20 40
-20 0 20 40 -20 0 20 40 -20 0 20 40
GS
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
Age 7
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
WCVI
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
SFB
Age 2
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
TB
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
 
 
Fig. 36 Trends in the growth increment at age for southern BC and California herring stocks from 
1940-2000. 
  
54
Growth Inc at Age Growth Inc at Age Growth Inc at Age Growth Inc at Age
-20 0 20 40 -20 0 20 40 -20 0 20 40 -20 0 20 40
-20 0 20 40 -20 0 20 40 -20 0 20 40 -20 0 20 40
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 
 
Fig. 37 Environmental indices for the North Pacific from 1940-2000. 
  
55
SOI PCI ALPI AFI Winter PDO
-2 -1 0 1 2 -200 -100 0 100 200 -4-202468 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3
-2 -1 0 1 2 -200 -100 0 100 200 -4-202468 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3
All stocks also indicate a small decline in Figure A9 from Hare and Mantua (2000) presents 
condition in the mid- to late 1980s and again in the the available zooplankton data for the North 
late 1990s following the two strong ENSO events.  Pacific and indicated a generally decreasing trend 
Results for Alaska and California are quite in zooplankton biomass since the 1977 regime 
variable with Sitka and PWS suggesting a marked shift (see Fig. A9 in their paper).  This observation 
increase in condition from the 1940s through the is consistent with the observed declining trend in 
1960s although this may be a function of changes herring growth increment in British Columbia but 
in sampling locations.  Both California stocks surprisingly not in California.  It is also consistent 
suggest a very slight increase in condition factor with the trend of declining size at age 4 in British 
over time with sharp declines associated with the Columbia and parts of Alaska.  Although not 
1982-83 and 1997-98 ENSO events.  Spratt (1987) explicit in the plankton data, it is possible that 
has previously reported the strong negative effects changes in species composition during El Niño 
of the 1982-83 El Niño on San Francisco Bay events are responsible for the marked decline in 
herring condition factor and growth. growth observed during these time periods so that 
 overall plankton biomass remains relatively stable 
The growth increments at age for Pacific herring but the preferred prey items for herring decline 
stocks are presented in Figures 34-36 and are markedly or are completely absent from the 
perhaps the best indicator of growing conditions in normal feeding areas. 
the previous year in each area.  Togiak fish show  
the largest growth increment coastwide which Pacific herring populations in the eastern Pacific 
includes a marked increase in the early 1990s have experienced significant synchronous 
followed by a recent decline.  PWS and Sitka fluctuations in abundance that appear to be related 
stocks do not demonstrate any long term trends in to environmental forcing.  We examined 
growth increment although there are declines in biological characteristics associated with changes 
the mid-1980s and late 1990s which may in growth as a proxy for herring survival over the 
correspond to El Niño effects.  British Columbia available data record.  Results indicate a complex 
stocks all show a decline in growth increment 
interaction between density dependent effects, 
from the early 1970s through the late 1990s.  They food supply, and environmental variation.  During 
all show a marked decrease in 1997 and some in the collapse of herring stocks throughout the 
the mid-1980s.  The California stocks do not Pacific in the late 1960s growth of herring 
indicate any clear trend in growth increment over increased dramatically, declining again as stock 
time but both show the effects of the 1982-83 El rebuilt.  During the period from 1977 to present 
Niño and SFB also the 1997-98 El Niño. growth characteristics of many stocks in British 
 Columbia and Alaska have shown a decline which 
The environmental indices are presented in Figure is apparently a result of declining food availability.  
37 and demonstrate broadly similar patterns in Plankton availability is most probably driven by 
winter PDO, AFI, and ALPI based on a lowess changing environmental conditions that have at 
smoothed trend line.  The PCI may be inversely least recently not been favourable for herring 
related to these indices but at a different frequency growth in British Columbia and southern Alaska.  
since they are not quite in phase.  The SOI index Superimposed on these relationships are the recent 
appears to be inversely related to the first three strong ENSO episodes which have negatively 
indices.  A comparison of these indices with impacted herring growth through the area of their 
herring weight at age 4, condition factor, and effect.  Overall, there appear to be threshold 
growth increment does not indicate any strong effects related to population density, ocean 
correlation but there is the suggestion of a loose production and plankton availability, and sea 
association between the trend in PDO and weight surface temperature mediated by ENSO that affect 
at age 4, condition, and perhaps growth increment the growth parameters of herring populations 
since 1970. throughout the North Pacific.  Future studies 
 should be directed at defining the thresholds and 
their effects on long-term herring production. 
  
56
References Spratt, J.D.  1987.  Variation in the growth rate of 
 Pacific herring from San Francisco Bay, 
Hare, S.R., and Mantua, N.J.  2000.  Empirical California. Calif. Fish and Game 73: 132-138. 
evidence for North Pacific regime shifts in Tesch, F.W.  1988.  Age and Growth.  In  W.E. 
1977 and 1989.  Prog. Oceanography 47: 103- Ricker [ed.]  Methods of assessment of fish 
145. production in fresh waters’.  IBP Handbook 
No. 3. Blackwell Scientific Publications, 
Oxford, pp. 93-123. 
 
 
Implications of variation in euphausiid productivity for the growth, 
production and resilience of Pacific herring (Clupea pallasi) from the 
southwest coast of Vancouver Island 
 
Ron W. Tanasichuk  
Pacific Biological Station, 3190 Hammond Bay Road, Nanaimo, B.C. Canada.  V9R 5K6.  E-mail: 
tanasichukr@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
This presentation includes the results of a number variations in year-class strength and 
of studies which collectively suggest that the oceanographic conditions on the size of recruit 
recent order of magnitude reduction in euphausiid herring and the growth rates of adult fish.  At that 
production along the southwest coast of time, data were available to 1996 only.  He 
Vancouver Island depressed the productivity and suggested that the 1993 year-class was an outlier 
resilience of the West Coast Vancouver Island because this year-class was the first to be 
(WCVI) herring (Clupea pallasi) population.  subjected to low T. spinifera biomass over its first 
 three years of life.  All subsequent year-classes 
We have been studying the oceanography of the have been outliers, over a period when T. spinifera 
southwest coast of Vancouver Island since 1985 to biomass remained depressed (Fig. 39).  This 
learn how the ocean affects fish productivity there.  dataset suggests that the compensatory population-  
Results of diet analyses show that euphausiids are  
3000
the dominant prey of the more abundant pelagic 
>17 mm
fish species and that herring feed on them 
exclusively.  We have also been monitoring the 2000
species and size composition of prey.  Tanasichuk 
(1999) showed that Pacific hake (Merluccius 
1000
productus), the dominant planktivore, selects 
larger (>17 mm) euphausiids of one species 0
9-12 mm
(Thysanoessa spinifera) regardless of how 
400
euphausiid biomass varies.  WCVI herring select 
300
the same prey.  Euphausiid population biology and 
200
productivity along the WCVI have been monitored 
100
since 1991 (Tanasichuk 1998).  Figure 38 shows 
that herring and hake prey biomass has varied by 
0
1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
an order of magnitude over the last 10 years.  The 
Year
 
same degree of prey variation has also occurred 
 
2
for coho salmon (Oncorhynchus kisutch). 
Fig. 38 Median biomass (mg dry mass/mg ) of 
 
key prey for Pacific herring and Pacific hake (>17 
The effect on herring productivity and resilience 
mm  T. spinifera) and coho salmon (9-12 mm  T. 
appears to operate through influencing growth.  
spinifera) over the summer feeding period. 
Tanasichuk (1997) examined the effect of 
 
  
57
-2
.
Median T. spinifera biomass (mg dry mass mg
)
200
190
94
98
180
96
93
95
97
170
100
94
90
98
79
97
93
96
77
80
95
70
0 20000 40000 60000 80000 100000
Parental biomass (tonnes)
 
 
Fig. 39 Scatterplot of mean standard length- and total mass-at-age 3 for WCVI herring.  Error bars are 
95% confidence limits.  Plot labels indicate year-class. 
 
regulating mechanism of density-dependent recruit 1982, when Fisheries and Oceans Canada started 
size has been disrupted by low euphausiid measuring ovarian mass.  Annual estimates of 
biomasses since 1993.  Tanasichuk (1997) observed mean mass-at-age were used to calculate 
concluded that adult growth rates were influenced ovarian production;  this includes the observed 
mainly by size at the beginning of the growth mass-at-age over the time when growth appeared 
period.  Because adult growth rates are affected to be suppressed.  “Non-suppressed” mass-at-age 
mostly be initial size, the effect of low euphausiid 3 was then estimated using the regression in 
biomass would persist over the entire life of the Tanasichuk (1997) which describes recruit mass as 
year-class.  It appears that mortality and size- a function of parental biomass.  These estimates of 
specific surplus energy allocation to ovarian 
recruit mass, and the regressions describing 
production have not varied.  Tanasichuk (2000) variations in adult growth rates in mass, were used 
reported that age-specific natural mortality rates of to estimate what the mass of older fish of a year-
adult herring vary as a function of age alone.  class should have been in subsequent years.  
Unpublished results showed that there has been no Figure 40 shows the effect of small recruit size on 
inter-annual variability in mass-specific ripe growth in subsequent years.  Figure 41 
ovarian mass.   demonstrates the effect on reduced growth on 
 ovarian production.  It would have been reduced 
Growth suppression had a large effect on ovarian by 20% as a consequence of growth suppression of 
(=egg) production, and presumably resilience, that recruit fish and its effect of subsequent adult size.  
is the population’s potential to increase or sustain However, after considering further that reduced 
biomass through recruitment.  We calculated egg production in 1996-98 could have reduced the 
ovarian production for all ages for each year since number of spawners produced by these year-
  
58
Mean standard length (mm)
Mean total mass (g)
200
classes, the suppression of reproduction could 
1993
have become compounded.  Calculations showed 
150
that egg production would have consequently been 
reduced by 40%, presumably a 40% reduction in 
100
resilience, in other words a 40% reduction in 
potential recruitment. 
50
1994
 
These results have implications for evaluating 
150
growth in herring and the concept of the pre-
100
cautionary approach.  Recruit size and subsequent 
adult growth are affected by year-class strength 
50
and food availability during the pre-recruit phase.  
1995
We show an effect of food which complicates the 
150
interpretation of size-at-age trends.  The 
precautionary approach (target- and limit reference 
100
points) implicitly assumes that fish population 
productivity and the ability to re-build are constant 
50
1996
over time.  These results show that assumption is 
invalid. 
150
 
100
References 
 
50
Tanasichuk, R. W.  1997.  Influence of biomass 
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002
and ocean climate on the growth of Pacific Year
 
herring (Clupea pallasi) from the southwest 
Fig. 40 Mass-at-age trajectories for WCVI 
coast of Vancouver Island.  Can. J. Fish. herring.  Dotted line – observed.  Solid line - 
Aquat. Sci. 54: 2782-2788. estimates from growth regressions in Tanasichuk 
Tanasichuk, R. W.  1998.  Interannual variations 
(1997).  Error bars are 95% confidence limits.  
in the population biology and productivity of Year-class is indicated in the upper right of each 
the euphausiid Thysanoessa spinifera in panel. 
Barkley Sound, Canada, with special reference 
 
1.2
to the 1992 and 1993 warm ocean years.  Mar. 
Ecol. Prog.  Ser. 173: 163-180. 
Tanasichuk, R. W.  1999.  Interannual variation in 
1
the availability of euphausiids as prey for 
Pacific hake (Merluccius productus) along the 
0.8
southwest coast of Vancouver Island.  Fish. 
Oceanogr.  8: 150-156. 
0.6
Tanasichuk, R. W.  2000.  Age-specific natural 
mortality rates of adult Pacific herring (Clupea 
0.4
pallasi) from southern British Columbia.  Can. 
J. Fish. Aquat. Sci.  57: 2258-2266. 
 
0.2
0
1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Spawning Season
 
Fig. 41 Suppression of ovarian production due 
to growth (solid circle) and growth plus 
recruitment depression (open square). 
 
  
59
Mean total mass (g)
Supressed/unsupressed ovarian production
Changes in growth with fluctuation of chub mackerel abundance in the 
Pacific waters off central Japan from 1970 to 1997 
 
1 2 
Chikako Watanabe , Akihiko Yatsu¹ and Yoshiro Watanabe
¹ National Research Institute of Fisheries Science, 2-12-4 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, Japan 
236-8648.  E-mail: falconer@nrifs.affrc.go.jp;  E-mail:  yatsua@affrc.go.jp 
² Ocean Research Institute, Tokyo University, 1-15-1Minamidai, Nakano-ku, Tokyo, Japan 164-8639.  
E-mail: ywatanab@ori.u-tokyo.ac.jp 
 
Introduction the Pacific chub mackerel stock and investigates 
the relationship between stock size and year-class 
 
abundance.  
Changes in growth as stock size fluctuates have 
 
been found in many fish populations.  Size-at-age 
of Japanese sardine (Sardinops melanostictus) has 
7000 160
Total biomass
varied remarkably with the stock fluctuations from 
140
6000
the late 1970s to the early 1990s (Wada 1989, 
Catch
120
5000
Hiyama 1989, Wada et al. 1995);  these have been 
100
Year- class
4000
considered to be density-dependent change in fish 
strength
80
size. 
3000
60
 
2000
40
Chub mackerel (Scomber japonicus) are one of the 
1000
most important fish populations in Japanese 20
waters.  Two stocks are recognized, the Tsushima 
0 0
1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995
Current stock and the Pacific stock.  The Tsushima 
 
Current stock is distributed in the East China Sea 
Fig. 42 Total biomass, catch and year-class 
and the Sea of Japan, and the Pacific stock occurs 
strength of the Pacific stock of chub mackerel 
along the Pacific coast of Japan.  The biomass of 
(Scomber japonicus).  Total biomass and year-
the Pacific stock is larger and more variable than 
class strength were estimated by VPA. 
that of the Tsushima Current stock.  Most of the 
 
catch of the Pacific stock is from the purse seine 
Materials and methods 
fishery in the waters off central and northern 
 
Japan.  The Pacific stock spawns from March to 
Data.  Length composition and age-length keys for 
June around the Izu islands off central Japan.  
1970-1997 were used to calculate mean length-at-
Juveniles of about 6 months of age recruit to purse 
age for each year.  The length composition data of 
seine and set net fisheries from August or 
purse seine catches from September to December 
September in the coastal area off northeastern 
were used because total catches in these months 
Japan. 
were usually largest during the year.  Scales were 
 
used for age determination.  Length compositions 
The landings of the Pacific stock increased from 
of fish samples were applied to length 
the 1960s, to a maximum of 1.5 million tons in 
compositions of total catches.  Length 
1978, and then declined to 23 thousand tons in 
compositions of total catches were divided into 
1990 (Fig. 42).  Recently, good year-classes 
age groups from 0 (6 months old) to 5 years based 
occurred in 1992 and 1996 (Fig. 42), but most of 
on age-length keys.  Mean fork length was 
these cohorts were exploited before first 
calculated from length compositions of total 
maturation, and therefore spawning stock did not 
catches for each age.  Total biomass was 
recover and total biomass stayed low.  With the 
represented by sum of VPA (virtual populations 
drastic stock level fluctuations, size-at-age and 
analysis) estimated biomass of chub mackerel 
maturity-at-age of the Pacific stock changed 
from age 0 to age 6+.  Year-class strength was 
(Iizuka 1974, Chiba 1995).  This study describes 
represented by abundance in number at age 0.  
long-term changes in stock size and size-at-age of 
  
60
3
Total biomass and catch (×10 ton)
8
Year-class strength (×10 inds
Statistical analysis.  ANOVA was used to positive relationships between deviations at age 0 
determine if the mean length-at-ages 0 to 5 were and ages 1 to 5, and between the deviations at age 
significantly different among years.  Regression 1 and ages 2 to 5 (Table 10), indicating that the 
analysis was applied to examine the relationships trend of length-at-age 0 is consistent through the 
between mean length-at-age and total biomass and life time (until 5 years old). 
year-class strength.  
 
2 
R = 0.36
Result and discussion 
250 p < 0.001
 
Mean length-at-age fluctuated greatly, especially 
at age 0 and 1, ranging from 164-259 mm at age 0 
and 242-316 mm at age 1.  While the biomass of 
200
chub mackerel decreased from the 1970s to the 
1990s, mean lengths-at-age increased.  Figure 43 
shows the relationship between the total biomass 
and the mean length at age 0 among years.  
150
Regression analyses indicated significant negative 
- 1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000 6,000
3 
relationships between the total biomass and the 
Total biomass (×10 tonj
 
mean fork length-at-age of a year (Table 8, 
 
p<0.05).  The biomass variations explained 19-
Fig. 43 Relationship between the total biomass 
36% of the inter-annual fluctuation of length-at-
and the length at age 0 of Scomber japonicus. 
age. 
 
 
2 
R = 0.35
Figure 44 demonstrates the relationship between 
p < 0.001
the year-class strength and the mean length-at-age 
250
0.  Mean length-at-age of each year-class was 
negatively correlated with the year-class strength 
(Table 9, p<0.01).  The variability in year-class 
200
strength explained 25-63% of the fluctuation of 
length-at-age. 
 
The deviations of the mean fork length of a year-
150
class from the mean of the 28-year time series 
- 50 100 150
8  
(1970 to 1997) were calculated for several ages.  
Year-class strength(×10 indsj
 
Figure 45 shows the relationships between 
 
deviation at age 0 versus deviation at age 1 and the 
Fig. 44 Relationship between the year-class 
deviation at age 0 versus deviation at age 4.  
strength and the length-at-age 0 of Scomber 
Regression analysis suggested significantly  
japonicus. 
 
 
Table 8 Statistics from regression of mean Table 9 Statistics from regression of mean 
length-at-age of chub mackerel vs. biomass. length-at-age of each year-class vs. recruitment. 
  
age df R R² p age df R R² p 
0 27 -0.60 0.36 0.001 0 27 -0.59 0.35 0.001 
1 27 -0.48 0.23 0.010 1 27 -0.47 0.25 0.007 
2 27 -0.53 0.28 0.004 2 26 -0.60 0.34 0.001 
3 27 -0.44 0.19 0.019 3 25 -0.67 0.46 0.000 
4 26 -0.47 0.22 0.013 4 24 -0.80 0.63 0.000 
5 26 -0.45 0.20 0.018 5 23 -0.67 0.48 0.000 
  
61
Mean length of age 0  (mm Mean length of age 0 (mm
50
50
0 vs 4
0 vs 1
0 0
-50 0 50
-50 0 50
2 2
 = 0.51 = 0.54
R R
-50
-50
 
Fig. 45 Relationships between the annual mean length deviation at age 0 and age 1 (left), and between 
the annual mean length deviation at age 0 and age 4 (right). 
 
Table 10 Statistics from regressions of annual sardine and spotted mackerel stocks may also 
mean length deviations at age 0 versus age 1 to 5 influence the growth of chub mackerel. 
and deviations at age 1 versus age 2 to 5.  
 References 
 
age R R² p 
Chiba. 1995. Shizuoka, Kanagawa Prefectural 
0      1 0.71 0.52 0.001 
Fisheries Research Stations, Tokyo. 
2 0.54 030 0.003 
Hiyama, Y.  1998.  Ecological changes in adults.  
3 0.54 0.29 0.005 
4. Migration range and growth rate in the 
4 0.73 0.54 0.000 
Tsushima Current area. In Y. Watanabe and T. 
5 0.53 0.28 0.009 
Wada [eds].  Stock fluctuations and ecological 
1      2 0.67 0.44 0.000 
changes of the Japanese sardine. Tokyo, pp. 
3 0.54 0.29 0.005 
35-44. 
4 0.71 0.50 0.000 
Iizuka, K.  1974.  The ecology of young mackerel 
5 0.54 0.29 0.007 
in the north-eastern Sea of Japan:  Estimation 
 
of the population size of the 0-age group and 
Our data confirmed that the trend in length of a 
the tendencies of growth patterns on 0-age 
year-class was determined during the first summer 
groups.  Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 34: 
of life and maintained throughout the life span.  
1-16. 
These results are in agreement with Iizuka (1974), 
Overholts, W.J.  1989.  Density-dependent growth 
who reported on the growth of 1963-1973 year-
in the Northwest Atlantic stock of Atlantic 
classes of the Pacific stock of chub mackerel and 
mackerel (Scomber scomburus).  J. Northw. 
found that the trend of growth at age 0 was 
Atl. Fish. Sci. 9: 115-121. 
maintained at least until age 2.  
Wada, T., Matsubara, Y., Matsumiya, Y., and 
 
Koizumi, N.  1995.  Influence of environment 
In this study, we investigated the effect of 
on stock fluctuations of Japanese sardine, 
mackerel biomass and/or year-class strength on the 
Sardinops melanostictus.  Can. Spec. Publ. 
mean length-at-age.  Year-class strength 
Fish. Aquat. Sci. 121: 387-394. 
significantly affected size-at-age of chub 
Wada, T.  1998.  3. Migration range and growth 
mackerel, but it only explained 25-63% of the 
rate in the Oyashio area.  In Y. Watanabe and 
fluctuations in the mean length-at-age.  Other 
T. Wada [eds].  Stock fluctuations and 
factors such as abiotic and/or biotic environment, 
ecological changes of the Japanese sardine. 
Tokyo, pp. 27-34. 
  
62
Inter-decadal fluctuations in length-at-age of Hokkaido-Sakhalin herring and 
Japanese sardine in the Sea of Japan 
 
1 2 3 4 
Yoshiro Watanabe , Yoshiaki Hiyama , Chikako Watanabe and ShiroTakayana
1
 Ocean Research Institute, Tokyo University, 1-15-1Minamidai, Nakano-ku, Tokyo, Japan 164-8639.  
E-mail: ywatanab@ori.u-tokyo.ac.jp 
2
 Seikai National Fisheries Research Institute, Nagasaki 850-0951, Japan.  
3
 National Research Institute of Fisheries Science, 2-12-4 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, Japan 
236-8648.  E-mail: falconer@nrifs.affrc.go.jp 
4
 Hokkaido Prefectural Fisheries Experimental Station, Yoichi 012-3876, Japan.  
 
Introduction this area were determined from scales after 1910.  
 Mean total length-at-age (TL) was calculated 
The total catch of Hokkaido spring herring based on number of fish by ages and by 5 mm TL 
(Clupea pallasii) in Japan peaked at 972 thousand intervals (Kitahama, 1955).  Time series of catch-
tons in 1897 and tended to decline thereafter with at-age 3 and older fish from 1910-1960 reported 
steep peaks and deep troughs (Fig. 46).  Spawning by Hanamura (1963).  We used this data for 
occurred from February to May along the coasts of estimating total number of fish at age 3 and older 
northern Japan and southern Sakhalin, within the from 1910-1950 by VPA (virtual population 
Sea of Japan and partly in the Sea of Okhotsk.  analysis).  
With the decline of the population, spawning  
1000
retreated to the north and finally disappeared from 
the coasts of Hokkaido in the middle 1950s 
800
(Morita 1985).  After that the catches were from 
600
the local populations distributed in the coastal 
waters off northern Japan. 
400
 
200
The Tsushima Current subpopulation of Japanese 
sardine (Sardinops melanostictus) in the East 
0
China Sea and the Sea of Japan experienced a 
1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000
 
peak in the late 1980s, similar to the Pacific 
Fig. 46 Total catch of Hokkaido spring herring 
subpopulation of these species (Watanabe et al. 
(Clupea pallasii) in Japan.  Data for 1887-1911 
1995).  Total catch of the subpopulation first 
are from Hanamura (1963);  after 1911 - from 
exceeded 1 million tons in 1984, maintained at this 
Catch Statistics. 
level until 1992, then rapidly declined to 33 
 
thousand tons in 1998 (Fig. 47). 
 
1500
Size-at-age of these two clupeid fishes varied 
through the years of the large population 
1000
fluctuations.  In this paper we describe inter-
decadal variability in size-at-age of both species 
and examine correlations between size-at-age and 500
population size. 
 
0
Materials and methods 
 
 
Hokkaido spring herring mature at age 3 and start 
Fig. 47 Total catch of the Tsushima Current 
migrating to the spawning grounds along the west 
subpopulation of Japanese sardine (Sardinops 
coast of Hokkaido (Hanamura 1963).  Ages of 
melanostictus) from 1978-1998. 
about 4000 individual fishes per year caught in 
  
63
3
3 Catch (ton 10 )
Catch (10 ton)
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
Data on catch-at-age and size-at-age of Japanese accounted for about 60% of those at age 4 in the 
sardine caught by the Japanese purse seine fishery 40 year-classes.  Only a limited proportion of age 
in the East China Sea and the Sea of Japan have 3 fish migrated to the coastal spawning grounds. 
been compiled since 1978.  Total numbers of fish- 
at-age were estimated each year by VPA. 
9.0
 
Results  
6.0
 
Clupea pallasii.  VPA estimates of spawner 
3.0
abundance (>3 years) of Hokkaido spring herring 
fluctuated greatly with a maximum of 19.6 billion 
0.0
fishes in 1924 and minimum of 0.4 billion in 1937. 
Total catch in number ranged from 3.0-0.04 billion 
fishes.  The exploitation rate was estimated to be 
Yearclass
 
<30% with exceptions in the middle 1930s and the 
Fig. 48 Variability in year-class population at 
late 1940-early 1950s.  Year-class population at 
age 4 of Hokkaido spring herring.  
age 4 varied greatly from 1907-1947 (Fig. 48).  
 
Dominant year-classes (>5.0 billion in number at 
10
10
age 4) occurred 6 times in 1909, 1911, 1915, 1921, 
1926 and 1939.  The maximum was 9.9 billion 
fishes in 1921, and minimum was 0.029 billion in 
1933, about a 2.5 order of magnitude difference. 
0 0
 -20 0 20 -10 0 10
We calculated deviations (%) of the mean TL at 
2
2
R =0.232 R =0.427
age 3 year and older for each year-class from the 
age 3 vs 5
-10 -10 age 4 vs 6
40-year mean (Fig. 49).  The coefficients of 
2
10
10
determination (R ) are summarized in Table 11.  
The deviations-at-age are positively correlated.  
The coefficients between age 3 vs 5 and 3 vs 7 
0
0
were small compared with those between age 4 vs 
-20 0 20
-10 0 10 7
6 or 4 vs 8.  Correlations of 4 year and older ages 
with age 3 were not statistically significant, but 2 2
R =0.111
R =0.495
those of 5 year and older ages with age 4 were 
-10 age 4 vs 8 -10 age 3 vs 7
 
highly significant.  This implies that the TL trends 
Fig. 49 Correlations of deviations (from the 40-
of year-classes were fixed by age 4 at the latest.  
year mean) of the mean TL-at-age in each year-
The mean TL at age 3 did not represent TL trend 
class of Hokkaido spring herring. 
of a year-class.  Total catches in number at age 3  
 
 
 
Table 11 Coefficients of determination of TL deviations from the 40-year mean across ages (* P<0.01, 
** P<0.001). 
 
 Age 4 Age 5 Age 6 Age 7 Age 8 Age 9 
Age 3 0.323 0.232 0.127 0.111 0.103 0.068 
Age 4  **0.747 **0.427 **0.465 **0.495 **0.531 
Age 5   **0.573 **0.431 **0.573 **0.533 
Age 6    **0.509 **0.559 *0.505 
Age 7     **0.601 *0.457 
 
  
64
9
Population (N 10 )
1907
1912
1917
1922
1927
1932
1937
1942
TL-at-age 4 varied from 25.5 in 1925 to 30.3 in of around 180 mm (Fig. 54).  Similar BL trend 
1944 with the average of 28.2±1.0 cm (Fig. 50).  was found in size-at-age 3.  The interannual 
TL was not necessarily smaller than the long-term fluctuation in BL corresponded inversely with the 
mean for the 6 dominant year-classes.  It tended to fluctuation in year-class size (Fig. 54). 
be larger than the mean in the early 1910s, smaller  
32
in the 1920s, and recovered in the early 1930s.  A 
31
similar TL trend was found at age 5 (40 year mean 
30
was 30.0 cm). 
29
 
28
TL-at-age 4 was not correlated with the year-class 
27
size in number at age 4.  The coefficient of 
26
determination was 0.068, indicating that only a 
25
small amount of the TL variability was explained 
by year-class strength (Fig. 51). 
 
Yearclass
 
TL-at-age 4 was correlated significantly (P < 0.05) 
 
with the mean spawning population in years when 
Fig. 50 Inter-decadal variations in TL-at-age 4 
a given year-class was at age 1 to 4.  About 17% 
and age 5 of Hokkaido spring herring.  
of the inter-annual variability in the mean TL of 
 
year-classes at age 4 could be explained by the 
32
2
size of the spawning population (R =0.165).  The 
variability in size-at-age of the herring inhabiting 
30
the Sea of Japan and Sea of Okhotsk is considered 
to be determined in a density independent manner. 
28
 
Sardinops melanostictus.  For Japanese sardine, 
26
y = -0.102x + 28.5
year-class abundance at age 2 varied greatly 
2
R = 0.0683
during the 20 year study from 1976-1996 (Fig. 
24
52).  The population was <20 billion fishes in the 
0.0 3.0 6.0 9.0
1970s.  Strong year-classes (>30 billion) occurred 
9
Population (N 10 )
 
consecutively in 1980-82 and 1984-87.  
 
Abundance reduced dramatically in 1988 year-
Fig. 51 Relationship between TL and year-
class and further declined to 1995.  The maximum 
classes size at age 4 of Hokkaido spring herring. 
and minimum year-class strengths were 77.3 and 
 
1.4 billion in number at age 2, about a 1.7 order of 
magnitude difference.  Strong year-classes >50 
billion occurred consecutively in the 1980s.  
60
Deviations (%) of the mean TL at age 3 of year-
classes from the 20-year mean were correlated 
with those at age 2, but not with age 1 (Fig. 53).  
30
The inter-annual trend in TL-at-age of each were 
fixed by age 2 at the latest in sardine.  Age 1 
sardines of the Tsushima Current subpopulation 
0
are not fully recruited to the Japanese purse seine 
fishery and do not represent size-at-age or strength 
of the year-classes. 
Yearclass
 
 
 
Body length (BL) at age 2 of the sardine was >180 
Fig. 52 Variability in year-class population at 
mm in the 1970s.  It remarkably declined to 169 
age 4 of Japanese sardine. 
mm in 1980 and remained smaller than 170 mm 
 
until 1988.  Then BL recovered to the 1970s level 
  
65
9
TL (cm)
Mean TL (cm)
Population (N 10 )
1907
1976
1912
1978
1980
1917
1982
1922
1984
1927
1986
1932
1988
1990
1937
1992
1942
1994
10 12
180
0 0
-20 0 20 -20 0 20
160
2
2
R = 0.125
R = 0.0646
y = -0.302x + 181
-10 age 1 vs 2 -12 age 1 vs 3
2
R = 0.600
10
10
140
03060
9
Population (N 10 )
 
0
0 
-10 10 -10 10
Fig. 55 Correlation of the mean BL with 
population of year-classes at age 2 of Japanese 
2
2
R = 0.742
R = 0.761
sardine. 
-10 age 2 vs 3 -10 age 2 vs 4
 
 
Discussion 
 
Fig. 53 Correlations of deviations from long  
The fluctuations in year-class strengths were 
term mean TL (20 years) among year-classes of 
greater in the herring (2.5 orders) than in the 
Japanese sardine, by age. 
 sardine (1.7 orders) during the years studied.  This 
may be related to the differences in the magnitude 
of inter-annual variability of ocean environment 
between the subarctic and temperate waters. 
190
 
Size-at-age of herring and sardine varied about ±4 
or 5% in the years studied. Growth of sardine up 
170
to 2 years old is considered to be largely 
determined through density-dependent processes 
such as competition for food, while that of the 
150
herring up to 4 years old was independent from the 
density of the population. Two factors may be 
responsible for the difference in the growth 
Yearclass
determining processes in herring and sardine.  
 
 
 
Fig. 54 Inter-decadal variations of BL-at-age 2 
The maximum year-class strength of the Tsushima 
and 3 of Japanese sardine. 
Current subpopulation of the sardine was as large 
 
as 77.3 billion in 1987. The total population 
BL-at-age 2 was significantly (P<0.001) correlated 
reached 370 billion in 1987. In the Hokkaido 
with the year-class size in number at age 2 (Fig. 
spring herring, the maximum year-class was 9.8 
55).  The coefficient of determination indicated 
billion in 1921 and the total spawning population 
that 60% of the BL variability can be explained by 
reached 19.6 billion in 1924. The population size 
year-class strength.  BL-at-age 2 was significantly 
of sardine was more than 10 times larger than 
(P<0.001) correlated with the total population at 
herring. Comparison in migration ranges of 
age 2.  The coefficient of determination was 0.587.  
sardine in the East China Sea and the Sea of Japan 
The variability in BL-at-age of the sardine 
and of herring in the Sea of Japan and the Sea of 
inhabiting in the temperate Sea of Japan and the 
Okhotsk are required, but the large population size 
East China Sea is considered to be determined in a 
of sardine seems to be a potential factor of 
density-dependent manner.  
density-dependent determination of size-at-age. 
  
66
BL (mm)
1975
1977
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
Mean BL (mm)
Another potential factor is the difference in References 
biological productivity between the temperate and  
subarctic waters in the Sea of Japan and the Sea of Hanamura, N.  1963.  A study on the method of 
Okhotsk. The Tsushima Current is derived from prediction of the Hokkaido spring herring 
the warm Kuroshio Current and its productivity is resources.  Bull Hokkaido Reg. Fish. Res. 
considered to be lower than subarctic waters Lab. 26: 1-66. 
inhabited by the herring. Carrying capacity of the Kitahama, H.  1955.  Data on the total length 
subarctic waters in the Sea of Japan and the Sea of compositions of Hokkaido spring herring.  
Okhotsk may be sufficiently greater than the total Hokkaido Pref. Fish. Exp. Stn., Yoichi, pp 46. 
food requirement of the herring population and Morita, S.  1985.  History of the herring fishery 
competition for food may not be realized in these and review of artificial propagation techniques 
waters.  for herring in Japan.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 
 42 (Suppl 1): 222-229. 
Watanabe, Y., Zenitani, H., and Kimura, R.  1995.  
Population decline of the Japanese sardine 
Sardinops melanostictus owing to recruitment 
failures.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 52: 1609-
1616.
 
 
Long-term variability in length of walleye pollock in the western Bering Sea 
and east Kamchatka 
 
Pavel A. Balykin and Alexander V. Buslov 
Kamchatka Fisheries and Oceanography Research Institute (KamchatNIRO), 18 Naberezhnaya Street, 
Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky, Russia  683600.  E-mail:  kamniro@mail.kamchatka.ru 
 
The mean body length of walleye pollock of total stock and the abundance of generations.  
yearlings from the western Bering Sea increases When the biomass has been high, the growth has 
when the area of the ice cover is reduced.  The been slow and vice versa.  The environmental 
average length of 2 to 6-year-old walleye pollock factors do not affect the growth of walleye pollock 
varies in relation to the dynamics of total stock to the east of Kamchatka. 
biomass and environment.  The biomass of  
walleye pollock is lower when the area of ice 2,5 13
2
cover in the Bering Sea exceeds 700,000 km .  
5
2,4
When the area of ice cover is reduced, the total 
stock abundance of walleye pollock increases and 
2,3
1
12,5
the average length of 2 to 6-year-old fish 
2,2
8
decreases.  A reliable relationship has been 2
observed between condition factor and the growth 
7
2,1
4
of fish, indicating that the growth of walleye 
6
2 12
pollock is dependent on the forage base.  Currently 
3
5
the biomass of walleye pollock in the western 
Bering Sea is very poor, therefore the growth in 4
1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989
length is not dependent on the environment and  
total stock biomass. 
Fig. 56 Variation of natural logarithms of 
 
average length of walleye pollock yearlings (1), 
The average length of 2 to 6-year-old walleye 
walleye pollock (2), Pacific herring (3), 
pollock in the Pacific Ocean waters adjacent to 
mesoplankton biomass (4), and area of ice cover 
Kamchatka has changed in relation to the biomass 
(5) in the western Bering Sea. 
  
67
Figure 56 shows changes in the length of walleye 
4 0,8
pollock yearlings, the biomass of mesoplankton 
3
and ice cover in the Bering Sea for the period from 
1
2
1973-1990.  The reduction of the ice cover area in 
0,7
the Bering Sea leads to the growth of total stock 
1
2
and an increase in average length of fish (Fig. 57). 
0
 
0,6
1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996
-1
Comparison of 2 to 6-year-old walleye pollock 
from the western Bering Sea and eastern 
-2
Kamchatka waters indicates that variability in  
-3 0,5
 
 
 
 
Fig. 59 Long-term dynamics of (1) average 
3000 38
1
condition factor in 3 to 6-year-old walleye pollock 
37 and (2) averaged deviations in length from the 
2
2000
long-term mean of these age groups. 
36
 
8000 49
1000
35
7000
1 47
6000
0 34
45
2
5000
542 590 660 701 728
43
2
4000
Ice cover, x1000 km
 3
41
3000
Fig. 57 Relationship between total biomass of 
39
2000
walleye pollock (bars) and length of 4-year-old 
37
fish (dots) and ice conditions. 
1000
 
0 35
50
A
1973 1976 1979 1982 1985 1988 1991 1994 1997 2000
 
6
45
 
5
40
Fig. 60 Long-term dynamics of total biomass of 
4
35
east Kamchatka walleye pollock (1), average 
30 length of 6-year-old fish (2) and average length of 
3
5-year-old fish (3). 
25
 
20 2
0,04
15
1978 1981 1984 1987 1990 1993 1996 1999 0,03
 
0,02
50
0,01
B
6
0
45
5
66,577,588,59
-0,01
40
-0,02
4
-0,03
35
3
-0,04
30
-0,05 Ln of abundance of generation in 2 years-old fish 
2
 
25
 
20
Fig. 61 Relationship between generation 
1973 1976 1979 1982 1985 1988 1991 1994 1997 2000
growth rate and abundance in the periods of high 
 
and intermediate stock abundance of the east 
Fig. 58 Long-term dynamics of average length 
Kamchatka walleye pollock, shown as the 
of 2 to 6-year-old walleye pollock:  (A) western 
deviation from the average specific growth rate.  
Bering Sea and (B) eastern Kamchatka. 
  
68
Biomass, x1000 t
Length, cm
Deviation* deviation
Biomass, x1000 tons
Lenght, cm
body length among nearby age groups is similar related to the total biomass of species (Fig. 60).  
(Fig. 58).  For the period 1980-1997, the condition For the periods of high and intermediate stocks the 
factor is related to linear growth of fish (Fig. 59).  growth rate of the east Kamchatka walleye pollock 
For the east Kamchatka stock, changes in growth depends inversely on cohort abundance (Fig. 61). 
of 5-6-year-old walleye pollock are inversely 
 
 
Effect of population abundance increase on herring distribution in the 
western Bering Sea 
 
Alexander A. Bonk 
Kamchatka Fisheries and Oceanography Research Institute (KamchatNIRO), 18 Naberezhnaya Street, 
Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky, Russia.  683600.  E-mail:  kamniro@mail.kamchatka.ru 
 
The last two decades have been important for the 
development of the Korf-Karaginsky Pacific 
herring population.  After a long period of low 
abundance in the 1980s, the population has been 
growing dynamically since 1990, reaching a 
maximum in 1997, and then started to decline 
again (Fig. 62). 
 
The annual distribution and migratory behavior of 
the Pacific herring during are determined by 
hydrology and the stock abundance fluctuations.  
The time period and the distance of the Pacific 
 
herring feeding migration are now significantly 
Fig. 62 The stock abundance dynamics of the 
different from those when stock abundance was 
Korf-Karaginsky herring in the western Bering 
low. 
Sea. 
 
During periods of low abundance, the feeding  
migration of the mature part of the stock occurred 
in Anastasiya and Dezhneva bays (Fig. 63A).  
Herring returned to Olytorsky Bay for winter 
th
before October 10.  This period was 
characterized by relatively stable conditions 
providing sufficient feeding for the Korf-
Karaginsky herring.  From the 1980s until the 
mid-1990s positive changes were observed in the 
Bering Sea.  These included:  1) warming of the 
upper 200 m which resulted in an increase of the 
forage zooplankton abundance, and 2) decrease in 
the stock abundance of walleye pollock, the 
nearest competitor of herring for food.  Thus 
during the 1980s and early 1990s, when the 
herring abundance was low, the feeding conditions 
for the Pacific herring became favorable.  In 1993, 
 
conditions were optimal for the production of an 
Fig. 63 The Korf-Kagarinsky herring 
abundant generation (Fig. 64).  In 1997, the  
distribution during the feeding migration:  (A) low 
 
stock abundance and (B) high abundance. 
  
69
4+ generation was the only one that recruited to high.  During the daytime fish were distributed 
the commercial fishery;  in the last 40 years, it had near the bottom, and at night they created thick 
6
the highest abundance and biomass, 4,230x10 shoals in the water column. 
3
fishes or 1,240x10 tons, respectively (Fig. 62).  
 
 
 
Fig. 64 Year-class abundance of age 4+ 
generations of the Korf-Kagarinsky herring in the 
Fig. 65 Distribution of the Korf-Kagarinsky 
western Bering Sea by brood year. 
herring in the western Bering Sea, in October-
 
November. 
The increase in abundance of the fishery-size 
 
individuals in the Korf-Karaginsky herring 
population took place simultaneously with water 
cooling in the region.  The indicators of that were:  
(1) a general decrease in the mixed water layer 
thermal capacity, and (2) extension of the ice 
cover in the Bering Sea since 1998.  Cold water 
masses dominated on the shelf, providing poor 
conditions for the forage base.  High abundance of 
the Korf-Karaginsky herring and poor food supply 
caused intensification of intra-specific competition 
for food.  Unable to completely fulfil their food 
requirements, herring had to enlarge the area of 
feeding. 
 
In 1998-2000, herring used marine bathypelagial 
in the Olytorsky-Navarinsky zone instead of the 
 
shelf zone for feeding until mid-October.  In 
Fig. 66 The area of wintering of the the Korf-
August and September, the echosounder tracks of 
Kagarinsky herring in the western Bering Sea. 
herring shoals were discovered at the depth of 
 
340-400 m.  At the same time, local shoals of 
The transformation from summer to winter 
feeding herring were found in the eastern part of 
conditions in Olyorsky Bay has been normally 
Olytorsky Bay (Fig. 63B).  From the second half 
completed in November.  This transformation 
of October, fish shoals were distributed at depths 
results in the quick cooling of the offshore waters.  
of 80-150 m, on both sides of Olytorsky Cape 
In 1998-2000, stable, favorable temperature 
(Fig. 65), however, these shoals were not stable.  
conditions in November occurred at depths of 150-
Herring migrated actively westward in small 
200 m, in the central and western parts of the bay.  
shoals, along the edge of the warmer and more 
Therefore, the herring stocks formed at these 
saline Pacific waters, where trophic activity was 
depths.  Their behavior at that time was similar to 
  
70
their behavior in October.  Following the arrival of mortality, and fishing, the stock abundance of the 
cold water, herring migrated westward, forming Korf-Karaginsky herring has decreased.  
non-mobile stocks at the depth of 180-250 m Moreover, at the present time, hydrological 
between the Cape of Goven and the Cape of conditions can hardly provide the required 
Golenischev in December (Fig. 66). biomass of forage zooplankton.  This should 
 prolong the feeding period until mid October and 
Since 1993, there has been no single abundant expand the feeding area. 
cohort produced by the population.  Due to natural 
 
 
Survival of yellowfin sole (Limanda aspera Pallas) in the northern part of the 
th
Tatar Strait (Sea of Japan) during the second half of the 20 century 
 
Sergey N. Tarasyuk  
Sakhalin Research Institute of Fisheries and Oceanography, 196 Komsomolskaya Street, Yuzhno-
Sakhalinsk, Russia 693023.  E-mail:  taras@sakhniro.ru 
 
The northern part of the Tatar Strait is one of the Yellowfin sole from the shelf zone of western 
traditional areas where yellowfin sole (Limanda Sakhalin cease annual increments at age 8-9+.  
aspera Pallas) dominate, averaging 60% of The instantaneous natural mortality rates vary by 
flounder abundance.  The commercial fishery of age decreasing from 0.22 to 0.12 beginning in age-
flounder stocks began in 1943.  In 1944, their 4 to age-6-8 individuals, respectively, and then 
catch reached the historical maximum – 10.1 gradually increasing to 0.60 at age 15.  The broods 
thousand tons, but during the following year it become fully available to the fishery beginning at  
reduced up to 7.4 thousand tons, and a catch per age 8.  
unit of effort (CPUE) decreased almost 2 times.   
Since 1945, the fishery ceased and until the Methods 
beginning of the 1950s, the flounder catch did not  
exceed 0.1 – 1.0 thousand tons a year.  Regular Data on the age structure of catches, annual 
scientific research on this species was not catches, catch per unit of effort, natural mortality 
conducted until 1956.  Nevertheless, the data by age, rate of maturation, and average body 
collected on the size composition of flounder weight by age during the period of 1956-2000 
catches during 1946, and some similar data since were processed using a method of virtual 
1956, indicated overfishing in the mid-1940s populations (VPA), with the help of program 
(Tarasyuk, 1994A).  After the 1950s, catch varied developed at the Fishery Laboratory Lowestoft 
from 5.45 thousand tons in 1955 to 0.35 thousand (Darby and Flatman 1994).  The Louric-Shepherd 
tons in 1979.  In the last ten years of the century, method was used for adjusting fishing mortality 
the catch constituted 0.4 – 2.0 thousand tons per coefficients (Pope and Shepherd 1985).   
year.    
 Further processing of VPA results was done to 
Age structure of the yellowfin sole population is reveal the causes determining brood year 
characterized by an extended age distribution.  abundances.  The abundance estimates of broods 
Fish at age 4 to 18 occur in catches.  Age-7 at age 4 were used as the index of recruitment.  A 
yellowfin sole are usually a modal age group, as cohort survival rate at age 4 was estimated as a 
their average long-term age value is 8.8.  Body quotient between the number of age 4 fish 
weights of yellowfin sole change according to the obtained from the VPA method, and the number at 
equation of allometric growth.  A coefficient of age 0.  The spawning stock was calculated as the 
allometry exponent in the equation is 3.1315, and total number of the age groups taking into account 
the scale coefficient is 0.0073 when body weight the rate of maturation, less a year catch, since the 
is measured in grams and length (AC) in cm.  fishery in this region is the most intensive before 
  
71
the beginning of spawning.  The number at age 0, brings about a sharp increase in survival, varying 
or a start number of generation was determined about twofold (Fig. 69).  This suggests a density 
from the number of spawners in the year of dependent mortality. 
reproduction, considering the fecundity and age,  
25 35
and assuming under equal sex ratio from the 
Stock biomass
catches.   
30
20 Number of age-4
 
25
Results 
15
 
20
The biomass of the commercial part of the stock 
15
10
calculated by VPA changed significantly during 
10
the period of observation.  In 1956, it constituted 
5
13.9 thousand tons, reduced to the minimum 2.8 – 
5
3.1 thousand tons in 1971 – 1975, and then began 
0 0
to increase to the maximum 19.2 thousand tons in 
1956 1961 1966 1971 1976 1981 1986 1991 1996
1991 – 1992.  At the end of the century yellowfin 
Years of generation
sole stock reduced a little (Fig. 67).  The 
 
commercial stock varied by 6.9 from 1956-2000.  
Fig. 67 Dynamics of biomass of the spawning 
Spawning stock also varied within the wide limits:  
stock and number of broods at age 4 from this 
from the minimum 11.7 million fish in 1970 to 
stock generation for the Tatar Strait yellowfin sole 
68.8 million fish in 1996, a factor of 5.8.  The 
population. 
cohort size at age 4 varied from 6.09 million to 
 
30.62 million fish in the 1962 and 1989 brood 
Model: Ricker model
y=x*exp((0.001671564)*(1-x/(0.1107065)))
years, respectively, a factor of 5.0. 
32
 
28
A potential population fecundity or cohort strength 
24
at age 0 varied from 4.0 to 25.4 trillion eggs 
20
according to changes in spawning stock and its age 16
12
structure.  Survival from age 0 to 4 averaged one 
8
individual from 3,000 eggs.  This index ranged 
4
widely, up to 7.5. 
0
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65
 
 Spawning stock number (millions) 
Figure 68 shows the stock recruitment relationship  
and the estimated Ricker’s model.  A correlation 
Fig. 68 Ricker’s “stock-recruitment” model fit 
coefficient with the amount of spawning stock was 
to the 1956-1992 observed data. 
significant (0.79, p<0.05) for abundance of broods.  
 
The portion of the explained dispersion after Model: Exponential growth 
y=14.83736+exp(7.389005+(-1.182823)*x)
calculating the coefficients of non-linear 
34
regression for the Ricker’s model was 63.08%.  
30
 
26
The survival rate for generations was well-
22
correlated with the numbers of age group 0;  the 
18
correlation coefficient was  0.61 (p < 0.05).  Use 
14
of the equation of exponential growth 
10
approximated the relationship between those 
6
46810121416182022
indices, with 37.16% dispersion explained.  Based 
Number of 0-age group, trillions
 
on the estimated curve, survival practically does 
not change at the initial number of brood more Fig. 69 Exponential model of the relation 
than 7 million individuals, and keeps at a stable between survival rate and number of broods at age 
level providing a minimum survival for 0. 
population.  Reduction in the number of eggs laid  
  
72
Survival rate, *10^-6 Recruitment (millions)
Stock biomass, thou.  tones
Number of  age-4, millions
0,8
temperature with the regression residuals, the 
index of survival, appeared to be significant with a 
0,6
correlation coefficient of -0.48.  A reconstructed 
0,4
zooplankton biomass time series for the 
0,2 southwestern Sakhalin coast has shown that 
maximum zooplankton biomass observed in cold 
0
years, and low plankton biomass occurred in warm 
-0,2
years (Kantakov 2000;  Fig. 71). 
-0,4 
Maximum of atmospheric activity also occurred in 
-0,6
the 1950s, when the greatest number of tropical 
Years
 
typhoons moved through the region, whereas in 
the 1970s, the number of typhoons was minimum 
Fig. 70 Dynamics of standardized residuals of 
(Fig. 72).  The correlation coefficient was -0.50 
the survival rate regression by the birth years of 
broods. (Tarasyuk 1994 B). 
 
 
Discussion 
The observed deviations from the exponential 
growth curve have causes other than the initial  
The noted relationships demonstrate the influence 
density of a population.  The standardized 
residuals indicated a maximum of survival appears of climatic factors on the abundance of yellowfin 
from 1974 to 1984, and low survival from the mid- sole generations.  To understand the mechanism of 
these relationships, we review the ecology of 
1950s through the mid-1960s, 1985 through 1992 
is characterized as slightly less than average. yellowfin sole spawning.  They spawn in the 
 northern part of the Sea of Japan in July-August, at 
the depths less than 50 m.  Eggs are spawned in 
A temporal series of the regression residuals on 
fish density demonstrates the potential climatic batches (Fadeev 1957, Ivankov et al. 1972).  
causes affecting a survival.  According to the data Spawned eggs are relatively small, their diameter 
is 0.8 – 0.9 mm.  Embryos and larvae develop in 
of coastal hydrometeorological stations (Kholmsk 
GMS), a maximum heating of the surface water in the upper 50-m of water column at temperatures 
the northern part of the Sea of Japan occurred in from 8 to 19ºC (Pertseva- Ostroumova 1961).  At 
the length of 16 - 27 mm, larvae settle on the 
the early to mid 1970s, whereas the 1980s were 
characterized as cold years.  Nevertheless, bottom (Nikolotova 1975).  The planktonic stage 
is about a one month, and on the whole, taking 
temperature conditions in the coastal zone may 
into account the duration of spawning, may 
non-adequately characterize biota during early 
stages of the yellowfin sole ontogenesis when a continue up to 4 months (Tarasyuk 1994B).  The 
peculiarity of yellowfin sole reproduction is the 
brood abundance is formed.  The longest 
oceanographic time-series observations in Tatar timing of their aggregations at plankton stages of 
Strait are standard transects:  Antonovsky and development to small areas with circulation that 
prevents the larvae from flowing out of favorable 
Cape Slepikovsky.  The temperature regime in this 
region strongly depends upon the Tsushima sites (Moiseev 1952).  Plankton and nektobenthic 
Current.  Its strengthening during the autumn in a crustaceans at juvenile stages of development form 
the basic food for planktotrophic larvae 
warm year forms a stable water column until the 
beginning of winter.  This is evident in the (Nikolotova 1975).  Evidently, a long stay in the 
dynamics of May temperature in the layer 50-100 upper water column, their peculiarities of feeding, 
and concentration in a limited area create a special 
m (Kantakov 2000;  Fig. 71).  The layer 
temperature, smoothed by a 5 point moving vulnerability of yellowfin sole at early stages of 
averages, has decreased from the mid-1970s to the ontogenesis to the negative affects of environment, 
and also a high mortality as a result of intra-
late 1980s, whereas the mid-1950s to the mid-
1970s was characterized by higher temperatures.  population competition.  
A correlation of initial estimates of the layer 
  
73
Residuals 
1956
1959
1962
1965
1968
1971
1974
1977
1980
1983
1986
1989
1992
1999
1998
1996
1996
1994
1993
1992
1990
1990
1988
1987
1986
1984
1984
1982
1981
1980
1978 1978
1976
1975
1974
1972 1972
1970
1969
1968
1966
1966
1964
1963
1962
1960
1960
1958
1957
1956
1954
1954
1952
1951
1950
1948
1948
1946
1945
1944
1942
1942
1940
1939
1938
1936
1936
1934
1933
1932
1930
1930
1928
1927
1926
1924
1924
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
 
215
205
195
185
175
165
155
145
135
125
115
105
95
85
 
Fig. 71 Dynamics of the May temperature in the 50-100 m layer along the transects Antonovsky and 
Cape Slepikovsky (top panel) and autumn biomass of the net zooplankton (bottom panel).  Zooplankton 
biomass is in units of mg wet weight per cubic meter.  (Source:  Kantakov 2000). 
 
cohort abundance upon their survival is realized 
10
through the deterioration of feeding conditions 
9
8
under the increased density of larval aggregations, 
7
diet selectivity, and limited resources of food 
6
fields.  The influence of tropical typhoons (more 
5
than 80 % of them occur in June-August) (Eremin 
4
and Tretyakova 1980) may result both in the 
3
negative impact of hydrodynamic wave on the 
2
1 embryos survival at the sensitive stages of 
0
development, and in their impact on the small-
1956 1960 1964 1968 1972 1976 1980 1984 1988 1992 1996
scale circulation systems, causing the appearance 
Years
 
of cold deep water masses on the surface and 
carrying eggs and larvae out of zones favorable for 
Fig. 72 Frequency of tropic typhoons moving 
through the area of Sakhalin Island. inhabitation.  In the cold year periods, zooplankton 
biomass in the northern Sea of Japan increases, 
 
and that reduces the level of intra-population 
Comparing these relationships with the 
peculiarities of reproduction of yellowfin sole, we competition for food.  In turn, this favorably 
affects the larval survival.  
conclude that the negative influence of the initial  
 
  
74
Температура, гр. С
Number of typhoons
References Moiseev, P.A.  1952.  Some specific features of 
 the bottom and near-bottom fish distribution in 
Darby, C.D. and Flatman, S.  1994.  Virtual the Far East seas.  Izv. TINRO 27: 129 – 137 
Population Analysis:  Version 3.1 (in Russian). 
(Windows/DOS) User Guide. Info.  Tech. Nikolotova, L.A.  1975.  Larval feeding of the 
Ser., MAFF Direct, Fish. Res., Lowestoft, (1): west Kamchatka flounders.  Izv. TINRO 97: 
85 pp. 51-61 (in Russian). 
Eremin, P.G. and Tretyakova, E.I.  1980.  To a Pertseva-Ostroumova, T.A.  1961.  A spawning 
question about the cyclicity of typhoons above and developing patterns of the Far East 
Sakhalin Region.  Information Letter No. 1/90. flounders. M.: AS USSR Publishers. 484 pp. 
Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk, SakhUGCS, pp. 31– 45 (in Russian). 
(in Russian). Pope, J.G. and Shepherd, J.G.  1985.  A 
Fadeev, N.S.  1957.  On the type of spawning and comparison of the performance of various 
fecundity for some commercial Sakhalin methods for tuning VPA’s using effort data.  J. 
flounders.  Zoological Journal 36(12): 18-41 Cons. Int. Explor. Mer. 42: 129-151. 
(in Russian). Tarasyuk, S.N.  1994 А.  Results of modeling 
Ivankov, V.I., Ivankova, Z.G., and Volkova, T.D. biological indices of the yellowfin flounder 
1972.  Types and terms of spawning for from the western Sakhalin waters during the 
flounders from Peter the Great Bay.  Scientific initial period of fishery.  In “Fishery 
Notes of DVGU 60: 49-61 (in Russian). researches in Sakhalin-Kuril region and 
Kantakov, G.A.  2000.  Oceanographic adjoining areas”. Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk, 
Retrospective Analysis of the Zooplankton Sakhalin Region Book Publishers, pp. 33-38 
Population Inhabitation Conditions at the (in Russian). 
th th
Southwest Sakhalin in 20 Century.  In 15 Tarasyuk S.N.  1994B.  On the possible causes 
International Symposium on Okhotsk Sea & providing the abundant broods of yllowfin 
Sea Ice. Okhotsk Sea & Cold Ocean Research, flounder.  In “Fishery researches in Sakhalin-
pp. 384-390. Kuril region and adjoining areas”. Yuzhno-
Sakhalinsk, Sakhalin Region Book Publishers, 
pp. 23-32 (in Russian). 
 
  
75
 
  
76
MODEL/REX WORKSHOP TO DEVELOP A MARINE ECOSYSTEM 
MODEL OF THE NORTH PACIFIC OCEAN INCLUDING PELAGIC 
FISHES  
(Co-conveners:  Bernard A. Megrey and Michio J. Kishi)
 
 
Summary
 
A 4-day MODEL/REX workshop made several 3. Coupled the fish model to the NEMURO 
significant achievements:  lower trophic level model; 
1. Assembled an international team of marine 4. Adapted the fish bioenergetics model to 
biologists, fisheries biologists, and physical Pacific herring (Clupea harengus pallasi) in 
oceanographers who collectively achieved a the eastern North Pacific, and Pacific saury 
consensus on the structure and function of a (Cololabis saira) in the western North Pacific; 
PICES Climate Change and Carrying Capacity 5. Made recommendations for future modeling 
(CCCC) prototype lower trophic level (LTL) activities.  
ecosystem model for the North Pacific Ocean  
that included pelagic fishes, and named it The significance of these achievements will 
“NEMURO.FISH”; ultimately be evaluated by how well the CCCC 
2. Developed a computer simulation model of Program effectively utilizes and embraces these 
fish bioenergetics and growth;  models as a basis of future modeling activity.
 
 
1.0 Workshop overview
 
Introduction extend NEMURO to include higher trophic level 
 components.  Based on some presentations there, 
The North Pacific Marine Science Organization we agreed to try Pacific herring as a candidate 
(PICES) organizes and promotes an international higher trophic level species and plans began for a 
science program, CCCC, in the temperate and joint workshop.  Dr. Michio Kishi prepared a 
subarctic regions of the North Pacific Ocean.  proposal to the Heiwa-Nakajima foundation of 
Ecosystem modeling is one of five key research Japan to help fund attendance to the workshop.  
activities defined by the CCCC Implementation The proposal was successful and planning began 
Panel.  The PICES CCCC MODEL Task Team is to hold the next workshop in Nemuro, Japan in 
given the role to encourage, facilitate and 2002. 
coordinate modeling activities within the member  
nations with respect to the goals and objectives of 
Goals and objectives of the Workshop 
the PICES-CCCC Program.  At the 2000 Nemuro 
 
Workshop, the MODEL Task Team developed 
The goals of the 2002 Nemuro PICES workshop 
NEMURO, a lower trophic level marine 
were to (1) develop a bioenergetics-based fish 
ecosystem model.  NEMURO has been 
model for Pacific herring (Clupea harengus 
internationally recognized, and recently, the Max 
pallasi) and Pacific saury (Cololabis saira) and (2) 
Planck Institute has adopted the use of NEMURO.  
to couple this model with output from the 
 
NEMURO lower trophic level model developed at 
At PICES IX in Hokkodate, the REX and MODEL 
the 2000 Nemuro PICES workshop.   
Task Teams met and agreed it would be useful to  
 
77
Organizing Committee, participants, sponsors laptop computers were available and were 
and venue arranged in each work area to make group work 
 more effective.  
Drs. Michio J. Kishi, Bernard A. Megrey and  
Francisco E. Werner organized the meeting.  Drs. Twenty six scientists from China, Korea, Russia, 
Megrey and. Kishi served as workshop co- Japan, Canada and the United States (Fig. 1) 
chairmen.  The Heiwa-Nakajima foundation of convened in Nemuro, Japan, between January 25 
Japan, PICES, and the city of Nemuro provided and January 27, 2002, to participate in a modeling 
financial support and access to excellent meeting workshop focused on developing a coupled lower 
rooms in the City Hall.  The Nemuro Support trophic level-higher trophic level model of the 
Committee supplied local logistical support.  marine ecosystem.  Most scientists arrived with 
 their own laptop computers.  Participants 
The venue was set at the Multi Purpose Hall, a (Appendix 1) consisted of plankton scientists, 
large octagon-shaped room, in the Nemuro City modelers, and individuals with biological 
Cultural Center.  The hall had a local area network knowledge of herring and saury.  Key regional 
which included a server workstation, laser and data sets were also provided by many workshop 
color printers, and another personal computer participants.  The workshop was continued at the 
connected to the Internet.  A classroom style table Frontier Research System for Global Change 
was arranged in the center of the room for the (FRSGC) facilities in Yokohama on January 29, 
plenary session.  A set of LCD projectors and 2002. 
screens and AC power outlets for participants’ 
 
 
Fig. 1  Nemuro Workshop participants.  Left to right –Top Row: Douglas Hay, Tomokazu Aiki, 
Masakatsu Inada, Daiki Mukai, Lan S. Smith, Vadim V. Navrotsky, Alexander V. Leonov, Francisco E. 
Werner, Robert A. Klumb, Bernard A. Megrey, Toshio Katsukawa, Takeshi Okunishi, Yasuhiro 
Yamanaka, Tomonori Azumaya. Bottom Row: Chul-hoon Hong, Sanae Chiba, Yuri I. Zuenko, Daji 
Huang, Masahiko Fujii, Kazuaki Tadokoro, Shin-ichi Ito, Shoichi Hamaya (Nemuro City Supporter), 
Michio J. Kishi, Makoto B. Kashiwai. 
78
Workshop schedule 13:00-15:30 Discussion on the results and 
 modification of model 
th th
Date:  January 25 -29 , 2002 15:40-16:00 Closing ceremony 
16:30- Press conference (Megrey, Kishi, 
Venue:  Nemuro City Culture Center* (25-27 Jan. 
Werner) 
2002), FRSGC (28,29 Jan. 2002) 
18:30-20:30 Farewell party by Nemuro city (at 
Conveners:  Michio J. Kishi (Hokkaido 
hotel) 
University), Bernard A. Megrey (NOAA), 
 
Francisco E. Werner (University of North 
th
January 28 , Monday 
Carolina) 
Move to Frontier Research System for Global 
Workshop Co-Chairmen:  M. Kishi and B. 
Climate Change 
Megrey 
 
th
 
January 29 , Tuesday 
Agenda 
09:00-12:00 Discussion on the results of new 
 
model and future strategy 
th
January 25 , Friday  
12:00-13:00 Lunch 
18:00 Opening ceremony 
13:00-17:00 Seminar at FRSGC 
19:00 Welcome reception  
13:00-13:30 Zuenko 
 
13:30-14:00 Navrotsky 
th
January 26 , Saturday 
14:00-14:30 Huang 
09:00-09:10 Remarks by M. J. Kishi 
14:30-15:00 Klumb 
09:10-09:30 Review of NEMURO (North 
15:00-15:30 Hong 
Pacific Ecosystem Model for 
15:30-16:00 Tea break 
Understanding Regional 
16:00-16:30 5-minute speech of Japanese 
Oceanography) developed by 
participants 
PICES MODEL Task Team in 
16:30-17:00 Discussion of future work 
2000 (Michio Kishi) 
 
09:30-10:30 Review of NEMURO FORTRAN 
Workshop activity 
code (Yasuhiro Yamanaka) 
 
10:30-11:00  Fish bioenergetics/biom ass 
After an opening ceremony with the people of 
modeling:  an application to 
Nemuro and a welcome party held the day before, 
Pacific herring (Bernard Megrey) 
the participants convened at the venue to start the 
10:30-11:00 Review of NEMURO FORTRAN 
workshop.   
code  (Yasuhiro Yamanaka) 
 
11:00-11:30 Review of Clupeid biology with 
On the first day, the workshop officially opened 
emphasis on energetics (Robert 
with a welcome to all who had endured a long 
Klumb)  
journey to come back to Nemuro.  In the morning 
11:30-12:00 Analysis of change in Pacific 
session, individual presentations were made on the 
herring distributions (Douglas 
NEMURO LTL model, a review of the 
Hay) 
FORTRAN program to execute NEMURO, the 
12:00-13:00 Lunch 
proposed fish bioenergetics model, and 
13:00-13:30 Review of Pacific saury 
presentations on herring and saury biology as 
(Cololabis saira) study under 
outlined in the agenda.  During the afternoon 
VENFISH  (Shin-ichi Ito) 
session, the workshop participants split into two 
13:30-17:00 Grouping of scientists (“team 
groups, to adapt the generalized fish bioenergetics 
herring” and “team saury”) 
model for Pacific herring (“team herring”) and 
 
Pacific saury (“team saury”).  
th
January 27 , Sunday 
 
09:00-12:00 Continue working in teams 
The second day was taken up primarily with the 
12:00-13:00 Lunch 
two working groups dealing with their specific 
tasks.  Results of the Pacific herring and saury 
79
applications were presented for discussion in the Sayonara Party, which was full of warm 
afternoon.  Also on the second day the coupled hospitality by the people of Nemuro city.   
lower trophic level-higher trophic level model was  
named NEMURO.FISH (North Pacific Ecosystem The third session was held at the Frontier Research 
Model for Understanding Regional System for Global Change in Yokohama.  The 
Oceanography.For Including Saury and Herring).  group discussed the structure and organization of 
Robert Klumb suggested the name. the final report, made writing assignments, 
 generated a list of workshop recommendations, 
The participants received closing remarks from the discussed where the MODEL Task Team should 
vice-chairman of the Nemuro Supporting be going next, and the possibility of holding future 
Committee where appreciation was extended to workshops.  Several individual seminars were 
have brought into being such a productive presented by workshop participants dealing with 
workshop. These feelings were amplified during a their personal research topics. 
 
 
2.0 Workshop presentations 
 
This section contains abstracts, extended abstracts, provided in the agenda.  The authors whose last 
or fully prepared reports and workshop summaries name is in underline and bold font made the 
given at the workshop.  The reports that follow are presentation.  Model versions referenced in these 
organized by authors, according to the schedule  reports are described in Megrey et al. (2000).
 
 
2.1 A generalized fish bioenergetics/biomass model with an application to 
Pacific herring 
 
1 2 3 4 5 
Bernard A. Megrey , Kenny Rose , Francisco E. Werner , Robert A. Klumb and Douglas Hay
1
 National Marine Fisheries Service, Alaska Fisheries Science Center, 7600 Sand Point Way NE, 
Seattle, WA 98115, U.S.A.  E-mail:  bern.megrey@noaa.gov 
2
 Coastal Fisheries Institute and Departm ent of Oceanography and Coastal Sciences, Wetlands 
Resources Building, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, U.S.A.  E-mail: 
karose@lsu.edu   
3
 Marine Sciences Department, CB # 3300, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3300, 
U.S.A.  E-mail:  cisco@unc.edu  
4 
Department of Natural Resource, Cornell Biological Field Station, Cornell University, 900
 Shackelton Point Road, Bridgeport, NY 13030, U.S.A.  E-mail:  rak11@cornell.edu  
5 
Pacific Biological Station, Fisheries and Oceans Canada, 3190 Hammond Bay Rd, Pacific Biological 
Station, Nanaimo, British Columbia, Canada V9R 5K6.  E-mail:  hayd@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca  
 
We chose to use bioenergetics/biomass modeling temperature and diet composition.  Model 
to represent fish growth because (1) the theory is formulation and parameters for Pacific herring 
based on the Law of Thermodynamics, (2) outputs followed the approach used by Rudstam (1988) for 
must equal inputs, ie., the energetic budget must Atlantic herring (Clupea harengus). 
balance (Law of Conservation of Mass), (3) terms  
in the equations are simple to biologically The growth rate of an individual Pacific herring 
interpret, (4) fish physiological terms are well (non reproductive) is calculated as weight 
known and in general can be directly measured, increment per unit of weight per time and is 
and (5) this modeling approach allows users to defined by: 
focus on important external regulators such as  
80
content of the prey, diet composition, prey 
dW CAL
z
(2.1.1) =[] C − (R + S + F + E) ⋅ ⋅W 
densities, and water temperatures. 
dt CAL
f
 
 
Consumption 
-1 -1
where C is consumption (g prey·g fish ·d ), E is 
 
excretion or losses of nitrogenous excretory wastes 
Consumption is estimated as the proportion of 
-1 -1
(g prey·g fish ·d ), F is egestion or losses due to 
maximum daily ration for herring at a particular 
-1 -1
feces (g prey·g fish ·d ), R is respiration or losses 
mass and temperature.  Maximum daily 
-1 -1
through metabolism (g prey·g fish ·d ), S is 
consumption rate (g of prey per g body mass of 
specific dynamic action or losses due to energy 
herring per day) is estimated using an allometric 
-1 -1
costs of digesting food (g prey·g fish ·d ), W is 
function of mass from ad libitum feeding 
the weight of the fish (g wet weight), t is time 
experiments conducted at the optimum 
(days) CAL is the caloric equivalent of 
z temperature. 
-1
zooplankton (cal·g zooplankton ), and CAL is the 
f 
-1
caloric equivalent of fish (cal·g fish ).  Note that 
The basic form of the consumption function is  
(2.1.1) does not include energetic costs of 
 
reproduction (spawning).  
(2.1.2) C = C ⋅ p ⋅ f (T ) 
MAX C
 
-1
b
If we define CAL as calories·g zooplankton  C
z
(2.1.3) C = a ⋅W  
MAX C
 
 
2580 joules 1 cal
where C is the specific consumption rate (g prey·g 
CAL = ⋅ = 617.22
z -1 -1
fish ·d ), C is the maximum specific feeding 
gram zoop 4.18 joules
MAX
  
-1 -1
rate (g prey·g fish ·d ), p is the proportion of 
 
-1
maximum consumption, f (T ) is a temperature 
C
and CAL as calories·g fish  
f
dependence function for consumption, T is water 
 
temperature (ºC), W is herring mass (g wet 
5533 joules 1 cal
weight), a is the intercept of the allometric mass 
CAL = ⋅ = 1323.68 c
f
gram fish 4.18 joules
function (for a 1 g fish at 0°C), and b is the slope 
c
  
of the allometric mass function.  The subscript C 
 
on the parameters refers to the consumption 
then once the change in weight from 2.1.1 is 
-1 -1
process. 
computed in terms of g zooplankton·g fish ·d , we 
 
can multiply it by the weight of the fish (W, g) to 
-1
In equation (2.1.2), the maximum specific feeding 
get g zooplankton·d , and finally convert g 
-1 -1
rate is modified by a water temperature 
zooplankton·d to g fish·d by multiplying the 
dependence function described below and an 
change in weight (dW/dt) by the ratio CAL /CAL . 
z f
additional proportionality constant that accounts 
 
for ecological constraints on the maximum feeding 
In the simulations described in this report, 
rate.  The p can range from 0 to 1, with 0 
equation 2.1.1 was solved using an Euler 
representing no feeding and 1 indicating the fish is 
numerical integration routine using a dt=0.01. 
feeding at its maximum rate, based on its body 
 
mass and water temperature.  The lower panel of 
The formulation of the individual processes 
figure 2.1.1 shows the relationship between fish 
represented by the terms in equation 2.1.1 is 
weight and consumption from equation 2.1.3. 
described individually below.  Consumption and 
 
respiration are nonlinear functions of fish weight 
Temperature dependence for cool and cold 
and water temperature.   
water species (Thornton and Lessem 1978) 
 
 
In addition to the physiological parameters, the 
The Thornton and Lessem description of 
model requires information about caloric content 
temperature dependence is essentially the product  
of herring (which can change seasonally), caloric 
81
of two sigmoid curves:  one curve is fit to the function for a theoretical set of parameters.  The 
increasing portion of the temperature dependence upper panel of Figure 2.1.1 shows the Thornton 
function (gcta), and the other to the decreasing and Lessem temperature adjustment function over 
portion (gctb).  Four temperatures and percentages a typical temperature range, and Figure 2.1.3 
are needed.  We used two sets of parameters, one shows the flexibility of this curve by adjusting te2 
for herring ages ≤1 year old, and one set for for a range of temperatures.  Finally, Figure 2.1.4 
herring > 1 years old.  shows the multi-dimensional relationship between 
 consumption, body mass and water temperature 
As an example, parameters for the second set are from equation 2.1.2. 
xk1=0.1, xk2=0.98, xk3=0.98, xk4=0.01, te1=1.0,  
te2=13.0, te3=15.0, and te4=23.0.  For the 
increasing part of the curve, te1 is the lower 
temperature at which the temperature dependence 
is a small fraction (xk1) of the maximum rate, and 
te2 is the water temperature corresponding to a 
large fraction (xk2) of the maximum consumption 
rate.  For the decreasing portion of the curve, te3 is 
the water temperature ( ≥ te2) at which dependence 
is a fraction (xk3) of the maximum, and te4 is the 
temperature at which dependence is some reduced 
fraction (xk4) of the maximum rate. 
 
The temperature dependence model is given by 
 
(2.1.4) f (T ) = gcta ⋅ gctb  
C
 
  
Fig. 2.1.1 Relationship between consumption 
where T is water temperature (ºC) 
and temperature from equation 2.1.4 (upper panel) 
 
and consumption and weight from equation 2.1.3 
1
tt5 =
(lower panel). 
() te2 − te1
 
 
⎡ () 1.0 − xk1 ⎤
t5 = tt5⋅ ln xk2 ⋅
⎢ ⎥
() 0.02 ⋅ xk1 (13,0 .98) (22, 0.98) 
⎣ ⎦
 
te2, xk2 te3, xk3 
[] t5⋅() T −te1
t4 = e
 
1
4 temp – F of T 
tt7 =
pairs define the 
() te4 − te3
 
functional 
⎡ () 1.0 − xk4 ⎤ relationship 
t7 = tt7 ⋅ ln xk3⋅
⎢ ⎥
() 0.02 ⋅ xk4
⎣ ⎦
 
[] t7⋅() te4−T
t6 = e
 
te1, xk1 
() xk1⋅t4
te4, xk4 
(1, 0.1)
gcta =
(27, 0.01)
() 1.0 + xk1⋅() t4 −1.0
 
() xk4 ⋅t6
 
gctb =
 
() 1.0 + xk4 ⋅() t6 −1.0
 
Fig. 2.1.2 Example of the Thornton and 
 
Lessem (1978) temperature adjustment curve for a 
Figure 2.1.2 shows an example of the Thornton 
theoretical set of parameters. 
and Lessem (1978) temperature adjustment  
82
in g, f (T) is the temperature dependence function 
R
for respiration, T is temperature in ºC, a is the 
R
9
intercept of the allometric mass function and 
18 
represents the weight specific oxygen 
-1 -1
12 consumption rate of a 1 g fish (g O ·g fish ·d ) at 
2
15 0ºC and no activity, b is the slope of the 
R
allometric mass function for standard metabolism, 
activity is the activity multiplier, S is the specific 
dynamic action, SDA is the proportion of 
assimilated energy lost to specific dynamic action, 
C is the specific consumption rate 
-1 -1
(g prey·g fish ·d ) and F is the specific egestion 
-1 -1
 
rate (g prey·g fish ·d ).  The subscript R on the 
 
parameters refers to the respiration process.  The 
Fig. 2.1.3 Example of the Thornton and 
-1 -1
coefficient 5.258 converts g O ·g fish ·d into  
2
Lessem (1978) temperature adjustment curve from 
-1 -1
g prey·g fish ·d using the conversion 
Figure 2.1.2 as a result of changing te2 from 9, 12, 
 
15, 18. 
(2.1.7) 
 
⎛ ⎞ ⎛ ⎞
13560 joules 1 cal 2580 joules 1 cal
⎜ ⋅ ⎟ ÷ ⎜ ⋅ ⎟ = 5.258g zoop / g(O )
2
⎜ ⎟ ⎜ ⎟
gO 4.18 joules g zoop 4.18 joules
⎝ 2 ⎠ ⎝ ⎠
 
 
The temperature dependence function for 
respiration is a simple exponential relationship 
given by 
 
() c ⋅T
R
(2.1.8) f (T ) = e  
R
 
where c approximates the Q (the rate at which 
R 10
the function increases over relatively low water 
temperatures). 
 
 
Activity is a power function of body weight 
 
conditioned on water temperature and is given by 
Fig. 2.1.4 Plot of the consumption, temperature 
 
and weight relationships from equation 2.1.2. 
() d ⋅U
R
 (2.1.9) activity = e  
Respiration 
 
-1
 
where U is swimming speed in cm·s and d is a 
R
The respiration or metabolic rate is dependent on 
coefficient relating swimming speed to 
body weight, ambient temperature and activity 
metabolism.  Swimming speed is calculated as a 
(swimming speed).  Total metabolic rate is 
function of body weight and temperature using 
estimated by adding the costs of respiration to the 
 
b () c ⋅T
costs of digestion, specific dynamic action (SDA). 
A A
(2.1.10) U = a ⋅W ⋅ e  
A
 
 
Metabolism is modeled as  
where a 3.9, b = 0.13 and c =0.149 if T <9.0 °C 
A= A A
 
and a 15.0, b = 0.13 and c =0.0.      if T  ≥9.0 °C 
A= A A
b
R
(2.1.5) R = a ⋅W ⋅ f (T ) ⋅ activity ⋅5.258 
R R
 
(2.1.6) S = SDA⋅() C − F 
Figure 2.1.5 shows the three dimensional 
relationship between respiration, water 
 
temperature and fish weight. 
where R is resting respiration (i.e. standard 
-1 -1
 
metabolism) in (g O ·g fish ·d ), W is wet weight 
2
83
-1 -1
(C , g prey·g fish ·d ) using 
j
n
(2.1.13) C = C 
r ∑ j
j=1
PD ⋅ v
ij ij
C ⋅
MAX
K
ij
(2.1.14) C =  
j
n
PD ⋅ v
ik ik
1+
∑
K
k =1
ik
 
where C , which is dependent on the weight of 
MAX
an individual fish and water temperature, is the 
-1 -1
consumption rate (g prey·g fish ·d ) of individual 
 
herring i from equation 2.1.3, PD is the density of 
 ij
3
prey type j (g wet weight/m ), v is the 
Fig. 2.1.5 Relationship between standard ij
vulnerability of prey type j to herring i 
respiration, weight and temperature from equation 
(dimensionless), and K is the half saturation 
2.1.5. ij
3
constant (g wet weight/m ) for individual herring i 
 
feeding on prey type k (k=1, 2, … j, … n).  
Egestion and excretion 
Because the herring model is tracking one fish, 
 
there is only one predator. 
Egestion (F, fecal waste) and excretion (E, 
 
nitrogenous waste) can be computed as a constant 
A total of three prey types are represented in the 
proportion of consumption. 
current fish model, microzooplankton, copepods 
 
and euphausids.  The prey densities are read in 
(2.1.11) F = a ⋅ C 
F
from the NEMURO model (µmole N/liter) and 
(2.1.12) E = a ⋅() C − F 3 
E
converted to g wet weight/m using the conversion 
 
 
−6 3
where a and a are constant proportions of 
14 g N 1.0e g 1g dry weight 1g wet weight 1.0e liters
F E
⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅
3
mole N g 0.07g N dry weight 0.2g dry weight m
consumption for egestion and excretion 
 
respectively.  The subscript F and E on the  
parameters refers to the egestion and excretion In Figure 2.1.7, the time-dependent solution to the 
process. NEMURO model for the three prey groups at the 
 Station P location is shown.  These data were used 
Multispecies feeding functional response to drive herring consumption using the multiple 
 species functional response model. 
In most cases realized consumption is calculated  
by adjusting C from equation 2.1.2 by p, and In the situation when there are multiple prey types, 
MAX
this would be sufficient if there were only one Figure 2.1.6 becomes more difficult to graphically 
prey type by using a Type II functional response represent.  Figures 2.1.8 to 2.1.11 represent 
equation (Fig. 2.1.6).  When there are multiple equations 2.1.13 and 2.1.14 for various parameter 
prey types, realized consumption depends on prey values.   
densities, vulnerability of each prey item to  
herring (the predator), and half-saturation In Figure 2.1.8, we represent fish consumption of 
constants governing the rate of herring saturation.  three prey types from the NEMURO LTL model 
A Type II functional response equation for (small zooplankton, large zooplankton and 
multiple prey types (after Rose et al. 1999) is used predatory zooplankton) as stacked bars, where the 
to compute realized daily consumption of each height of the bar is cumulative consumption from 
-1 -1
herring i ( C, g prey·g fish ·d ) and the equation 2.1.13, and the colored segments within a 
r
consumption of each prey type j  bar represent the consumption of each prey type. 
 
84
µµµ
Figure 2.1.8, the vulnerability parameter for small 
zooplankton was varied from 0.0 to 1.0, while 
keeping the vulnerability parameter for large 
zooplankton and predatory zooplankton equal to 
1.0 and using the parameters at the left of the 
figure in equations 2.1.13 and 2.1.14.  In the 
middle panel, just the vulnerability for large 
zooplankton was varied from 0.0 to 1.0, while 
a⋅ x
FR=
holding the vulnerabilities for small zooplankton 
b+ x
and predatory zooplankton at 1.0.  In the bottom 
a =10
panel, only the vulnerability for predatory 
b =100
zooplankton was varied from 0.0 to 1.0. 
 
These results show that, for the prey whose 
vulnerability is changing (let us call it the target 
prey type), the contribution of the target prey type 
 
to total consumption ranges from 0.0 at 0.0 
 
vulnerability, gradually increases as vulnerability 
Fig. 2.1.6 Type II functional response 
increases, until a vulnerability of 1.0, where its 
describing the theoretical relationship between 
contribution to total consumption is exactly one 
available food density and feeding rate when there 
third.  Also total consumption gradually increases 
is just one prey type. 
as the proportion of the target prey type increases 
 
with increasing vulnerability to the predator.   
 
Also note that the right-most bar in each panel is 
the same (height and contribution of each prey 
type) when vulnerability is 1.0 for all prey types. 
 
Using Figure 2.1.8 as a base case, Figure 2.1.9 
shows the change when the half saturation 
constant for large zooplankton (K ) is changed 
2
from 100.0 to 10.0.  Now each panel in Figure 
2.1.9 is similar to the corresponding panel in 
Figure 2.1.8 (the base case), except that large 
zooplankton make up the bulk of total 
consumption regardless of which prey types 
vulnerability is changed. 
 
 
Now using Figure 2.1.9 as a base case, Figure 
 
2.1.10 shows the change when the density of 
Fig. 2.1.7 NEMURO model output showing 
predatory zooplankton (PD ) is changed from 2.0 
3
time-dependent dynamics of small, large and 
to 4.8.  Now each panel in Figure 2.1.10 is similar 
predatory zooplankton. 
to the corresponding panel in Figure 2.1.9, except 
 
that the contribution of predatory zooplankton to 
The parameters at the left of the figure were used 
total consumption is higher in each case.  Also, the 
in equations 2.1.13 and 2.1.14.  For each panel 
height of each bar (total consumption) is higher in 
within a figure, the vulnerability of one prey type 
Figure 2.1.10 compared to Figure 2.1.19. 
was changed from 0 to 1, while keeping all other 
 
parameters the same and assigning the 
Figure 2.1.11 shows the results of the mutispecies 
vulnerability parameter for the remaining two prey 
feeding functional response for the parameter 
type to 1.0.  For example, in the top panel of 
values used in the herring application. 
85
  
PD =2.0 PD =2.0 
1 1
PD =2.0 PD =2.0 
2 2
PD =2.0 PD =4.8 
3 3
=2.5 =2.5 
C C
MAX MAX
    
K =100.0 K =100.0 
1 1
K =100.0 K =10.0 
2 2
K =100.0 K =100.0 
3 3
 
 
 
 
Fig.2.1.10 An example of the multispecies 
Fig. 2.1.8 An example of the mutispecies 
functional response formulation (equations 2.1.13 
functional response formulation (equations 2.1.13 
and 2.1.14) for three prey groups, varying the 
and 2.1.14) for three prey groups, varying the 
vulnerability of the target prey group one at a time, 
vulnerability of the target prey group one at a time. 
changing the half saturation constant for prey 
 
group 2 (K ) from 100.0 to 10.0, and changing the 
2
density of prey group 3 (PD ) from 2.0 to 4.8. 
3
 
 
PD =2.0 
1
PD =2.0 
2
 
PD =2.0 
3
PD =1.8 
1
C =2.5 
MAX
PD =0.8 
2
  
PD =4.8 
3
K =100.0 
1
C =2.5 
MAX
K =10.0 
2
  
K =100.0 
3
K =100.0 
1
K =10.0 
2
K =100.0 
3
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2.1.9 An example of the multispecies 
Fig. 2.1.11 An example of the multispecies 
functional response formulation (equations 2.1.13 
functional response formulation (equations 2.1.13 
and 2.1.14) for three prey groups, varying the 
and 2.1.14) for three prey groups, varying the 
vulnerability of the target prey group one at a time, 
vulnerability of the target prey group one at a time 
and changing the half saturation constant for prey 
using the parameters in the herring model.  
group 2 (K ) from 100.0 to 10.0. 
2
 
 
 
account for time, and 2) the way NEMURO 
Linking a fish bioenergetics model to the 
generates phytoplankton and zooplankton densities 
NEMURO LTL model 
(mole N/liter), and the way the fish 
 
bioenergeticsmodel expects phytoplankton and 
The NEMURO LTL model and the fish 
zooplankton densities (µmole N/liter).  These 
bioenergetics model were developed 
differences are presented in Table 2.1.1. 
independently.  Linking the two models involves 
Reconciling these differences requires the use of 
paying close attention and reconciling two 
several conversion coefficients, which can be seen 
important differences:  1) the way the two models  
in the code presented in Appendices 4 and 5. 
 
86
Table 2.1.1 Ways in which NEMURO and the where they influence the consumption term of the 
fish bioenergetics model account for time and LTL bioenergetics governing equation 2.1.1.  The 
densities. models are run sequentially and there is no 
 feedback between the two models.  
Model Time LTL Density   
NEMURO seconds mole N/liter 
In the dynamic linkage (Fig 2.1.13), the models 
Fish Bioenergetics day µ mole N/liter 
are run simultaneously, the zooplankton prey 
 
groups contribute to the consumption term of the 
fish bioenergetics governing equation 2.1.1, the 
Linking the fish bioenergetics model to NEMURO 
ZOOS, ZOOL, and ZOOP state variables of 
can be done in two ways.  In a static linkage (Fig 
NEMURO are reduced by the amount eaten by 
2.1.12), the NEMURO model is run and a time 
herring, fish excretion waste is added to the 
series of small, large and predatory zooplankton 
nitrogen pool of NEMURO, and fish egestion 
abundances are stored in an output file and used as 
waste is added to the DOM pool of NEMURO.  
an input file for the fish bioenergetics model 
Fish Model Fish Model 
1 dW
1 dW
=[] C − (R + SDA+ F + E)
=[] C−(R+SDA+F +E)
W dt
W dt
Run NEMURO, NEMURO Small 
NEMURO Small 
save output file of 
Zooplankton 
NEMURO NH4 
Zooplankton 
Small, Lg and Pred 
NEMURO Large 
Zoop and use to 
NEMURO PON
NEMURO Large 
Zooplankton 
drive fish model 
Zooplankton 
NEMURO Predatory 
NEMURO Predatory 
Zooplankton 
Zooplankton 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2.1.12 Example of a static linkage between 
Fig. 2.1.13 Example of a dynamic linkage 
NEMURO and the bioenergetics fish model. between NEMURO and the bioenergetics fish 
model..
 
Table 2.1.2 Summary of parameter values used in the generalized herring bioenergetics model from 
Rudstam (1988). 
Symbol  Parameter description      Value 
Consumption, C 
MAX
a  Intercept for C at (te1+te3)/2     0.642 
C MAX
b  coefficient for C versus weight    -0.256 
C MAX
a b
te1  Temperature for xk1 (in ºC)     1  1   
a b 
te2  Temperature for xk2 (in ºC)     15 13 
a a  
te3  Temperature for xk3 (in ºC)     17 15 
a b 
te4  Temperature for xk4 (in ºC)     25 23 
xk1  Proportion of C at te1     0.10 
MAX
xk2  Proportion of C at te2     0.98 
MAX
xk3  Proportion of C at te3     0.98 
MAX
xk4  Proportion of C at te4     0.01 
MAX
 
Metabolism, R  
a  Intercept for R       0.0033 
R
b  Coefficient for R versus weight     -0.227 
R
c Coefficient for R versus temperature    0.0548 
R  
d Coefficient for R versus swimming speed   0.03 
R  
S  Coefficient for Specific Dynamic Action    0.175 
87
Table 2.1.2 (cont.) 
 
Symbol  Parameter description      Value 
Swimming Speed, U 
a  Intercept U (< 9 ºC) (in cm/s)     3.9 
A
a  Intercept U ( ≥ 9 ºC) (in cm/s)     15.0 
A
b   Coefficient U versus weight     0.13 
A
c   Coefficient U versus temperature (< 9 ºC)   0.149 
A
c   Coefficient U versus temperature ( ≥ 9 ºC)   0.0 
A
 
Egestion and Excretion, F and E 
a  Proportion of consumed food egested    0.16 
F
a  Proportion of consumed food excreted    0.10 
E
 
a - values for age 0 and 1herring 
b - values for age 2 and older herring 
 
 
2.2 Review of Clupeid biology with emphasis on energetics 
 
 
Robert A. Klumb  
Department of Natural Resources, Cornell Biological Field Station, Cornell University, 900 Shackelton 
Point Road, Bridgeport, NY 13030, U.S.A.  E-mail:  rak11@cornell.edu  
 
The general bioenergetics model based on the Law Maximum consumption rates are determined in 
of Thermodynamics balances all consumed energy laboratory experiments by feeding fish a known 
as follows:  G = C – R – F – U, where G=growth, (by weight) ad libitum ration and then subtracting 
C=consumption, R=metabolism (respiration), uneaten food after a specified time interval.  For 
F=egestion, and U=excretion.  Consumed energy adult alewife Alosa pseudoharengus, the specific 
is first allocated to costs of metabolism and waste slope for weight dependence on maximum 
losses with the remainder available for somatic consumption was -0.3 (Stewart and Binkowski 
growth.  Energy lost by the gametes released 1986), a value intermediate to that found in studies 
during spawning can also be included.  Formulas of larval and juvenile clupeids (De Silva and 
and parameters provided below for the individual Balbontin 1974; Theilacker 1987).  The specific 
components in the bioenergetics model follow the weight-dependent slope (CB) for maximum 
terminology and symbols used in Hansen et al. consumption of northern anchovy Engraulis 
(1997).  Energy equivalent conversion factors for mordax larvae (wet weight < 0.001 g) re-
oxygen consumption, carbohydrates, fats, and calculated from data in Theilacker (1987) was 
protein can be found in Elliott and Davison -0.367, while the slope for Atlantic herring (wet 
(1975), with additional comments on the weight 8 – 15 g) was -0.256 (De Silva and 
oxycalorific coefficient found in Brett (1985). Balbontin 1974).  Rudstam (1988) used the slope 
 and intercept derived by De Silva and Balbontin 
Consumption (1974) in the bioenergetics model for adult 
 Atlantic herring Clupea harengus consumption.  
Consumption (C) = C *P-value*f(T) and Due to a lack of data for larval and juvenile fishes, 
max
CB 
C =CA*W the same relations for maximum consumption of 
max
 
adult herring and alewives were applied to age-0 
-1 -1
Consumption (g prey·g ·d ), is generally modeled fish by Arrhenius (1998a) and Klumb et al. (in 
as an allometric (power) function of weight. review), respectively. 
  
88
The “P-value” in the bioenergetics model refers to standard metabolism is the minimum energy 
the proportion of maximum consumption.  This requirements needed by a fish at rest (also known 
value is used to fit the bioenergetics model to as basal metabolism), and it is this metabolic state 
observed growth or can be set constant to check that is used in bioenergetics models.  Measuring 
resultant growth potential in varied environments. standard metabolism is difficult and requires use 
 of anesthetized fish or fish with movements 
Temperature dependence of consumption is confined by small respirometers.  Routine 
usually modeled as simple or modified exponential metabolism includes normal spontaneous activity, 
functions (Hansen et al. 1997).  For cool- and while active metabolism includes the cost for 
cold-water species, the temperature dependence of activity above the spontaneous activity level.  
consumption is generally modeled using a curve Winberg (1956) stated that active metabolism was 
proposed by Thorton and Lessem (1978), which approximately twice standard metabolism (i.e. the 
modified the logistic equation.  This function is “Winberg multiplier” of 2).  However, Ware 
the product of two intersecting sigmoid curves (1975) indicated active metabolism could range 
(one ascending and one descending) forming a from 2 to 3 times standard rates.  Bioenergetics 
“humped” curve across the entire temperature models generally use allometric function 
range inhabited by a given species.   parameters derived for standard metabolism 
 multiplied by a temperature function and an 
Required parameters include the approximate activity factor to estimate total respiration costs. 
temperatures for optimum consumption, and the  
-1 -1
high and low temperatures where consumption is Respiration (g oxygen·g ·d ) of adult fishes 
dramatically reduced (~98%) compared to generally scales negatively with weight (i.e. 
maximum consumption.  Any temperatures negative slope), and ranges from -0.25 to -0.15 on 
derived from laboratory or field data showing a weight specific basis (Winberg 1956).  For 
maximum or reduced consumption levels can be clupeids, slopes of the metabolism-weight 
used.  If specific data relating consumption and relations ranged from -0.19 to -0.28 for Atlantic 
temperature are lacking, the optimum of menhaden Brevoortia tyrannus (Hettler 1976),  
consumption is generally equated to the fish’s -0.215 for alewife (Stewart and Binkowski 1986), 
thermal optimum for growth (Beitinger and and -0.227 for Atlantic herring (De Silva and 
Balbontin 1974).  Rudstam (1988) used -0.227 in 
Magnuson 1979), and the temperatures where 
consumption is dramatically reduced are derived the adult Atlantic herring bioenergetics model, and 
from the thermal tolerances (survival limits) of a this value was also applied to age-0 herring (Kerr 
species. and Dickie 1985;  Arrhenius 1998a).  The slope 
 for the metabolism-weight relation of Maurolicus 
Metabolism/respiration muelleri, a mesopelagic planktivore, was -0.15 
 (Ikeda 1996). 
Total metabolism = Respiration + specific  
dynamic action (SDA) The relation of respiration to weight of fishes has 
 
been found to change ontogentically, with 
where isometric (mass independent) relations for larvae 
 switching to negative allometries in adults (Post 
RB
Respiration (R) = RA*W * f(T)*Activity and and Lee 1996).  However, the variability of slopes 
RQ*T 
f(T) = e found in the review of 31 species by Post and Lee 
 (1996) highlighted the need to derive weight-
Metabolism of fishes is determined by measuring metabolism relations for the larvae of individual 
oxygen consumption at various temperatures over species.  The final weight-metabolism relation 
a known time period, and generally modeled as an derived likely depends on the range of fish sizes 
allometric function of weight and an exponential used.  Studies of larval fishes encompassing 
function of temperature.  Brett and Groves (1979) greater than three orders of magnitude in weight 
distinguished three types of metabolism in fishes: documented isometric relations between 
standard, routine and active.  By definition, metabolism and weight for Clupeidae (Klumb et 
89
al., in review), Cyprinidae (Kamler 1972), and simple constant, i.e. the “activity multiplier = 2” of 
Scombridae (Giguère et al. 1988). Winberg (1956), can be used to accord increased 
 (aerobic) metabolic costs due to swimming.  
Specific dynamic action (SDA) Exponential functions have been used to model 
 activity costs of adult alewife (Stewart and 
SDA = SDA*(C – F) Binkowski 1986) and Atlantic herring (Rudstam 
 1988).  The exponential model is composed of 
Specific dynamic action, or more appropriately three components: 1) VEL which is the weight 
termed “apparent specific dynamic action” and dependence of swimming speed (cm/s), 2) the 
also known as the “heat increment”, is the energy temperature (T) dependence of swimming speed 
allocated to the digestive processes of food, (BACT), and 3) the relation of respiration to 
principally deamination of proteins but also swimming speed (RTO).  The parameter ACT is 
includes energy costs of absorption, transportation 
the intercept (cm/s) for a 1-g fish at 0°C.  
and deposition of food (Beamish 1974).  Oxygen 
Swimming speed can change from temperature 
consumption by fasting and fed fish in flow-
dependence to independence (at T = RTL).  
through respirometers (where the fish is subjected 
Swimming speeds of Atlantic herring were only 
to a known level of activity, i.e., forced to swim 
dependent on weight at temperatures > 9°C 
against a known current) is required to measure 
(Rudstam 1988), and alewife swimming speeds 
SDA (Beamish and Trippel 1990).  Beamish and 
were independent at > 15°C. (Stewart and 
Trippel (1990) found that SDA increased with 
Binkowski 1986)  
meal size and body weight but declined with 
 
weight at fixed rations.  However, in most 
The coefficient for swimming speed dependence 
bioenergetic models, SDA is considered a constant 
of metabolism (RTO) used in the adult alewife 
proportion of ingested energy with values for adult 
model was assumed constant (RTO = 0.03) and 
fish ranging from 10-29% (reviewed by Beamish 
based on data in Muir and Niimi (1972).  Data for 
and Trippel 1990).  The SDA parameter in 
Cape anchovy E. capensis found that coefficients 
bioenergetics models is generally borrowed from 
before, during, and after feeding ranged from 0.01 
non-related species because proper measurement 
to 0.04 (James and Probyn 1989).  A coefficient 
requires strict laboratory experiments using 
relating respiration and swimming speed of 0.03 
specialized equipment.  For adult alewife (Stewart 
has also been reported for adult menhaden (Durbin 
and Binkowski 1986) and adult Atlantic herring 
et al. 1981), and the coefficient for adult 
(Rudstam 1988), SDA was assumed to be 17.5% 
coregonids was 0.02 (Dabrowski 1985).  However, 
based on data for aholehole Kuhlia sandvicensis 
the coefficient relating respiration rate to 
(Muir and Niimi 1972).  Arrhenius (1998a) 
swimming speed increased substantially in larval 
lowered SDA to 15% for age-0 Atlantic herring.  
coregonids (Dabrowski 1986) and cyprinids 
Larval clupeids have been found to assimilate food 
(Kaufmann 1990);  therefore, a constant relating 
more efficiently than adults (Kiørboe et al. 1987).  
metabolic cost to swimming speed is inappropriate 
In energetic terms, Kiørboe et al. (1987) estimated 
for early life stages.  Using an exponential activity 
SDA for larval Atlantic herring to be 10% of 
function and a constant relating swimming speed 
assimilated rations, and Limburg (1994) calculated 
to oxygen consumption resulted in essentially no 
the mean SDA for American shad Alosa 
energetic costs for the activity of YOY alewife 
sapidissima juveniles to be 13%. 
(Klumb et al., in review). 
 
 
Activity 
How to best model the activity costs of larval fish 
 
is uncertain since existing data from the few 
RTO*VEL
Activity = e ,  
studies relating metabolism and swimming speeds 
RK4 
where VEL = RK1*W for T ≥ RTL 
at early life stages are equivocal.  Because the 
RK4 BACT*T
or VEL = ACT*W *e when T < RTL 
slope of metabolism versus swimming speed 
 
varied with body size, Dabrowski et al. (1988) 
The energetic cost of activity is generally 
found active metabolic rates of coregonids to be  
considered a multiple of standard metabolism.  A 
5 - 50 times standard metabolism.  A size-effect on 
90
the slope for the metabolism-swimming speed temperature and ration (Elliott 1976a).  However, 
relation also existed for larvae of two cyprinid Stewart and Binkowski (1986) found small 
species (Kaufmann 1990);  however, ratios of changes in estimated consumption when making 
routine metabolism to standard metabolism were the simplified assumption of egestion being a 
low (< 1.5) and essentially flat from 0.005 - 0.300 constant proportion of consumption in the 
g (wet weight).  In Kaufmann’s (1990) study, bioenergetics model for alewife. 
ratios of active to routine metabolism (i.e., the  
factorial scope) ranged from 2 - 4.  These The proportion of consumption egested has been 
contrasting results may lie in the function chosen found to be low in larval and juvenile clupeids 
to describe the metabolism-swimming speed 
(Kiørboe et al. 1987; Limburg 1994).  Arrhenius 
relation, i.e., exponential (Dabrowski 1986; (1998) used 16%, the value from the adult Atlantic 
Dabrowski et al. 1988) or allometric (Kaufmann herring (Rudstam 1988) and alewife (Stewart and 
1990).  However, using an exponential model, Binkowski 1986) models for the proportion of 
Wieser and Forstner (1986) found the ratios of assimilated ration egested by larval Atlantic 
active to routine metabolism for larvae of three herring.  Both Kiørboe et al. (1987) and Limburg 
cyprinid species ranged from 1 - 4 and were (1994) found the percentage of food egested was 
independent of weight (0.01 - 0.3 g wet) and 10% (by mass).  However, Klumpp and von 
Westernhagen (1996) found egestion for Atlantic 
temperature (12 - 24°C).  Activity rates of fishes 
herring larvae age 8 - 33 days averaged 17.6% 
can also vary widely with growth rate and food 
(range 13.4 - 25.6%) of ration (Artemia sp. 
density (Ware 1975), while laboratory 
measurements of metabolism during activity may nauplii) energy content.   
 
be higher than actual costs in the wild, since larvae 
Based on the above three studies on larval and 
are also passively moved by water currents.  
Klumb et al. (in review) used routine metabolism juvenile clupeids (Kiørboe et al. 1987; Limburg 
1994; Klumpp and von Westernhagen 1996), 
parameters without an activity multiplier in a 
Klumb et al. (in review) chose 0.125 as a first 
bioenergetics model for age-0 alewife. 
 approximation for the proportion of consumption 
egested by larval and juvenile alewife.  
Clupeids have pronounced changes in activity 
 
patterns possibly due to circadian rhythms (Katz 
1978; Batty 1987).  Clupeids do not swim in Excretion 
 
schools during darkness (Limburg 1994).  
Excretion (U) = UA*(C – F) 
Accuracy of bioenergetic estimates of herring 
 
consumption were improved when including diel 
Excretion is modeled as a constant proportion of 
feeding cycles (Arrhenius 1998a). 
assimilation (consumption minus egestion).  In the 
 
adult alewife (Stewart and Binkowski 1986) and 
Egestion 
Atlantic herring models (Rudstam 1988), excretion 
 
was assumed to be 10% of assimilation based on 
Egestion (F) = FA*C 
rates measured for brown trout (Elliott 1976b). 
 
 
Egestion is modeled as a constant proportion of 
consumption.  Assimilation efficiency (in terms of Few studies on larval fish excretion have been 
conducted.  For three species, Blennius pavo, 
energy) of adult menhaden ranged from 86 to 92% 
plaice Pleuronectes platesssa, and Atlantic 
(Durbin and Durbin 1981).  In the adult alewife 
(Stewart and Binkowski 1986) and Atlantic herring, Klumpp and von Westernhagen (1996) 
found the mean percent of the assimilated ration 
herring models (Rudstam 1988), egestion was 
excreted was 6.0, 6.6 and 10.7%, respectively.  
assumed to be 16% of consumption.   
 Due to high mortality for Atlantic herring larvae in 
Klumpp and von Westernhagen’s study, Klumb et 
Data for egestion processes and models are not 
al. (in review) used the average value of 7.8% for 
common; most extensive studies have been done 
for brown trout Salmo trutta (Elliot 1976a, 1976b).  all three species as a first approximation of the 
Egestion has been found to be a function of 
91
percent of assimilation excreted by larval and activity of clupeids may be lower at night (Katz 
juvenile alewife. 1978), filter feeders can still feed in darkness 
 (Hettler 1976; Janssen and Brandt 1980; Grabe 
Data requirements 1996). 
  
There are four data requirements for the Feeding activity of larval herring has been found 
bioenergetics model: 1) diet (in proportions of to be dependent on densities of copepod nauplii 
prey types), 2) energy density of the predator fish, (Munk and Kiorboe 1985) with success a function 
3) energy density of the prey, and 4) water of prey size (Hunter and Blaxter 1982).  Atlantic 
temperatures.  The bioenergetics model is an 
herring (length 25 mm) larvae were able to 
individual based model but can incorporate 
consume prey sizes ≥ 1.0 mm (Sherman and 
populations by multiplying mean weight by 
Honey 1971, cited in Hunter and Blaxter 1982).  
population number. 
Foraging behavior of Altantic herring larvae 
 
changed with prey size and was related to larval 
Diet 
length by the equation:  prey length = 0.027*larval 
 
length (Munk 1992), and attack success was 
Diet information was summarized by Douglas E. 
directly related to relative prey size.  Fiksen and 
Hay (Pacific Biological Station, Fisheries and 
Folkford (1999) included the mouth size of herring 
Oceans Canada) based on recent observations 
larvae, perception (visual field and reaction 
(Hay and McCarter 2001, and older literature such 
distance), light intensity, and the length, width and 
as Wailes 1936).  Depending on the population, 
density of plankton prey when modeling encounter 
herring diets can be simple or complicated.  The 
rates and probabilities of successful strikes. 
simple story is that herring eat mainly copepod 
 
eggs and nauplii as larvae, copepod adults and 
Energy density of predator and prey 
nauplii as juveniles and euphausiids as adults.  
 
This over-simplified` story gets messy when the 
Energy density, also called caloric content and 
smaller, non-migratory marginal populations are energy content, in bioenergetics models is used in 
examined because they appear to eat a wider 
terms of wet weight.  Dry-weight data are 
variety of taxa.  Herring feed intensely in the 
customarily converted (approximated) to wet 
summer months but they also eat during winter.  In weight assuming dry weight is 10 - 20% of total 
all areas, winter diets, although small in relation to 
weight.  Hartman and Brandt (1995) provided 
total annual consumption, may be more variable 
many equations for estimating energy density from 
than summer diets.  Perhaps the main point to 
the percent dry weight of various marine and 
emphasize, however, is that in southern British 
freshwater fish species.  Assuming constant 
Columbia, most herring feed in shelf waters where 
energy densities or using values that are too high 
the main food items are euphausiids.  Atlantic 
or low can greatly affect bioenergetics model 
herring and sprat Sprattus sprattus diets consisted 
consumption estimates (Stewart and Binkowski 
of 70 - 73% copepods, 12 - 14% Oikopleura, and 9 
1986). 
- 12% cladocerans (De Silva 1973). 
 
 
Energy density (ED) of clupeids has been found to 
Adult clupeids feed by filtering or particulate vary seasonally, peaking in fall and declining 
feeding (Blaxter and Hunter 1982;  Janssen 1976).   
through winter (Arrhenius and Hansson 1996; 
Janssen (1976) found for alewives that the filter 
Flath and Diana 1985;  Paul et al. 1998).  Age-0 
feeding mode displayed by large alewives (total EDs are lower than older fish (Arrhenius and 
lengths > 170 mm) was not size-selective, while 
Hansson 1996; Flath and Diana 1985;  Paul et al. 
particulate feeders (total lengths 50 - 115 mm) 
1998).  For age-1 alewife in Lake Michigan, ED in 
-1
selected zooplankton > 1.0 mm.  Transition of June and July was 4520 J·g , increased in August 
larvae to adult body morphology and feeding 
and September to 4729 and 5440, respectively, 
modes occurs at metamorphosis (~35 mm) after 
then declined to 4729 in April, and 4436 by May 
gill rakers and the upper and lower jaws become 
(Flath and Diana 1985).  For age-0 Atlantic 
developed (Blaxter and Hunter 1982).  Although 
herring, Arrhenius and Hansson (1996) found ED 
92
-1 -1
increased from 2600 J·g in mid-July to 4500 J·g December to the end of January (Paul and Paul 
in October.  The ED of age-0 Baltic Sea sprat 1998b). 
-1
increased from 4000 J·g in August to  
-1
approximately 5250 J·g by December (Arrhenius Energy densities of freshwater and marine 
-1
1998b).  October ED of alewife was 5020 J·g invertebrates can be found in Cummins and 
(Flath and Diana 1985). Wuycheck (1971), while good tables of the caloric 
 content of marine invertebrates (with references) 
Higher energy densities were found for Pacific are presented in Foy and Norcross (1999) and Foy 
herring off Alaska (Paul et al. 1998;  Foy and Paul and Paul (1999).  Laurence (1976) provides energy 
1999) compared to Great Lakes alewives and densities for marine calanoid copepods in the 
Baltic Sea clupeids.  Age 2+ Pacific herring had Atlantic.  Like fish, the energy density for 
-1
EDs in fall that ranged from 9400 to 10200 J·g invertebrates has been found to vary seasonally. 
-1
and declined over winter to 5200 to 6300 J·g by  
spring.  Females had higher energy densities in  
-1
both seasons than males by 200 - 400 J·g .  Age-0 Table 2.2.1 Energy densities (jouls/gram) for 
-1
herring had EDs of 5700 J·g in fall which main food items of Pacific herring. 
-1
declined to 4400 J·g by the following spring  
-1
(Paul et al. 1998).  Equations to predict ED from Food Item J·g 
standard length of juveniles by month are provided 
Copepoda 2580 
in Paul and Paul (1998a).  The ED for age-0 
Euphausiids (per gram wet weight) 5020 
-1 -1
captive fasting herring declined 23 J·g ·d from 
Fish eggs (per gram wet weight) 4520 
 
Table 2.2.2 Existing bioenergetic models. 
 
Reference Comments 
General models 
Winberg 1956 extensive early work but reference not that accessible 
Kitchell et al. 1974 results of International Biological Program (IBP) workshops and first 
paper of the “Wisconsin” bioenergetics model – applied to bluegill sunfish 
(Lepomis macrochirus) in terms of mass balance 
Elliott 1976b; 1979 general review of energetics resulting from his extensive work with brown 
trout (Salmo trutta) 
 
Stewart et al. 1983 changed the Kitchell et al. 1974 model from mass to energy balance, for 
lake trout (Salvelinus namaycush) 
Clupeid bioenergetics models 
Rudstam 1988 Adult Atlantic herring (Clupea harengus) 
Kerr and Dickie 1985 Age-0 Atlantic herring 
Arrhenius 1998 Age-0 Atlantic herring 
Fiksen and Folkford 1999 Larval Atlantic herring– Individual based model, which includes 
metabolism, ingestion, prey encounter success, and multiple prey 
functional response 
Stewart and Binkowski Adult alewife (Alosa pseudoharengus) 
1986 
Hewett and Stewart 1989 Age-0 alewife: (only temperatures for the consumption component 
differed from the adult model) 
Klumb et al. In review Age-0 alewife 
Durbin and Durbin 1983 Adult menhaden (Breoortia tyrannus):– in terms of energy and Nitrogen 
93
2.3 Reflections of factors affecting size-at-age and strong year classes of 
herring in the North Pacific 
 
Douglas E. Hay 
Pacific Biological Station, Fisheries and Oceans Canada, 3190 Hammond Bay Road, Nanaimo, British 
Columbia, Canada V9R 5K6.  E-mail:  hayd@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
One approach to the investigation of linkages After age 4, the relative size-at-age of individuals 
between oceanographic process and subsequent in the 1977 year-class declined, and was smaller 
impacts on marine fish populations, is than normal, which indicates that growth rate 
retrospective analyses of age-specific growth rates declined in older individuals.  This retrospective 
(size-at-age) from archive collections of scales or analysis of growth from scale analysis was 
otoliths.  This approach can be linked to corroborated by analyses of catch-sampling data, 
independent observations on (1) temporal collected routinely for the last 70 years.  The size-
variation in abundance, (2) synchrony or at-age of 3-year-old members of the 1977 year-
asynchrony of year-class strength among different class was normal in most areas in 1980, but size-
populations, or different species, and (3) habitat at-age of older individuals (e.g. age 6 fish 
requirements of life history stages (eggs, larvae, collected in 1983) was smaller than normal (Fig. 
juveniles, adults) that have different spatial and 2.3.4).   
trophic characteristics.   
 A strong 1977 year-class also occurred in several 
Widespread geographic synchrony sometimes other species, including blackcod and lingcod 
occurs in Pacific herring (Hollowed and Wooster (Hollowed and Wooster 1995).  Climate-related 
1995, Hay et al. 2001).  An exceptionally strong changes, but not necessarily increases in 
year-class occurred in 1977 over a broad and abundance, also occurred in other marine species 
geographic range (Fig. 2.3.1).  It was strong in including salmonids (Beamish et al. 1999) and 
northern BC, parts of south-eastern and central pollock Theragra chalcogrammus (Ohtani and 
Alaska and the Bering Sea (Hollowed and Azumaya 1995).  Further, there are periods when 
Wooster 1995).  This 1977 year-class developed in there has been synchrony of strong year-classes 
different populations with different spawning among different species in the North Pacific 
times, with a range of about 3 months from the (Hollowed et al. 1987), which is evidence of 
earliest to the latest mean spawning time.  Pacific environmental influence on the production of year-
herring spawn in shallow, inshore inter-and class strength.    
subtidal waters.  In many areas of the Pacific coast  
of North America, spawn deposition is monitored The habitats occupied by age 1 and 2 herring are 
and quantified annually.  Spawn deposition was mainly inshore (Haegele 1997), whereas most of 
not exceptional in 1977.  Therefore, it follows that the older age groups (age 3 and older) tend to 
in 1977, survival from eggs to the juvenile and occupy shelf waters.  During intensive summer 
recruit stage, between 1977 and 1980, was feeding periods, juvenile herring are found mainly 
relatively higher (or mortality was lower) than in shallow, nearshore waters of less that 50 m.   In 
most other years.  It also follows that the factor(s) general, age 1 juveniles occur in shallower waters, 
that promoted the strong year-class were widely 
closer to shore, than age 2 herring.  In general, 
distributed in space and time.    herring form shoals of similar-sized individuals so 
 the two larger age groups do not mix, although 
Retrospective analysis of archived herring scales both age groups of juveniles occur in the same 
(Fig. 2.3.2) from northern BC populations, vicinities, herring juveniles are widely dispersed 
indicates that individuals of the 1977 year-class through all BC coastal waters. 
were of normal size, or slightly larger than normal,  
relative to samples from other years (Fig. 2.3.3).   Over the last 70 years in British Columbia (BC), 
 herring stomachs have been examined by different 
94
people, in different years, at different places and at If lower mortality of early life history stages is 
different herring life history stages.  Wailes (1936) part of the explanation for the formation of the 
summarized the food of young herring mainly in 1977 year-class - or other year classes, why did 
the first summer of life.  At very young stages, this happen?  Presumably it must reflect decreases 
eggs (ova) and nauplii from various invertebrates in mortality by starvation, disease or predation?  In 
are most important.  Copepod nauplii seem to 1977, starvation seems unlikely, because juvenile 
dominate the food but food composition varied growth was enhanced compared to other years.  
with location.  The youngest juveniles (age 1) fed We have no evidence to suggest that disease 
mainly on copepods.  Older, larger juveniles took routinely limits survival.  Rather, outbreaks seem 
various zooplankton, with euphausiids being 
episodic, and this could explain years with 
common.  More recent work examined gut data exceptionally bad year-classes, but not the reverse.  
from herring juveniles in Georgia Strait, BC, A decrease in predation, between the egg/larval 
Hecate Strait and Prince William Sound Alaska stages and pre-recruit stage could occur if there 
(Haegele 1997, Foy and Norcross 1999, Hay and were (i) fewer predators, or (ii) if the predators 
McCarter 2001).  In general the main food for ‘switched’ or decreased predation on herring for a 
herring at ages 1 and 2 is copepods.  Therefore if different prey species.  Were predation rates on 
the abundant 1977 year-class ate mainly copepods juvenile herring lower in 1977 and 1978?  We 
at ages 1 and 2, then copepods must have been have no data on this, but we observe that some 
abundant in nearshore northern waters, both in common herring predators (lingcod and blackcod 
1977 and 1978.  From our present understanding and some piscivorous salmon) also had strong 
of herring life history, there is little opportunity for 1977 year-classes.  Therefore it seems improbable 
trophic interaction (i.e. direct density-dependent that there was a decrease in the potential 
competition for food) between age-classes:  either community of herring predators between 1977 and 
among juveniles (ages 1 versus age 2) or between 1980.   
juveniles versus adults (age 3+ and older).  In BC  
waters, probably the first opportunity for direct From the observations and reasoning above, we 
interaction occurs during the third winter of life, at conclude that the most parsimonious explanation 
age 2+, when (BC) herring start to mature sexually for the development of the strong 1977 year-class 
and join the adult stock.  At this time, however, was a general decrease in predation of juveniles 
winter feeding is minimal and growth is slight.   because the main herring predators had alternate 
 prey.  Such a reduction in predation could occur 
The observations above can be summarized as through predator switching during early life 
follows.  In 1977, and some other years, we see history stages - specifically, predators of herring 
that strong year-classes can develop over broad chose to feed on an alternate food source.  If this 
areas of time and space.  They develop in years alternate food source was an unusually abundant 
when spawn deposition is normal, and sometimes supply of copepods, available both to the juveniles 
even lower than normal.  Further, sometimes they of herring and their predators, this could explain 
can be synchronous over broad areas of time and our observations.  Specifically if predators 
space.  Synchrony may develop in other species.  preferentially switched to copepods, instead of 
Retrospective analysis of herring scales indicates herring juveniles, the consequence of a substantial 
superior juvenile growth among strong cohorts, increase in copepod availability would be both 
but decreased growth during older adult stages (in enhance survival and growth of juvenile herring.  
1977).  Strong year-classes can arise in years of  
normal or modest spawn deposition.  These If the cause(s) of the strong 1977 year-class was 
observations indicate that survival, between the similar in all geographic areas where it occurred, 
egg and recruit stages, is enhanced.  Such from northern BC to the Bering Sea, and if the 
enhanced survival must occur during the juvenile cause was from decreased predation associated 
stages that consume mainly copepods in nearshore with availability of an alternate food source, then 
habitats.  Therefore strong year-classes may clearly the factors which promoted this alternate 
develop as a consequence of changes in these 
food source were widespread.  There have been  
habitats.     
95
some suggestions (Hollowed and Wooster 1992; 
Polovina et al. 1995) that there can be such 
linkages between offshore oceanographic changes 
Alaska
and changes in productivity or food abundance on 
shelf and inshore waters, resulting from mid-gyre 
changes, but these are not well understood.  If 
there were such a relationship, the impact of an 
BC
 
Age 5 only
1977 year class
4
3
annulus 2
 
 
2
Fig. 2.3.1 Approximate locations of the strong 
annulus 1
1977 year-class, indicated by arrows.  Red arrows 
1
with dark outlines show locations where the 1977 
year-class made up 70% or more of the spawning 
67 70 71 74 75 77 79 80 82 85 88 90 92
population as age 3 in 1980, or age 4 in 1981.  
Year-class
 
Plain red and yellow arrows show populations 
 
where the 1977 year-class represented over 50% 
Fig. 2.3.3 Retrospective analyses of scale 
and 40% of the populations, respectively.       
growth of 5-year-old-herring from archived 
 collections of scales from northern BC.  Scale 
growth, corresponding to juveniles at age 1 (blue 
Annulus 2
rectangles) and age 2 (red rectangles), as estimated 
Edge
Annulus 1
from comparison of focus:  annuli distances, was 
Focus
normal in the 1977 year-class.  The 1977 year-
class is shown in yellow.  The boxes and vertical 
lines represent the range and 95% confidence 
limits about the mean.    
 
1977 year- class
250
Age 8
c b a Age 7 
200
Age 6
Age 5
Age 4
Age 3
150 Age 2
Year
 
 
 
Fig. 2.3.4 Comparison of the size-at-age of the 
 
1977 year-class with those of other years from 
Fig. 2.3.2 A herring scale, showing the focus 
catch sampling data collected in northern BC.  The 
(start of growth) and the first and second annuli. 
1977 year-class (large dark circles) was normal (or 
Retrospective indices of age-specific growth rates 
slightly larger than normal at age 2).  Thereafter, 
during the first year (green bar a) and second year 
the relative size-at-age, relative to previous year-
(yellow bar b) was determined by direct 
classes, decreased until age 8. 
measurement of scales.  
96
Median (mm) length at age
Focus to annulus1 (mm)
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
abundant production of zooplantion, specifically Vancouver Island.  Similar mechanisms 
copepods, could explain both enhanced growth mightoperate at the juvenile stages, so factors 
and year-class survival in herring and other promoting a strong year-class of herring might 
species.  There is a precedent for assuming that an also support strong year-classes of other species, 
abundant source of an alternate zooplankton prey leading to synchrony between unrelated species 
species can reduce predation on herring.  Ware such as such as blackcod and lingcod.  Again, the 
and McFarlane (1995) showed that increased answer is a tentative yes.  Both of these species 
euphausiid production resulted in a decreased hake have early life stages (first several years of life) in 
predation on adult herring off the west coast of nearshore waters. 
 
 
2.4 Review for Pacific saury (Cololabis saira) study under the VENFISH project 
 
1 1 2 3 1
Shin-ichi Ito , Yutaka Kurita , Yoshioki Oozeki , Satoshi Suyama , Hiroya Sugisaki , Yongjun 
2
 
Tian
1 
Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute, 3-27-5 Shinhamacho, Shiogama, Miyagi 985-0001, 
Japan.  E-mail:  goito@affrc.go.jp, sugisaki@mgy.affrc.go.jp 
2 
National Research Institute of Fisheries Science, 2-12-4 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, 
Kanagawa 236-8648, Japan.  E-mail:  oozeki@affrc.go.jp 
3 
Hachinohe Branch, Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute, Same, Hachinohe, Aomori 031-
0841, Japan.  E-mail:  suyama@myg.affrc.go.jp 
 
VENFISH (Comprehensive study of the Variation and in that area many eddies are detached from the 
of the oceanic ENvironment and FISH populations Kuroshio and Oyashio and make very complicated 
in the northwestern Pacific) project was started in environments.  The saury spawning starts in the 
April 1997 and will end in March 2002.  This mixed water region in autumn, moves to the 
project has been supported by Japan Agriculture Kuroshio area in winter, and moves back to the 
Forest Fisheries Agency.  The aim of this project mixed water region in spring (Fig. 2.4.1) (Odate 
is clarification of bottom-up control process for 1977; Watanabe and Lo 1989; Watanabe et al. 
Pacific saury and walleye pollock in the 1997).  Juveniles are advected to the Kuroshio 
Northwestern Pacific.  More than 20 scientists extension region, then grow and migrate to the 
from National Fisheries Research Centers at Oyashio region through the mixed water region for 
Hokkaido, Tohoku, Yokohama and Shimizu, and feeding.  After sufficient feeding they migrate 
Hokkaido University and Tohoku University back to the Kuroshio region for spawning.  On the 
joined this project. southward migration, they are fished in the 
 Japanese coastal zone.  We will briefly report the 
The VENFISH team is composed of 5 teams and new findings for Pacific saury in the later sections. 
there are primary production, zooplankton and fish  
teams.  The fish team is composed of Pacific saury Feeding habitat 
and walleye pollock groups.  Between these three  
teams there is a plankton ecosystem model team The feeding habitat of Pacific saury (Cololabis 
and a fish population model team.  In this report saira) changes according to the life stage and the 
we will note our studies of saury, which is only location.  Larvae smaller than 15 mm mainly feeds 
one portion of this project. on Oncea and Oitona sp. (Nakata and Koyama 
 2002), whereas larvae and juvenile larger than 15 
The main target area of the VENFISH project is mm prefer Calanus sp.  Young saury which 
east of 160ºE in the northwestern Pacific, and in migrate to the mixed water region mainly feed on 
that region there is a warm Kuroshio current and a Euphausia pacifica.  In the Oyashio region they 
cold Oyashio current.  Between these two western feed mainly on Euphausia pacifica and 
boundary currents, there is a mixed water region,  Neocalanus cristatus and the ration becomes the 
97
maximum in this season.  On the way of their these values and ratio of mature saury to the total, 
backward migration, they feed Euphausia pacifica they estimated the spawning density for each 
and Sagitta elegans, but the ration decreases to the season.  Their result showed that the most 
minimum.  In the spawning area they feed on important season for spawning is winter. 
calanoid copepods and the ration is higher than in  
autumn (Sugisaki and Kurita, in preparation; Larvae and juvenile 
Kurita and Sugisaki, in preparation).  
 Many studies have been done about larval and 
juvenile saury (Watanabe et al. 1997; Oozeki and 
45 Watanabe 2000; Oozeki and Watanabe, in 
Feeding ground
in summer
preparation).  Using widely sampled field data, 
Oyashio Front
Fishing ground
Watanabe et al. (1997) and Oozeki and Watanabe 
in autumn
40
(2000) estimated the production of hatched larvae 
Mixed water region
in each season since 1990 to 1997.  The average 
spawning ground
Migration
in spring & autumn
value for 8 years showed the highest value in 
35
Kuroshio Extension
autumn and the lowest value in spring.  They also 
spawning ground
estimated the growth rate and mortality of larvae 
in winter
Migration
30 and production of juveniles.  Growth rate showed 
130 135 140 145 150 155 160 165
a maximum in autumn and a minimum in spring.  
 
Mortality was highest in autumn and lowest in 
 
spring.  As a result, the production of surviving 
Fig. 2.4.1 Schematic picture of Pacific saury 
juveniles showed a maximum in spring and a 
(Cololabis saira) life history.  Spawning starts in 
minimum in autumn.  But the fluctuation of 
September and continues until June, shifting 
juvenile production in spring is very high and 
location from the mixed water region and 
stable in winter.  Watanabe et al. (1997) suggested 
Kuroshio region.  The main spawning season is 
that the stable winter juvenile might contribute to 
winter.  Juveniles are advected to the Kuroshio 
stable recruitment and middle size saury landings 
extension region and migrate to the Oyashio 
in autumn.  Also Watanabe and Lo (1989) pointed 
region through the mixed region for feeding.  
out that winter was the most active spawning 
After sufficient feeding they migrate back to the 
season using larval catch data during 1973-1986. 
Kuroshio region for spawning.  On the southward 
 
migration, they are fished in the Japanese coastal 
Oozeki and Watanabe (2000) conducted 
zone. 
laboratory incubation experiments on saury eggs.  
 
They reared same age larvae at three different 
Spawning density 
temperatures and observed growth rate.  This was 
 
done for three different age larvae (9, 20, 30 days) 
Kurita and Sugisaki (in preparation) surveyed the 
and the dependency of growth rate on age was also 
seasonal change of the saury distribution and the 
tested.  The result showed that the growth rate 
ratio of mature stage in the three regions.  In early 
increased linearly with temperature and also 
autumn, half of the saury occur in the Oyashio 
increased with age.  Analysis of the otolith 
region and they are immature.  In winter almost all 
increment and the knob length of the larvae 
of the saury are in the Kuroshio and they are 
showed the possibility of the estimation of growth 
mature.  In spring, half of the saury exist in the 
rate of saury juveniles from the otolith field data.  
Kuroshio and most of them are mature. But the 
Then, they estimated the instantaneous growth rate 
other half occurs in the mixed water region and 
from otolith field data and analyzed the 
only about 70% of them are mature.  These results 
relationship between the recent growth rate and 
show that the most important area is the Kuroshio 
oceanic environments (Oozeki and Watanabe: in 
region and the most important season is winter for 
preparation).  Their result showed that the SST 
the saury spawning. 
and food density affected larval growth during the 
 
early stages, and SST and chlorophyll become 
Kurita and Sugisaki (in preparation) estimated the 
more important in the later stage. 
spawning interval and batch fecundity.  Using 
98
Growth rate of adults hyaline zone.  According to his scenario, saury 
 which are born in the earlier season spawn in the 
Suyama et al. (in preparation) analyzed the first winter and also in the second winter.  But the 
presence of a hyaline zone in the otoliths of later spawned saury do not spawn in the first year 
Pacific saury.  Usually the size decomposition is and spawn in the second year. 
done by knob length, but sometimes it is difficult  
to divide them only from body length information.  Energy for migration and spawning  
On the other hand, the otoliths of large size saury  
have the hyaline zone whereas the small and Kurita (personal communication) analyzed 
middle sizes do not.  They analyzed the existence 
seasonal variation of lipid and protein content in 
the hyaline zone and found out that the large and 30 cm knob length saury.  The protein content did 
middle size cohort can be decomposed by the not vary much but lipid variation showed very 
boundary of 50% existence ration of hyaline zone.  large variability.  The average lipid content is 
Using this definition they decomposed the large about 40 g in summer.  In winter, which is the 
and middle cohort and analyzed the inter-annual active spawning season, mature saury contained 
variability in the growth of each cohort.  The little neutral lipid.  Moreover, protein seemed to be 
middle size fluctuated between 264 and 286 mm, utilized as energy sources because the sum of 
and the large size fluctuated between 303 and 314 protein and water content was constant.  From this 
mm, and the fluctuation was larger in the middle result he concluded that saury need to feed in 
size. order to spawn eggs in the Kuroshio region.   
  
For example, the growth increment of the large Thus, the environment may be very important for 
and middle cohort from July to November 1999, the saury reproduction in the Kuroshio region.  
was 11.3 and 19.3 mm respectively.  On the other From the energy balance between the food nutrient 
hand, they increased to 12.5 and 31.3 mm and egg production, he estimated that about 35.6% 
respectively in 2000.  This result suggests that the of total assimilated energy was used for winter egg 
growth rate of the large size cohort is more stably production in the Kuroshio. 
estimated compared to the middle size cohort.  
 Population dynamics model for Pacific saury 
Growth rate between juvenile and large size   
 Tian et al. (2002b) analyzed the interannual 
Using the hyaline zone information from the variability of the saury stock using a population 
otolith it is possible to estimate the growth rate of dynamics model.  In his model there are two 
young and adult saury, but the growth rate cohorts.  One is a cohort spawned during autumn - 
between juvenile and young saury is very difficult winter and the other is spawned during winter - 
to estimate because of the existence of the hyaline spring.  The life span of the saury was assumed to 
zone.  We cannot count the increment of the be two years, and as a result the large size saury 
otolith because the increment is unclear in the included both cohorts.  The governing equations 
hyaline zone.  So, we cannot determine the age of were growth rate, population, fishing effort and 
adult saury. reproduction equations.  In the population 
 dynamics the mortality included environmental 
For this problem, Kurita (personal  effects.  As environment factors they adapted SST 
communication) developed a new method to in the Kuroshio Extension zone (KE SST) and SOI 
estimate the hatch date from the age at which the (Southern Oscillation Index) according to the 
otolith increment width reached a second result of Tian et al. (2000a).  
maximum.  It became possible to estimate the age  
of saury using this method even if there is a The results showed that the effect of KE SST was 
hyaline zone.  He estimated the hatch date of the important to the longer-period variability, and the 
large size saury and developed a new scenario of SOI effect was important to both the longer-period 
the life history of Pacific saury combined with the 
and inter-annual variability. 
information of the growth of the saury with no  
99
Conclusion A population dynamics model was constructed 
 under VENFISH and the effect of KE SST and 
Under the VENFISH project, much has been SOI was tested.  But in that model the 
learned about Pacific saury and a new life history environment influenced only mortality.  In the 
of the saury was proposed.  But information about future we should include the environmental 
the time between the juvenile and small saury influence on production and clarify the bottom-up 
stages are still limited.  In the future more study is control mechanism of Pacific saury. 
needed on these stages. 
 
 
2.5 Formalization of interactions between chemical and biological 
compartments in the mathematical model describing the transformation of 
nitrogen, phosphorus, silicon and carbon compounds 
 
1 2
Alexander V. Leonov and Gennady A. Kantakov 
1 
Institute of Oceanology, Russian Academy of Sciences, 36 Nakhimovsky Ave., Moscow, 117851, 
Russia.  E-mail:  leonov@sio.rssi.ru  
2 
Sakhalin Research Institute of Fisheries and Oceanography, 196 Komsomolskaya St., Yuzhno-
Sakhalinsk, 693023, Russia.  E-mail:  okhotsk@sakhniro.ru  
 
In the significant part of the ecological models The simulation of processes of the substrate 
used for studying the joint dynamics of the consumption by microorganisms 
microorganism biomasses and biogenic substance  
concentrations in the natural waters, several most For the simulation of processes of the substrate 
important biological functions are formalized.   consumption by microorganisms (bacterio-, phyto- 
 and zooplankton), the equation of Michaelis-
They are connected with the consumption of Menten-Monod is traditionally used: 
biogenic substances (UP) by microorganisms,  
excretion of the metabolic products (L) by them, (2.5.2) UP = K (T, L) * C / (K + C )     
i m i
the microorganism mortality (S) and grazing (G)  
by microorganisms of higher trophic levels.  The where UP is the growth rate of the microorganism 
-1
change of the microorganism biomass in the biomass (or the substrate uptake), day ;  C is the 
i
course of time (dB/dt) in the ecological models, as concentration of concrete substratum, mg/l;  K is 
m
a rule, is represented by the following structural the Michaelis constant, mg/l;  K (T, L) is the 
equation: maximum growth rate of the microorganism 
 biomass (or the substrate uptake) corrected to the 
*
   
(2.5.1) dB / dt = (UP - L - S) * B  -  G * В temperature (T) and radiation (L) conditions in the 
 water environment, mg/(l day).  Thus, for 
here B* is the biomass of microorganisms from description of the process of the substrate uptake 
the higher trophic level, and due to grazing they by one group of microorganism (by bacterio-, 
have an influence on the development and activity phyto- or zooplankton) it is necessary to estimate 
of the considered microorganism group B;  UP, L, the values of two coefficients - K (T, L) and K .  
m
S, and G are specific rates of the biogenic Using this equation form for the description of the 
substance consumption, the metabolic product consumption of several substrata by 
excretion, the mortality of microorganisms B and microorganisms, means that the process of the 
-1
their grazing by B*, respectively (day ).   substrate uptake is described independently of 
 each other for any substrate, and in this case, the 
Biomasses B and B* are calculated in the units of values of the rate constants for the consumption of 
biogenic elements (N, P, C or Si). each substrata should be evaluated.  If the number 
 of such substrata reaches five (ammonia, nitrites, 
100
nitrates, phosphates, silicates) then the number of (2.5.4) UP = K (T, L) /(1 + В / C )  
N N
evaluated coefficients should be equal to ten.  
 where B is the biomass of the studied group of 
N
The form of equation (2.5.2) with some microorganisms, in units of N, mg N/l;  C is the 
N
modifications is used for describing the processes concentration of N fractions consumed by these 
of the substrate consumption by microorganisms microorganisms, mg N/l.  
in the models developed by PICES MODEL Task  
Team for the studying of chemical and biological If there are several N-containing substrata in the 
compartment dynamics in the marine environment.  water environment (for example, ammonia NH , 
4
However, in the marine environment, the substrate nitrites NO, and nitrates NO) and these 
2 3
concentrations are always little and therefore it is substrates are interchangeable and may be 
very difficult to describe the dynamics of the consumed by the microorganism (let us mark it as 
biomasses and substrate concentrations even for F and taking into account that the biomass is 
one season.  Frequently the very task of the expressed in units of N, it may be written as F ), 
N
simulation of the chemical and biological then the expression for C can be represented in 
N
compartment dynamics in the marine systems is a the form of the pool on N (PoolF ) for the studied 
N
rather difficult labor-consuming or even group of microorganism: 
insurmountable problem.  
 (2.5.5) PoolF = d(1) * NH4 + d(2) * NO2 + 
N
Here we present the logic of the simulation of the d(3) * NO3 
substrate consumption process by the  
microorganisms that is used for development of Here the coefficients d(i) show preferences in the 
the model describing the transformation of N, P, C consumption of each substrate by the 
and Si compounds in the polysubstrate microorganism for this N-substrates (NH , NO , 
4 2
environment (Leonov and Saposhnikov 1997).  and NO ).  Value of the coefficients d(i) for each 
3
First we shall transform the equation (2.5.2) substrate can change from 0 to 1, and their sum for 
subdividing the terms of equation in the numerator the selected set of substrata is 1. 
and the denominator on C .  As a result, we obtain  
i
the following equation: How are the values of coefficients d(i) evaluated? 
 It is known from literature that the phytoplankton 
(2.5.3) UP = K (T, L) /(1 + K / C )  consumes more preferably ammonium N than 
m i
 other mineral forms.  The nitrate N is in second 
The analysis of literature shows that the value of place.  So, in the first approximation, we can 
K in different examples of using equation (2.5.2) assign the values of the preference coefficients in 
m
for describing of processes in the natural waters the uptake of indicated substrates by the studied 
changes by 2-3 orders.  Consequently, the group of phytoplankton:  d(1) = 0.5;  d(2) = 0.2; 
convincing arguments of the application of the d(3) = 0.3.  Inserting the equation (2.5.5) into the 
equation (2.5.2) for describing the substrate equation (2.5.4), we obtain: 
consumption processes in the marine ecosystems  
is clearly insufficient (large number of coefficients (2.5.6) UP = K (T, L) /(1 +  В / PoolF )  
FN N N
for the polysubstratal environment and the large 
or  
variability of the coefficient K ).  The value of the 
m
(2.5.6a) UP = K (T, L) /(1 +  В /(d(1)*NH4 + 
coefficient K for the marine ecosystems may be 
m FN N
d(2)*NO2 + d(3)*NO3)) 
compared with the values of the microorganism 
biomasses.  Therefore we have all reasons to use,  
The general rate of the N-containing substrata 
instead of the coefficient K , the value of the 
m
consumption, UP , is composed of the rates of 
biomass in the units of biogenic element (N, P, C FN
or Si) from which biomass can be evaluated.  If the consumption of the individual substrates: 
 
the biomass is considered in N, then the equation 
(2.5.3) can be written as: (2.5.7) UP = UP + UP + UP  
FN NH4 NO2 NO3 
 
101
Let us write down the equations, which describe the water environment for the phytoplankton.  If 
the consumptions of individual substrates (NH , we want correctly describe in the model the 
4
NO and NO) by phytoplankton taking into substrate uptake processes then we should 
2 3
account that in the water environment several remember the basic Odum’s postulate that 
substrates are interchangeable on N, as indicated everything is interrelated in the natural water 
by the equation (2.5.6a).  Making elementary environment.  The requirements of phytoplankton 
algebraic conversions, we shall obtain the in P cannot be compensated by N or Si 
equations, which describe the consumption of each compounds, and vice versa.  Therefore the 
studied substrates by the phytoplankton: compounds of different biogenic elements cannot 
 be considered as interchangeable for the formation 
(2.5.8) UP = K (T, L) * d(1) * NH4 / (PoolF of the microorganism biomass and the kinetics of 
NH4 N
+ В )  the uptake substrate processes should be 
N
 formulated with point of view their mutual 
(2.5.9) UP = K (T, L) * d(2) * NO2 / (PoolF influence on each other and not their 
NO2 N
+ В )  interchangeability.  
N
  
(2.5.10) UP = K (T, L) * d(3) * NO3 / (PoolF Taking into account these reasons, let us write 
NO3 N
+ В )    down the equation (2.5.6) for the rate of biomass 
N
 growth (or the different substrate uptake) for the 
The suggested form of the description of the conditions of the combined influence of N and P 
interchangeable substrates by the microorganism compounds on the biomass of the considered 
assumes that the rates of the consumption of each microorganism group (for example, the 
substrate will be compared only in such a case, phytoplankton) keeping the logic of all foregoing 
when the product of substrate concentrations to reasons.  Then we obtain, that 
their preference coefficient will be close.  With the  
maximum rate will be consumed that substratum, (2.5.11) UP = K (T, L) /(1 + В / PoolF +  В / 
F N N Р
PoolF )   
for which the product of its preference coefficient 
Р
to the concentration will be the greatest (in this  
case, from of three given substrates).  This form of Here B is the biomass in units of P, mg P/l; 
P
the equations for the consumption of the PoolF - the pool of the P substrates, mg P/l, that 
p
interchangeable substrates by microogranism (in may be consumed by the phytoplankton, and these 
particular, by phytoplankton) gives the possibility substrates are the dissolved mineral (DIP) and 
of switching for the intensive consumption by the organic (DOP) forms of P: 
hydrobionts only of those substrata whose  
concentrations to these are greatest in the (2.5.12) PoolF = d(4)*DIP + d(5)*DOP 
p 
comparison with other substrata.  It gives a  
possibility for the water environment to restore the In this case the total rates of the uptake of N and P 
pool of those substrata, which in the process of the compounds by the given group of microorganisms 
biomass growth descend to the smallest are represented as: 
(sometimes critically small) values.  This  
phenomenon in the description of the processes of (2.5.13) UP = UP + UP + UP  
FN NH4 NO2 NO3 
increasing of the biomass and substrate  
consumption is impossible by equations the (2.5.14) UP = UP + UP   
FP DIP DOP  
traditionally used for the simulation of marine  
ecosystems, in which the substrate consumption Accordingly to the same logic, let us formulate 
by different groups of microorganism is assigned equations for describing the individual substrates 
independently of each other. taking into account the influence of each of them 
 on the kinetics of the formation of biomass and the 
Let us consider the case, when there are several substrate uptake being oriented toward general 
substrates as the interchangeable (as it was equation (2.5.11): 
examined above), so also not interchangeable, in  
102
(2.5.15) UP = K (T, L) * d(1) * NH4 / MF   A similar form of equations may be used for any 
NH4 
 functional group of microorganism taking into 
(2.5.16) UP = K (T, L) * d(2) * NO2 / MF   account any the variety of the substrate assortment  
NO2 
 including the components of the water 
(2.5.17) UP = K (T, L) * d(3) * NO3 / MF     environment pollution (for example, oil products).  
NO3 
 The substrate assortment for the organisms of 
(2.5.18) UP = K (T, L) * d(4) * DIP / MF     higher trophic levels is higher than for the 
DIP 
 organisms of lowest trophic status.  In this 
(2.5.19) UP = K (T, L) * d(5) * DOP / MF    assortment fall the dissolved and particulated 
DOP 
 organic compounds of biogenic elements, 
where  including biomasses of certain microorganisms 
(2.5.20) MF=PoolF * PoolF + B * PoolF + B and detritus.  
N P N P P
* PoolF .    
N
 The equation for the term G (the specific grazing 
When the joint consumption of N, P, and SI rate of the microorganism from the lowest trophic 
compounds is considered for the same group of levels by the organisms of higher levels) is 
microorganism, the equation (2.5.11) takes the constructed, on the basis of the presented above 
form:  principles considering the high-constituent nature 
 of water environment and the mutual influence of 
(2.5.21) UP = K (T, L) /(1 + В / PoolF + В / the uptake of individual substrates on each other in 
F N N Р
PoolF +  В / PoolF )    the process of the microorganism biomass growth. 
Р si Si
  
where  The value of the maximum growth rate of the 
(2.5.22) PoolF = d(6) * DISi     microorganism biomass (or the substrate 
Si 
 consumption), K (T, L) should be corrected to the 
and DISI is the content of dissolved inorganic conditions on the temperature and for light (for the 
silicon, mg Si/l.  planktonic organisms) in the water environment.  
 The analysis of ecological models existing at 
In accordance to the accepted logic for the present shows that there are many methods of 
formulations of kinetic dependences, the equations 
carrying out a similar correction. 
describing the individual substrate uptake and their  
mutual influence on each other are written in the In the model of the transformation of nitrogen, 
following form: phosphorus, silicon and carbon compounds the 
 temperature dependence is considered by the 
(2.5.23) UP = K (T, L) * d(1) * NH4 / MF1 exponential function, which differs for the 
NH4 
 different groups of microorganisms in the slope 
(2.5.24) UP = K (T, L) * d(2) * NO2 / MF1 and the optimum values of temperature.  The 
NO2 
 dependence of the plankton biomass growth as a 
(2.5.25) UP  = K (T, L) * d(3) * NO3 / MF1 function of light conditions in water environment 
NO3 
 is considered by the traditional functions that are 
(2.5.26) UP = K (T, L) * d(4) * DIP / MF1 used at the simulation of the processes of 
DIP 
 phytoplankton photosynthesis and daily vertical 
(2.5.27) UP = K (T, L) * d(5) * DOP / MF1 migration of zooplankton. 
DOP 
  
(2.5.28) UP = K (T, L) * d(6) * DISi / MF1 Formalization of the excretion processes of 
DISi 
 metabolic products by microorganisms 
where   
(2.5.29) MF1 = PoolF * PoolF * PoolF + B * At first stages of mathematical simulation model 
N P Si N
PoolF * PoolF + B * PoolF * PoolF development as the independent scientific 
P Si P N Si 
+ B * PoolF * PoolF direction in the studies of the natural aquasystems 
Si N P
  state, this important biological function of 
103
microorganisms was not considered at all.  At With the values of coefficients a and b can be 
present time, in the majority of the cases the reproduced the significant spectrum of the 
specific rate of the metabolic excretion by conditions for the microorganism biomass growth 
microorganisms (L) is formulated in the ecological which can be evaluated in the units of different 
models by the simplest method and, as a rule, it is biogenic elements (N, P, C or Si).  
 
represented in the form of a constant quotas (α) 
from the UP function: Formalization of the processes of the 
microorganism mortality 
 
 
(2.5.30) L =  α * UP 
The processes of development and growth of the 
 
microorganism biomass are continuous with the 
The experience of the experimental research of the 
processes of the internal losses of biomasses (S).  
microorganism population dynamics and the 
It is possible to assume that the natural 
simulation of the conditions for the biomass 
physiological losses of the biomasses of any group 
growth shows that the excretion fraction of the 
of microorganisms compose 5-10% of the total 
products of metabolic exchange in different 
biomass although this problem remains 
microorganisms differs very substantially, and it 
insufficiently studied experimentally for all 
can change considerably in the process of the 
microorganism groups.  In the process of the 
biomass growth in each group of microorganisms. 
microorganism mortality, the detritus (or the dead 
 
suspended matter) is formed in the water 
This fact was taken into account, and during the 
environment.  The biogenic substances containing 
development of the mathematical model of the 
in it are actively included in turnover by bacteria 
transformation of nitrogen, phosphorus, silicon, 
and zooplankton which transform detritus into the 
and carbon compounds the different forms of the 
labile nutrients well assimilated by other 
expression of the excretion fraction of metabolic 
microorganisms.  Under the conditions of reduced 
products changing in the time were checked.  It 
temperatures, the detrital links become the most 
was found the form of equation for α that most 
important in the nutrition and growth of the 
completely consider the special features of the 
populations of fishes. 
microorganism biomass growth, and it is 
 
formulated as the dependence from the specific 
At the first ecological models, the microorganism 
rate of the substrate uptake, UP: 
mortality S is not taken into account at all or only 
 
natural physiological biomass losses are 
(2.5.31) α = a * UP / (1 + b * UP) + (1 - a / b)    
considered.  The modern ecological models 
 
include the natural internal biomass losses and 
where a and  b are constants (moreover a < b) 
take into account losses inevitable at the 
whose values determine the nature of change in 
stimulation of the biomass growth processes.  It 
the excretion fraction in the dependence on the 
may be differently formulated.  In the 
values of the total substrate uptake by considered 
mathematical model of the transformation of N, P, 
group of microorganisms.  
Si, and C compounds this important biological 
 
function is described by the equation: 
The first term of the equation (2.5.31) shows the 
 
forming quota of the metabolic excretion of 
(2.5.32) S = g (1) + g (2) * В / UP 
N N FN
substance in the favorable on the nutrient 
 
conditions of the water environment, when values 
where g (1) and g (2) are constants describing the 
of UP are significant.   
processes of the natural  biomass losses and 
 
mortality  depending on the conditions of 
The second term of the equation (2.5.31) shows 
activating the growth, respectively.  If the biomass 
the quota of the metabolic excretion at the 
of the microorganism group is evaluated in the 
substrate deficite when values of UP become 
units of different biogenic elements (N, P, C or Si) 
minimum.   
then respectively for each case their specific rates 
 
of the internal losses of biomasses are evaluated 
104
with the use of specific values of coefficients g (i), substances by microorganism.  These biogenic 
values of biomasses B and rates of the substrate substrates are subdivided on interchangeable (on 
consumption UP. one biogenic element) and not interchangeable (on 
 the different biogenic elements).  The used form of 
The set of model coefficients applied in two case equations for the description in this model of the 
studies (for the Okhotsk Sea (Leonov and most important biological functions serves as the 
Sapozhnikov 1997) and Caspian Sea (Leonov and example for the formalization of the processes of 
Srygar 1999) for the simulation of microorganism the internal regulation (self regulation) of the 
dynamics is presented in Table 2.5.1.  microorganism activity within the ecosystems.  
 The account of a similar internal regulation 
Thus, in the mathematical model of the mechanism of the microorganism activity makes 
transformation of N, P, Si, and C compounds, the this model sufficiently resistant and allow us to 
interactions between chemical (concentrations of apply it without the significant correction of the 
biogenic substances) and biological (biomasses the parameters in the study the aqueous ecosystems 
microorganisms - bacteria, phyto- and which essentially differ in the environmental 
zooplankton) compartments are considered and conditions (temperature, radiation, water regime, 
reproduced the most important biological transparency).  There are several positive 
processes of the substrate uptake, excretion of the experiences in the application of this model to 
metabolic products and mortality of the study the special features of the ecosystem 
microorganisms.  As a result of these processes, functioning of the Sea of Okhotsk (Leonov and 
the turnover of chemical substances (organic and Sapozhnikov 1997) and Caspian Sea (Leonov and 
mineral) are performed in natural marine Stygar 1999).  The first results are also obtained 
ecosystems.  The special feature of this model is on the simulation of the intraannual dynamics of 
the formalization of the important biological biogenic substances in the ecosystem in La 
functions (the excretion of the metabolic products Perouse Strait and Aniva Bay (Sea of Okhotsk) 
and mortality of microorganisms) in a dependence (Pischalnik and Leonov 2002). 
on the consumption of different biogenic 
 
Table 2.5.1 Values of model parameters used for description of biological compartment dynamics in 
the Sea of Okhotsk and the Caspian Sea. 
 
Case study 1 - The Sea of Okhotsk Case study 2 - The Caspian Sea  
Heterotrophic bacteria (B) Heterotrophic bacteria (B) 
Maximum growth rate: K=1.0 Maximum growth rate: K=0.75 
Preference coefficients for substrate uptake: Preference coefficients for substrate uptake: 
for C-containing substrate: d =1; for C-containing substrate: d =1; 
DOC DOC
for Si-containing substrate: d =0.6; d =0.01  for Si-containing substrate: d =0.6; d =0.01 
DOSi DISi DOSi DISi
                                            d =0.39;                                             d =0.39; 
SID SID
for N-containing substrate: d =0.6; d =0.4  for N-containing substrate: d =0.6; d =0.4 
DON ND DON ND
for P-containing substrate: d =0.4; d =0.6 for P-containing substrate: d =0.4; d =0.6 
DOP PD DOP PD
Excretion activity: Excretion activity: 
for C substrate: a =0.05; b =0.09  for C substrate: a =0.05; b =0.088 
C C C C
for Si substrate: a =0.05; b =0.088’ for Si substrate: a =0.05; b =0.088 
Si Si Si Si
for N substrate: a =0.05; b =0.087 for N substrate: a =0.05; b =0.1 
N N N N
for P substrate: a =0.05; b =0.09 for P substrate: a =0.05; b =0.086 
P P P P
Mortality coefficients: Mortality coefficients: 
for C substrate: g(1) =0.04; g(2) =0.04 for C substrate: g(1) =0.03; g(2) =0.025 
C C C C
for Si substrate: g(1) =0.045; g(2) =0.05 for Si substrate: g(1) =0.045; g(2) =0.05 
Si Si Si Si
for N substrate: g(1) =0.035; g(2) =0.035 for N substrate: g(1) =0.028; g(2) =0.03 
N N N N
for P substrate: g(1) =0.055; g(2) =0.055 for P substrate: g(1) =0.045; g(2) =0.05 
P P P P
105
First phytoplankton group (F1-diatom algae) First phytoplankton group (F1-diatom algae) 
Maximum growth rate: K=2.5 Maximum growth rate: K=2.5 
Preference coefficients for substrate uptake: Preference coefficients for substrate uptake: 
for Si-containing substrate:  d =0.3;    d =0.7  for Si-containing substrate: d =0.3;    d =0.7  
DOSi DISi DOSi DISi
for N-containing substrate:d =0.025;  =0.025 for N-containing substrate: d =0.2;     d =0.05 
NH4 NO2 NH4 NO2
                                            d =0.9;     d =0.05                                             d =0.7;     d =0.05 
NO3 UR NO3 UR
for P-containing substrate:   d =0.3;    d =0.7 for P-containing substrate: d =0.05;    d =0.95 
DOP DIP DOP DIP
Excretion activity: Excretion activity: 
for Si substrate: a =0.051; b =0.052 for Si substrate: a =0.051; b =0.052 
Si Si Si Si
for N substrate: a =0.05; b =0.053 for N substrate: a =0.05; b =0.052 
N N N N
for P substrate: a =0.05; b =0.065 for P substrate: a =0.05; b =0.055 
P P P P
Mortality coefficients:  Mortality coefficients:  
for Si substrate: g(1) =0.0; g(2) =0.08 for Si substrate: g(1) =0.04;  g(2) =0.03 
Si Si Si Si
for N substrate: g(1) =0.0; g(2) =0.02 for N substrate: g(1) =0.05;   g(2) =0.049 
N N N N
for P substrate: g(1) =0.0; g(2) =0.02 for P substrate:  g(1) =0.05;   g(2) =0.07 
P P P P
Second phytoplankton group (F2-peridinium Second phytoplankton group (F2-green algae) 
algae)  
Maximum growth rate: K=1.8 Maximum growth rate: K=2.5 
Preference coefficients for substrate uptake: Preference coefficients for substrate uptake: 
for N-containing substrate: d =0.15;    d =0.05 =0.2;      d =0.05 
for N-containing substrate: d
NH4 NO2 NH4 NO2
                                             d =0.2;      d =0.6                                              d =0.7;      d =0.05 
NO3 UR NO3 UR
for P-containing substrate:   d =0.4;      d =0.6 for P-containing substrate:   d =0.05;    d =0.95 
DOP DIP DOP DIP
Excretion activity: Excretion activity: 
for N substrate: a =0.049; b =0.0495 for N substrate: a =0.049; b =0.0495 
N N N N
for P substrate: a =0.049; b =0.053 for P substrate: a =0.049; b =0.052 
P P P P
Mortality coefficients:  Mortality coefficients:  
for N substrate: g(1) =0.0;  g(2) =0.05 for N substrate: g(1) =0.04;  g(2) =0.03 
N N N N
for P substrate:  g(1) =0.0;  g(2) =0.1 for P substrate:  g(1) =0.04;  g(2) =0.06 
P P P P
Third phytoplankton group (F3-green algae) Third phytoplankton group (F3-blue-green 
Maximum growth rate: K=1.8 algae) 
Preference coefficients for substrate uptake: Maximum growth rate: K=2.5  
for N-containing substrate: d =0.15;    d =0.05 Preference coefficients for substrate uptake: 
NH4 NO2
                                             d =0.2;      d =0.6 for N-containing substrate: d =0.2;      d =0.05 
NO3 UR NH4 NO2
for P-containing substrate:   d =0.4;      d =0.6                                              d =0.7;      d =0.05 
DOP DIP NO3 UR
Excretion activity: for P-containing substrate:   d =0.05;    d =0.95 
DOP DIP
for N substrate: a =0.049; b =0.0495 Excretion activity: 
N N
for P substrate: a =0.049; b =0.0523 for N substrate: a =0.049; b =0.0495 
P P N N
Mortality coefficients:  for P substrate: a =0.049; b =0.052 
P P
for N substrate: g(1) =0.0;  g(2) =0.05  Mortality coefficients:  
N N
for P substrate:  g(1) =0.0;  g(2) =0.1 for N substrate: g(1) =0.04;  g(2) =0.03 
P P N N
for P substrate:  g(1) =0.04;  g(2) =0.06 
P P
First zooplankton group (Z1-herbivorous) First zooplankton group (Z1-herbivorous) 
Maximum growth rate: K=1.5 Maximum growth rate: K=0.75 
Preference coefficients for substrate uptake: Preference coefficients for substrate uptake: 
for Si-containing substrate: d =0.15;   d =0.02 for Si-containing substrate: d =0.15;   d =0.02 
DOSi DISi DOSi DISi
                                             d =0.77;     d =0.01                                              d =0.77;     d =0.01 
SiD BSi SiD BSi
                                             d =0.05                                              d =0.05 
F1Si F1Si
for N-containing substrate: d =0.48;   d =0.34 for N-containing substrate:  d =0.5;       d =0.05 
ND F1N ND F1N
                                            d =0.05;   d =0.02                                              d =0.25;     d =0.1 
F2N F3N F2N F3N
106
                                             d =0.11;                                              d =0.1; 
BN BN
for P-containing substrate:  d =0.78;   d =0.15 for P-containing substrate:   d =0.73;   d =0.1 
PD F1P PD F1P
                                             d =0.025; d =0.025                                              d =0.025; d =0.025 
F2P F3P F2P F3P
                                             d =0.02;                                              d =0.02;    d =0.1 
BP BP DOP
Excretion activity: Excretion activity: 
for Si substrate: a =0.048;  b =0.052 for Si substrate: a =0.035;  b =0.052 
Si Si Si Si
for N substrate: a =0.041;  b =0.05 for N substrate: a =0.041;  b =0.05 
N N N N
for P substrate: a =0.035;    b =0.05 for P substrate: a =0.035;   b =0.052 
P P P P
Mortality coefficients:  Mortality coefficients:  
for Si substrate: g(1) =0.0;  g(2) =0.2 for Si substrate: g(1) =0.05;  g(2) =0.2 
Si Si Si Si
for N substrate: g(1) =0.0;  g(2) =0.4  for N substrate: g(1) =0.05;   g(2) =0.4 
N N N N
for P substrate: g(1) =0.0;   g(2) =0.8 for P substrate:  g(1) =0.035; g(2) =0.5 
P P P P
Second zooplankton group (Z2-predatory) Second zooplankton group (Z2-predatory) 
Maximum growth rate: K=0.5 Maximum growth rate: K=0.75 
Preference coefficients for substrate uptake: Preference coefficients for substrate uptake: 
for N-containing substrate: d =0.55;     d =0.31 for N-containing substrate:  d =0.55;     d =0.2 
ND F1N ND F1N
                                             d =0.1;      d =0.04     d =0.02;   d =0.02;    d =0.15;    d =0.06 
Z1N BN F2N F3N Z1N BN
for P-containing substrate:   d =0.8;       d =0.1 for P-containing substrate:   d =0.75;      d =0.05 
PD F1P PD F1P
                                             d =0.05;     d =0.05                           d =0.05;    d =0.05;     d =0.1 
BP Z1P BP Z1P DOP
Excretion activity: Excretion activity: 
for N substrate: a =0.0276;  b =0.0287 for N substrate: a =0.0276;  b =0.03 
N N N N
for P substrate:  a =0.0276;   b =0.0287 for P substrate:  a =0.0276;   b =0.032 
P P P P
Mortality coefficients:  Mortality coefficients:  
for N substrate: g(1) =0.0;    g(2) =0.5 for N substrate: g(1) =0.05;    g(2) =0.4  
N N N N
for P substrate:  g(1) =0.0;    g(2) =1.0 for P substrate:  g(1) =0.035;  g(2) =0.6 
P P P P
-1 -1
Note:  the dimension of parameters: K - day , d, a, b - (undimension), g(1) day , g(2) -  
i i i - i
-1 -2
[(mg Element/l) (day )]. 
 
 
3.0 Herring group report and model results 
 
1 2 3 4
Douglas E. Hay , Robert A. Klumb , Bernard A. Megrey , S. Lan Smith and Francisco E.  
5 
Werner (authors listed alphabetically)
1 
Pacific Biological Station, Fisheries and Oceans Canada, 3190 Hammond Bay Road, Nanaimo, B. C., 
Canada, V9R 5K6.  E-mail:  hayd@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca   
2 
Department of Natural Resources, Cornell Biological Field Station, Cornell University, 900 
Shackelton Point Road, Bridgeport, NY 13030, U.S.A.  E-mail:  rak11@cornell.edu  
3
 National Marine Fisheries Service, Alaska Fisheries Science Center, 7600 Sand Point Way NE, 
Seattle, WA 98115, U.S.A.  E-mail:  bern.megrey@noaa.gov 
4 
Frontier Research System for Global Change, Showa-machi 3173-25, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, 
Kanagawa, 236-001, Japan.  E-mail:  lanimal@jamstec.go.jp  
5
 Marine Sciences Department, CB# 3300, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3300, 
U.S.A.  E-mail:  cisco@unc.edu  
 
Summary report from the herring group NEMURO model to pelagic fish required 
 modifications of the existing Atlantic herring 
Specific data for most physiological parameters of bioenergetics model of Rudstam (1988).  Three 
Pacific herring are lacking.  The first task of main areas focused on at the workshop included: 
“Team Herring” towards linking the LTL 1) modifying the temperature dependence function 
107
for consumption and cutoff temperature values, growth versus abundance and temperature in Haist 
where swimming speed changes in the Rudstam and Stocker (1985)).  
model to describe the actual temperatures  
inhabited by Pacific herring,  2) accounting for As a preliminary approximation, Bernard Megrey 
known differences in larval and juvenile fish normalized the Baltic Sea temperatures to a zero-
physiology (age-0) compared to adults, and  one scale, based on the maximum and minimum 
3) incorporating known seasonal changes in temperatures observed for a location off the west 
energy density of adult Pacific herring.  Trends in coast of Vancouver Island, Amphitrite lighthouse 
size-at-age were discussed and potential (Fig. 3.1).   
hypotheses to be tested after completion of the  
model were proposed.  In the application to Pacific 
herring our objectives were to model one fish, 
generate data to compare to observed size-at-age, 
follow one cohort through time, and provide a 
means to perform regional comparisons.  
 
Temperature-dependence of consumption and 
swimming speed 
 
Douglas Hay provided diet data for Pacific herring 
from near Vancouver, British Columbia, from 
which he and Robert Klumb tried to extract the 
 
temperature-dependence terms for the herring  
consumption equation.  The original herring Fig. 3.1 Location of B.C. Lighthouse stations 
bioenergetics model was formulated for the Baltic including Amphitrite Point Lighthouse, the source 
Sea, but the Vancouver site has lower of the temperature data used in the model. 
temperatures and less seasonal variation of  
temperature.  Because temperature is one of the Values for the two temperature series were 
main process-mediating functions in the rescaled using the formula:  
bioenergetics model,  we had to modify the  
parameters for temperature dependence on (3.1) 
consumption function to agree with the 
() TB − TB ⋅( TA − TA)
min max min
TA = + TA
temperature ranges inhabited by Pacific herring off 
min
() TB − TB
max min
the coast of Vancouver.  Vadim Navrotsky  
 
suggested that we formulate this temperature 
=30.0, TB =1.0, TA =14.0, 
where TB
max min max
dependence in terms of DT = T - T , where T 
opt opt
TA =8.0, TA refers to temperatures from 
min
is the optimal temperature for consumption 
Amphitrite lighthouse, and TB refers to 
(depending upon location).  One could also use the 
temperatures from the Baltic Sea. 
temperature of the waters in which the growth of 
 
herring is maximized as a proxy for the 
The re-scaled temperatures used for the Thornton 
temperature at which their consumption rate is 
and Lessem (1978) temperature dependence 
maximum (e.g., 12°C, based on the data for peak 
function for consumption  were as follows: 
 
Age 0 Age 1 Age > 1 
Amphitrite Baltic Amphitrite Baltic Amphitrite Baltic 
8.0 1 8.0 1 8.0 1 
10.897 15 10.897 15 10.483 13 
11.31 17 11.31 17 10.897 15 
12.552 23 12.552 23 12.553 23 
 
108
Temperatures in the respiration model, where 
activity changed needed to be re-computed for 
age-0 and age-1 herring: 
 
Old ► New 
15°C  10.897°C 
  9°C    9.655°C 
 
Finally the equation describing the annual 
temperature signal needed to be re-computed 
based on observed mean monthly sea surface 
temperature (SST) data from Amphitrite 
 
lighthouse.  The following equation 
 
 
Fig. 3.3 Results of the Baltic Sea herring model 
(3.2) 
from Rudstam (1988).  The solid line represents 
⎛ ⎞ model output and the open circles are weight-at-
⎛ 2 ⋅π ⋅() JDAY − 30 ⎞
⎛ ⎞
⎜ ⎟
T = 7.717 + 5.6796 ⋅ 0.5 ⋅ ⎜1− cos ⎟
⎜ ⎟
⎜ ⎟
⎜ ⎟
age values from field observations. 
365
⎝ ⎠
⎝ ⎝ ⎠ ⎠
 
 
 
was fit to the observed data (Fig 3.2) where JDAY 
is Julian day and T is water temperature. 
 
Julian Day 
 
 
 
Fig. 3.4 Simulated growth from the herring 
 
bioenergetics model. 
Fig. 3.2 Observed and predicted mean SST at 
 
Amphitrite Lighthouse. 
Separate age 0 and adult formulations 
 
 
Validation to Pacific herring 
Describing the growth of a YOY fish involves 
 
more than just rescaling process equations derived 
To validate the bioenergetics model to herring, we 
for adult fishes.  Often the process rates differ 
used model structure and parameters after 
substantially between different life stages (Post 
Rudstam (1988) for Baltic Sea herring, but 
and Lee 1996).  Cisco Werner and Rob Klumb 
included no young-of-the-year (YOY) dynamics, 
modified the Atlantic herring bioenergetics model 
no multispecies functional response, and no 
for age-0 herring. Rob’s parameters for respiration 
spawning (Rudstam model has spawning).  
were based on his laboratory measurements from 
 
age-0 alewife, another clupeid, which used routine 
Results of the model (Fig 3.4) can be compared to 
metabolism without an activity multiplier.  
the Rudstam results (Fig. 3.3) and good agreement 
Literature values for larval and juvenile clupeids 
in dynamical behavior can be noted.  
109
were also used that lowered SDA, egestion, and if age ≥=1 and T  ≤9.655 °C then   
excretion parameters compared to the adult  a  0.0033, b = -0.227, c 0.0548, a 3.9,  
R= R R= A=
Atlantic herring parameters.   b  = 0.13, c =0.149 and d =0.03  
A A R
  
The YOY formulation for herring respiration if age ≥=1 and T >9.655 °C then   
proposed by Arrhenius (1998) along with our  a  0.0033, b = -0.227 c 0.0548, a 15.0,  
R= R R= A=
conversion factor from wet weight (g) to energy  b  = 0.13,  c =0.0 and d =0.03 
A A R
(J) was:   
 In the final set of simulations, the Arrhenius 
b
R (1998) equations 3.5 and 3.6 were modified after 
(3.5) R = a ⋅W ⋅ f (T ) ⋅ activity ⋅5.258 
R R
Klumb et al. (in press) to use the parameters. 
 
 
where the units are the same as in equation 2.1.5 
if age=0 then   
and a 0.0033, b = -0.227.  
R= R
 a  0.00528, b = -0.007, c 0.0548, a 1.0,  
R= R R= A=
 
 b  = 0.0, c =0.0 and d =0.0.  
A A R
The temperature dependence function for 
 
respiration  
In all simulations, equations for age 1 and older 
 
Pacific herring were the same as described in 
() c ⋅T
R
(3.6) f (T ) = e 
R
Arrhenius (1998). 
 
 
for a age-0 herring was similar to equation 2.1.8.  
The coefficients of SDA, egestion, and excretion 
 
in equations 2.1.6, 2.1.11, and 2.1.12 were made 
Activity is a power function of body weight 
age dependent with the parameters given in Table 
conditioned on water temperature and is given by 
3.1. 
 
 
() d ⋅U
R
Formulation for energy density  
(3.7) activity = e 
 
 
-1
The energy density of clupeids varies seasonally.  
where U is swimming speed in cm·s and d is a 
R
Instead of using constant conversion factors, as in 
coefficient relating swimming speed to 
equation 2.1.1, we incorporated a simple energy 
metabolism.  Swimming speed is calculated as a 
cycle based on data in Paul et al. (1998) for age-2 
function of body weight and temperature using 
and greater herring.  Paul et al. (1998) found 
 
energy density peaked at 9800 J/g wet wt. (range 
b () c ⋅T
A A
(3.8) U = a ⋅W ⋅ e 
A
9400 - 10200) in fall (October 1), and in spring 
 
(March 1) dropped to 5750 J/g wet wt. (range 
Swimming speeds have been observed to switch 
5200 - 6300).  For age-0 and age-1 herring we 
from temperature dependence (at low 
assumed a constant energy density of 4460 J/g wet 
temperatures) to temperature independence (at 
wt. (Foy and Paul 1999). Age-0 herring do exhibit 
high temperatures).  Formulations by life stage for 
a seasonal energy cycle from 5000 J/g wet wt. in 
changes in swimming speeds versus the adjusted 
November to 3900 J/g wet wt. in March, and could 
temperatures from temperature-dependence of 
be included in future modifications of the model. 
consumption and swimming speed section (given 
 
earlier) were: 
The following code was used to implement a 
 
straight-line approximation to a sinusoid that 
if age=0 and T  ≤10.897 °C then   
described seasonal changes in energy density.  The 
 a  0.0033, b = -0.227, c 0.0548,  
R= R R=
period between March 1 and October 1 consisted 
 a  5.76, b = 0.386, c =0.238 and d =0.03  
A= A A R
of 214 days.  The period prior to March 1 and the 
 
period after October 1, together summed to 151 
if age=0 and T >10.897 °C then   
days.  
 a  0.0033, b = -0.227, c 0.0548, a 8.6,  
R= R R= A=
 
 b  = 0.386,  c =0.0 and d =0.03 
A A R
 
110
Table 3.1 Summary of final parameter values used in the herring bioenergetics model. 
 
Symbol  Parameter description      Value 
Consumption, C
MAX 
a Intercept for C at       0.642 
C MAX
b coefficient for C versus weight    -0.256 
C MAX
a b c
te1 Temperature for xk1 (in ºC)        8.0       8.0       8.0 
a b c
te2 Temperature for xk2 (in ºC)      10.897 10.897  10.483 
a b c
te3 Temperature for xk3 (in ºC)      11.310 11.310 10.897 
a b  c
te4 Temperature for xk4 (in ºC)      12.552 12.966 12.552 
xk1 Proportion of C at te1     0.10 
MAX
xk2 Proportion of C at te2     0.98 
MAX
xk3 Proportion of C at te3     0.98 
MAX
xk4 Proportion of C at te4     0.01 
MAX
 
Metabolism, R  
a bc
a Intercept for R        0.00528  0.0033 
R
a bc
 Coefficient for R versus weight      -0.007   -0.227 
b
R
a bc
c Coefficient for R versus temperature     0.083     0.0548 
R 
a bc
d Coefficient for R versus swimming speed   0.0       0.03 
R 
a b   c
S Coefficient for Specific Dynamic Action    0.125     0.175 0.175 
 
Swimming Speed, U 
bc 
a Intercept U (< 9.655 ºC) (in cm/s)    3.9
A
bc
a Intercept U ( ≥9.655 ºC) (in cm/s)    15.0 
A
bc
b  Coefficient U versus weight      0.13 
A
bc
c  Coefficient U versus temperature (<9.655 ºC)    0.149 
A
bc
c  Coefficient U versus temperature (≥9.655 ºC)   0.0 
A
 
Egestion and Excretion, F and E 
a bc
a Proportion of consumed food egested     0.125 0.16 
F
a bc
a Proportion of consumed food excreted     0.078 0.10 
E
 
Multispecies Functional Response 
V Vulnerability of prey group 1 to predator 1   1.0 
11
V Vulnerability of prey group 2 to predator 1   1.0 
12
V Vulnerability of prey group 3 to predator 1   1.0 
13
K Half saturation constant for prey group 1 to predator  
11
3
1 (g wet weight/m)       750.0 
K Half saturation constant for prey group 2 to predator  
12
3
1 (g wet weight/m)       75.0 
K Half saturation constant for prey group 3 to predator  
13
3
1 (g wet weight/m)       750.0 
 
a - values for age-0 herring, b - values for age-1 herring, c - values for age-2 and older herring 
 
111
if(iage.ge.2)then -age predicted by the herring bioenergetics model 
 enMar1=5750. by adjusting the “p” parameter of equation 2.1.2.   
 jdMar1=60  
 enOct1=9800. 
 jdOct1=274 
if(jjday.lt.60)then 
 delen=(enMar1-enOct1)/151 
 en=enOct1+(90+jjday)*delen 
end if 
if(jjday.ge.60.and.jjday.lt.274)then 
 delen=(enOct1-enMar1)/(jdOct1-jdMar1) 
 en=enMar1+(jjday-jdMar1)*delen 
p=0.425 
end if 
if(jjday.ge.274)then 
 delen=(enMar1-enOct1)/151 
 
 en=enOct1+(jjday-jdOct1)*delen 
Fig. 3.10 Observed size-at-age of the 1973 
end if 
herring year-class and size-at-age predicted from 
else 
the herring bioenergetics model using p=0.425. 
 en=4460. 
 
end if    
 
Figure 3.9 shows the straight line approximation to 
seasonal energy density.  Forcing prey fields are 
given in Figure 2.1.7. 
 
 
Fig. 3.11 Observed size-at-age of the 1973 
herring year-class and size-at-age predicted from 
the herring bioenergetics model using p=0.40. 
 
 
 
Fig. 3.9 Straight line approximation to a 
seasonal energy density curve. 
 
Simulation results and final modifications to 
the herring model 
 
The base model included YOY processes, 
p=0.475
included no multi-species functional response and 
provided a comparison of observed and predicted 
 
size-at-age, and included no spawning (observed 
data were taken after feeding but before Fig. 3.12 Observed size-at-age of the 1973 
spawning).  Figures 3.10 to 3.12 show the fit of herring year-class and size-at-age predicted from 
observed size (weight)-at-age compared to size-at the herring bioenergetics model using p=0.475. 
112
Observed herring size-at-age data were taken from Figure 3.14 shows the base case.  Figure 3.15 
the Straight of Georgia herring data using the 1973 shows the base curve plotted against a run where 
age class, seen as age-1 in 1973 and present in the the SDA, E and F equations were made age 
fishery until age 12 in 1984.  As can be seen from dependent.  Age dependent parameters are given 
these figures the model predictions of size-at-age in Table 3.1.  Also plotted in Figure 3.15 are 
were extremely sensitive to changing this model predictions when modifying the respiration 
parameter, the best fit being when p=0.425.  A equation to more accurately reflect the metabolic 
long-term simulation with these parameters is requirements of an age-0 herring (R) (Klumb et al. 
shown in Figure 3.13. In review).  The final curve in Figure 3.15 (All) 
 demonstrates model output when all of these 
The base case was modified to include YOY features were activated. 
improvements, age specific rates, multispecies  
functional response, location specific temperature 
description and change of temperature curve 
parameters, re-adjustment of p and k’s to 
temperature change, and seasonal and age 
dependent energy density for fish. 
 
 
Fig. 3.15 YOY sensitivity. Observed and 
predicted size-at-age due to implementing age 
specific formulation for Specific Dynamic Action, 
egestion, excretion, respiration one at a time.  The 
“all” line represents the run where all processes 
are age dependent and compared to the base run. 
 
 
 
Fig. 3.13 Example of a long-term simulation of 
herring growth using tuned model parameters. 
 
 
Fig. 3.16 Simulation run incorporating new 
temperature dependent values (seasonal range 8-
14ºC) and the seasonal herring energy density 
algorithm.  Comparisons are made of observed 
 
size-at-age between adjusting little “p” in equation 
 
2.1.2 and using the multispecies functional 
Fig. 3.14 Comparison of observed and predicted 
dependence function (equations 2.1.13 and 2.1.14) 
size-at-age, base case. 
with the k values as described above. 
 
113
Finally, Figure 3.16 demonstrates results of the size-at-age data, measurements from scale annuli 
customized herring model for a p value of 0.6375, collected over the same period from larger herring 
and for a run where the multispecies functional also showed no consistent decrease in growth for 
response to three prey types was activated using fish during the first 3 years of life.  This decrease 
the parameters (k1, k2 and k3) shown in Figure in size-at-age first appears when herring can begin 
3.16, as well as the seasonal energy density to eat euphausiids in addition to copepods (age 
algoritm.  Note that to implement the multispecies 3+).  Generally, when euphausiids are abundant, 
functional response feature the line the predation on herring by other piscivores that 
“con=0.75*gcmax” in the FORTRAN code needs also eat euphausiids is reduced.  Given this double 
to be commented out. benefit of more available food and less predation, 
 the growth of herring should be highly sensitive to 
Trends in size-at-age:  some ideas for euphausiid production.  The predatory 
zooplankton (ZP) compartment in the NEMURO 
hypothesis testing  
 model was designed to represent euphausiids.   
Douglas Hay has data for size-at-age of Pacific  
herring over several decades.  Over the last 20 Thus the coupled NEMURO-herring bioenergetics 
years, the mean size-at-age has decreased at model could be used to examine the effects of 
several locations for fish aged greater than 3 years.  temperature and other physical forcings (e.g., 
However, the mean size-at-age for ages 1–3 years Pacific Decadal Oscillation) on the production of 
did not show a significant decrease which may euphausiids and thereby on the size-at-age of 
result from difficulties in sampling small fish (i.e. herring.  
gear selectivity).  In agreement to the observed  
 
 
4.0 Saury group report and model results 
 
1 2 3 4
Shin-ichi Ito , Michio J. Kishi , Yasuhiro Yamanaka and Masahiko Fujii 
1 
Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute, 3-27-5 Shinhamacho, Shiogama, Miyagi 985-0001, 
Japan.  E-mail:  goito@affrc.go.jp 
2 
Hokkaido University, Minato-cho 3-1-1, Hakodate, Hokkaido 041-8611, Japan.  E-mail: 
kishi@salmon.fish.hokudai.ac.jp 
3 
Graduate School of Environmental Earth Science, Hokkaido University, North 10, West 5 Kita-ku, 
Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-0810, Japan.  E-mail:  galapen.ees.hokudai.ac.jp 
4 
National Institute for Environmental Studies, 16-2 Onogawa, Tsukuba, 305-8506, Japan.  E-mail: 
fujii.masahiko@nies.go.jp 
 
The members of  “team saury” were D. Huang, C. one box, and adapted the same type of governing 
Hong, Y. I. Zuenko, T. Katukawa, T. Azumaya, S. equations for bioenergetics model as the ones for 
Chiba, M. Fujii, M. J. Kishi, K. Tadokoro, M. B. Pacific herring.   
Kashiwai, Y. Yamanaka, T. Okunishi, A. Tsuda,  
D. Mukai, M. Inada, T. Aiki and S. Ito.  Model parameters are discussed for applying the 
 model to Pacific saury.  Here we report the 
According to the life history of Pacific saury, S. discussion summary and model results. 
Ito proposed to have saury bioenergetics model  
coupled with the ecosystem model composed of a Life history stages 
three- ocean-box model which corresponds to  
Kuroshio, Oyashio, and the mixed water region.  Pacific saury are spawned in the Kuroshio and the 
But the three-box model is a little complicated to mixed water region from autumn to spring.  The 
start with.  As a first step we started from a larvae are advected to the Kuroshio extension 
coupled saury bioenergetics-ecosystem model with region and juveniles migrate to the Oyashio region 
114
through the mixed water region.  After sufficient average ration of the Pacific saury are 5.0 
feeding in the Oyashio region, they migrate back gww/day/individual for 20 cm, 7.2 
to the spawning region.  The swimming activity, gww/day/individual for 26 cm, and 10.2 
feeding habitat and metabolism are different gww/day/individual for 30 cm saury (Kurita and 
according to the life history stages.  Odate (1977) Sugisaki; in preparation).  These data were 
and Kosaka (2000) divided the Pacific saury life estimated in the Oyashio region.  Comparing this 
history stages according to knob length (KL) 
with observational data, we adapted 0.6 for a and 
c
(Table 4.1). 
-0.256 for b parameters.  Figure 4.1 shows the 
c
 
C curve and observational value of ration per 
MAX
Table 4.1 Life stages of Pacific saury after 
unit wet weight of the Pacific saury. 
Odate (1977). 
 
 
2.5
Stage Knob length 
2
 
larvae < 2.5 cm 
1.5
Cmax
juvenile 2.5 - 5.9 cm 
feeding/W
earlier young 6.0 - 9.9 cm 
1
later young 10.0 - 14.9 cm 
0.5
small 15.0 - 19.9 cm 
adult > 20.0 cm 
0
 0 50 100 150
wet weight
About the earlier stage growth, Watanabe and Kuji 
 
 
(1991) reared the saury larvae from hatching and 
they showed that it takes 60 days to grow to 79 Fig. 4.1 C curve and observational value of 
MAX
ration per unit wet weight of the Pacific saury. 
mm KL.  Watanabe et al. (1988) analyzed the 
 
growth rate of Pacific saury and they showed that 
it takes about 100 days to grow to 100 mm KL.  Temperature dependency for C 
MAX
 
According to their result, it takes about 180 days 
Oozeki (in preparation) analyzed the relationship 
to become adult saury.  Suyama et al. (1996) 
showed lower growth rate and it takes about 200 between saury growth rate and environmental 
factors using the same field data reported in 
days to become an adult.  For simplicity, only 
Watanabe et al. (1997).  His result showed 
three life stages are assumed in the saury 
positive contributions from surface temperature 
bioenergetics model (Table 4.2). 
and food density to growth rate.  The SST range 
 
Table 4.2 Life stages of Pacific saury in the was between 16-22°C.  Oozeki and Watanabe 
(2000) reared Pacific saury in the laboratory with 
saruy bioenergetics model. 
different water temperatures and found a strong 
 
dependence of growth rate on temperature.  The 
Stage Age 
temperature range was between 12-24°C. 
 
 
larvae and juvenile < 60 days 
For adult saury we have no measures of growth 
young and premature 60-180 days 
rate at different temperatures.  But the habitat 
adult > 180 days 
temperature is between 16 and 20°C.  We adapted 
 
the following values for the temperature 
Maximum consumption rate C 
MAX
dependency parameters for C of Pacific saury 
MAX
 
(Table 4.3).  Figure 4.2 shows the temperature 
Because adult Pacific saury are too difficult to rear 
dependence function for each stage. 
in laboratories, there is no experimental estimation 
 
of consumption rate.  Field data showed the  
 
115
Cmax
1.2
On the other hand, the wet weight (g)-knob length 
(cm) relation was proposed by Kosaka (2000) as: 
1
 
0.8
stage1 larvae and juvenile  
0.6 stage2
logW = -2.069+2.42439logL 
stage3
 earlier young  
0.4
logW = -2.483+3.06174logL 
0.2
 later young   
0
logW = -2.335+2.93760logL 
0102030
 small  
Temperature (degC)
 
logW = -2.688+3.22526logL 
 
 adult  
Fig. 4.2 Temperature dependence function of 
logW = -2.685+3.21229logL 
consumption rate of Pacific saury for each life 
 
stage. 
Figure 4.4 shows the wet weight-knob length 
 
relation curves of Kosaka (2000).  If we adapt the 
Table 4.3 Temperature dependency parameters 
simple one curve for all stages, it becomes 
for C
MAX. 
 
3
 
 W = ( KL / 6.13 )  
  Stage  Stage Stage 
 
1 2 3 
and the curve will look like Figure 4.4.  The 
te1 Temperature for 5 5 5 
broken line in Figure 4.3 shows the same curve.  
xk1 (in ºC) 
 
160 70
te2 Temperature for 20 16 16 
140
60
xk2 (in ºC) 
120
50
te3 Temperature for 26 20 20 
100
40
weight
xk3 (in ºC) 
80
swimming speed
30
60
te4 Temperature for 30 30 30 
20
40
xk4 (in ºC) 
10
20
xk1 Proportion of  0.10  
0 0
C at te1 0102030
MAX
knob length (cm)
xk2 Proportion of  0.98   
 
C at te2 
MAX
Fig. 4.3 Swimming speed (cm/s) and wet weight 
xk3 Proportion of  0.98  
(g) as a function of body length (cm). 
C at te3 
MAX
 
xk4 Proportion of  0.5  
180
C at te4 
MAX
160
 
140
 
120
Swimming speed 
100
weight
80 obs
 
60
Although we do not have actual data on swimming 
40
speed of Pacific saury, other small pelagic fish 
20
swim at speeds of several times their body length 
0
per second.  We assumed the normal swimming 
0102030
speed is two times of the knob length (nearly same 
body length (cm)
 
as body length) per weight (Fig. 4.3). 
 
 
Fig. 4.4 Wet weight (g)-knob length (cm) 
 U = 2.0 KL 
relation curves of Kosaka (2000) (red) and fitting 
 
curve (black).  
116
fc(T)
weight (g) weight (g)
70
The last equation could be rewritten as  
0.33
60
 KL = 6.13 W  
50
and the swimming speed becomes  
40
0.33
U
 U = 12.3 W 
30
and we adapted 12.3 as a parameter when the 
A
20
temperature is higher than 12°C and  0.33 for b 
A
10
value.  For temperatures less than 12°C we 
0
adapted 2.0 as a .  The weight - swimming speed 
A
0 50 100 150
relation looks like Figure 4.5 when the 
wet weight (g)
temperature is higher than 12°C.    
 
 
Fig. 4.5 Wet weight (g)-swimming speed  
The parameters we adapted for Pacific saury 
(U-cm/s) relation curve for higher temperature. 
bioenergetics model are summarized on Table 4.4. 
 
Table 4.4 Summary of parameter values used in the saury bioenergetics model. 
 
Symbol  Parameter description     Value 
 
Consumption, C 
MAX
a  Intercept for C at (te1+te3)/2    0.6  
C MAX
b  coefficient for C versus weight   -0.256 
C MAX
te1  Temperature for xk1 (in ºC)     5,  5,  5  
te2  Temperature for xk2 (in ºC)    20, 16, 16  
te3  Temperature for xk3 (in ºC)    26, 20, 20  
te4  Temperature for xk4 (in ºC)    30, 30, 30  
xk1  Proportion of C at te1    0.10 
MAX
xk2  Proportion of C at te2    0.98 
MAX
xk3  Proportion of C at te3    0.98 
MAX
xk4  Proportion of C at te4    0.5  
MAX
 
Metabolism, R  
a  Intercept for R      0.0033 
R
b  Coefficient for R versus weight    -0.227 
R
c Coefficient for R versus temperature   0.0548 
R  
d Coefficient for R versus swimming speed  0.03 
R  
S  Coefficient for Specific Dynamic Action   0.175 
 
Swimming speed, U 
a  Intercept U (< 12 ºC) (in cm/s)    2.0  
A
a  Intercept U (≥ 12 ºC) (in cm/s)    12.3  
A
b   Coefficient U versus weight    0.33  
A
c   Coefficient U versus temperature (< 12 ºC)  0.149 
A
c   Coefficient U versus temperature (≥ 12 ºC)  0.0 
A
 
Egestion and excretion, F and E 
a  Proportion of consumed food egested   0.16 
F
a  Proportion of consumed food excreted   0.10 
E
 
Multispecies functional response (by saury size groups) 
117
U (cm/s)
V  Vulnerability of prey group 1 to predator 1  1.0 
11
V  Vulnerability of prey group 2 to predator 1  0.0 
12
V  Vulnerability of prey group 3 to predator 1  0.0 
13
K  Half saturation constant for prey group 1 to  
11
3
predator 1 (g wet weight/m)    100.0 
K  Half saturation constant for prey group 2 to  
12
3
predator 1 (g wet weight/m)    100.0 
K  Half saturation constant for prey group 3 to  
13
3
predator 1 (g wet weight/m)    100.0 
V  Vulnerability of prey group 1 to predator 2  1.0 
21
V  Vulnerability of prey group 2 to predator 2  1.0 
22
V  Vulnerability of prey group 3 to predator 2  0.0 
23
K  Half saturation constant for prey group 1 to  
21
3
predator 2 (g wet weight/m)    100.0 
K  Half saturation constant for prey group 2 to  
22
3
predator 2 (g wet weight/m)    100.0 
K  Half saturation constant for prey group 3 to  
23
3
predator 2 (g wet weight/m)    100.0 
V  Vulnerability of prey group 1 to predator 3  0.0 
31
V  Vulnerability of prey group 2 to predator 3  1.0 
32
V  Vulnerability of prey group 3 to predator 3  1.0 
33
K  Half saturation constant for prey group 1 to 
31
3
 predator 3 (g wet weight/m)    100.0 
K  Half saturation constant for prey group 2 to  
32
3
predator 3 (g wet weight/m)    100.0 
K  Half saturation constant for prey group 3 to  
33
3
predator 3 (g wet weight/m)    100.0 
 
start day is February 1st 
stage 1     0-50mm  0-30days   
stage 2     50-200mm  30-150days 
stage 3     >200mm  150day-720days 
 
 
Pacific saury
Model result 
 
200 25
The parameters which are revised for the Pacific 
saury were used to integrate the bioenergetics 
20
150
model coupled with the ecosystem model.  Figure 
wei ght
15
4.6 shows the result of the integration, and shows 
100 temp
10
that the weight of saury reached 120 g after one 
light
50
year.  This seems reasonable for Pacific saury.  
5
The model shows a high growth rate around 13ºC 
0 0
water temperature.  This corresponds to the habitat 
0 200 400 600 800
temperature in the Oyashio region during the 
age (day)
 
feeding season. 
 
 
Fig. 4.6 Result of Pacific saury bioenergetics 
Figure 4.7 shows the interannual experiment of 
model.  Light is in units of ly/min. 
ecosystem-saury coupled model with realistic  
 
 
118
weight (g)
Pacific saury
forcing of A7 (Akkeshi line St 7 off Hokkaido, 
Japan).  The model results show low growth rate 
200
in the third and fourth year cohort.  The result 
1
strongly depends on water temperature. 
150
2
 
3
100
Future work 
4
50
 
5
This model is not perfect and needs improvements 
0
DMJSDMJSDMJSDMJSDMJSDMJS
in several respects.  
Month
 
 
 
• The weight of the earliest stage is not 
Fig. 4.7 Result of Pacific saury bioenergetics 
reproduced well.  We should re-parameterize 
model with realistic forcing. 
values for this stage. 
 
• More than half of the Pacific saury spawn in 
the first year and all of them spawn in the 
second year (Kurita and Sugisaki; in 
preparation).  We should include the effect of 
spawning in this model. 
• In this model only one ocean region is 
included.  But the saury migrate from the 
subtropical to the subarctic region through the 
mixed water region, each with its own Ku r o s h i o 
Mixed water 
seasonal cycle of temperature and prey.  We 
region
Oyashio 
should include at least three ocean regions in 
 
the ecosystem-saury coupled model.  We 
 
suggest Figure 4.8 as a prototype three ocean 
Fig. 4.8 Schematic picture of a three-ocean-box 
region model.  This kind of model is very 
model.  This model includes three ocean regions 
useful for the analysis of interannual 
but only one saury bioenergetic model. 
variability of saury growth. 
 
 
5.0 Model experiments and hypotheses
Several model experiments were discussed to test Understanding the extent to which environmental 
hypotheses regarding the effects of climate conditions account for these temperature 
change.  The details of the experiments and differences in herring growth is important for 
hypotheses are described below. predicting climate change effects and for effective 
 management of these fisheries in the future. 
Space hypothesis   
 Key regions contributing to fish growth and 
Geographic variation in fish growth:  Differences biomass variations:  Pacific saury are spawned in 
in environmental conditions, and resulting the subtropical and transition zone from autumn to 
differences in lower trophic conditions, can spring, and migrate from the subtropical to the 
account for the differences in herring growth rates subarctic ocean through a transition zone.  The 
among selected sites in the North Pacific environments of these three regions show different 
ecosystem.  There exist long-term data sets on interannual variability, and it is very difficult to 
size-at-age of herring from many locations in the 
distinguish which location (or season) is most 
North Pacific.  These data sets show that herring important to the interannual variability of fish 
growth rates over the past decades have varied growth and biomass.  We will tune up the NPZ 
consistently among the different locations.  model coupled to the fish growth model with long-
119
Weight
term climate and weather records by comparing environmental conditions.  For example, the 
the model results of fish growth with interannual dominant species changed from sardine to saury 
variability in observed size composition.  To across the regime shift in 1987.   
understand which region contributes most to the  
interannual variability in fish growth and biomass, Comparing different fish bioenergetics models 
sensitivity tests of this model will be very useful. with the same NPZ model is very useful to 
Understanding key regions in fish growth and understand the climate change effects on ocean 
biomass variation is also important for predicting ecosystems through bottom-up processes. 
climate change effects and for effective  
management of these fisheries in the future. 
Climate change hypothesis 
  
Time hypothesis   Global climate change effects on energy 
pathways and fish production:  Climate change 
 
Understanding regime shifts:  Synchronous may result in energy being diverted from the 
changes in herring growth rates across locations pelagic pathway and shunted through the 
may be accounted for by basin-wide decadal-scale microbial pathway, resulting in less food for 
changes in environmental conditions.  Preliminary pelagic fish and consequently slower fish growth 
examination of herring growth rates at several rates.  We will use the coupled NPZ and fish 
locations showed sudden shifts in growth rates models, the long-term datasets, and defined 
occurring in the same years across all locations.  climate change scenarios to predict how climate 
We will combine the long-term datasets on herring change might affect energy cycling, shift the 
growth, where possible, with regional and local dominance among different phytoplankton and 
long-term climate and weather records, and use the zooplankton groups, and affect fish growth and 
NPZ model coupled to the fish growth model to production in the North Pacific ecosystem.  Model 
examine possible environmental regime changes.   simulations will be performed under present-day 
 (baseline) environmental conditions, and for a 
Understanding how regime shifts cascade up the suite of realistic climate change scenarios.  
food web may be our best chance for using past Comparing these linkages and pathways under 
conditions to infer future effects of climate baseline and climate change scenarios for a variety 
change. of locations that have different environmental 
 conditions (e.g., shallow coastal versus deep blue 
Change of dominant species:  Changes in the water) will aid in the interpretation and 
dominant small pelagic fish species seems to generalization of our results. 
coincide with basin-wide decadal-scale changes in 
 
 
6.0 Recommendations 
 
Results of the model work accomplished at the 3. Incorporate data observations into NEMURO 
workshop resulted in several recommendations.  (to be programmed); 
They are listed here in priority.  A description of 
a. Obtain physical parameters (radiation, 
workplan scheduling is indicated after each item in 
cloud cover, wind stress); 
parentheses and in italics: 
b. Obtain realistic time series of SST and 
 
photosynthetically active light; 
1. Develop site-specific applications (to be 
c. Obtain physical observed time series; 
scheduled); 
d. Obtain observed zooplankton time series; 
2. Perform herring comparison between the Sea 
4. Execute a dynamics linkage in 
of Okhotsk and Vancouver Island (to be 
scheduled); NEMURO.FISH (to be scheduled); 
120
5. Revise physiological parameters (fish and Thus all of the components of equation 6.2 are 
LTL) (to be scheduled); known or can be estimated. 
 
6. Public web distribution (PICES to support) (to 
Also note that with this approach we can compare 
be scheduled); 
observed growth to von Bertalanffy growth, a 
7. Meet in Qingdao with (1) and (2) finished (to 
growth model very commonly used in fisheries 
be scheduled); 
science.  
 
8. Consider explicit spatial (x, y, z) and temporal 
The von Bertalanffy empirical growth model (von 
structure (to be programmed); 
Bertalanffy 1938) is written 
9. Dissemination of NEMURO.FISH results in 
 
−k⋅(t−t ) 3
GLOBEC newsletter and scientific 
0
(6.5) W (t) = W ⋅ (1− e )  
∞
publications (to be scheduled); 
 
10. Develop a project home page (to be where W is the asymptotic weight, W is the 
∞
scheduled); 
weight at time t, k is the growth parameter with 
-1
units t , and t is the theoretical age the fish would 
0
11. Incorporate age structure, reproduction and 
have zero weight had they always grown as 
early life history into NEMURO.FISH (to be 
described by (6.5). 
programmed). 
 
 
The differential form of (6.5) is  
The last recommendation was discussed at length 
 
because of a perceived need to provide a tool for 
2 1
dW
the management of fisheries.   3 3
(6.6) = 3k ⋅ (W ⋅W −W )  
∞
 dt
It was noted that fish biomass at any time can be 
 
represented as the product of fish weight (W) and We know that the change in weight formulation 
fish numbers (N). from the fish bioenergetics model (6.3) can be 
 
collapsed into a simpler form because most terms 
are dependent on consumption thus they are 
(6.1) B = N ⋅W 
t t t
proportional to C and the C and R terms are weight 
 
dependent.  So (6.3) can be simplified to 
The rate of change of fish biomass can be written 
 
as 
dW
p2
dB dW dN
(6.7) = p3⋅ C − p1⋅W  
(6.2) = N +W  
dt
dt dt dt
 
 
Equating (6.7) and (6.6) we can calculate the rate 
where we know from the fish bioenergetics model 
of consumption required for von Bertalanffy 
that 
growth, C*, as 
 
 
dW
(6.8) 
(6.3) = C − (R + SDA + E + F) ⋅W  
dt
2 1
1
p2
⎡ ⎤
3 3
C* = ⋅ 3k ⋅W ⋅W − 3k ⋅W + p1⋅W  
 
∞
⎢ ⎥
⎣ ⎦
p3
and from fish population dynamics we know that 
 
 
So it seems the theoretical foundation of extending 
dN
−(F +M )
(6.4) = e ⋅ N 
NEMURO.FISH to a population level model 
dt
useful for fisheries management is possible with a 
 
few minor modifications. 
where F is the instantaneous fishing mortality rate 
and M is the instantaneous natural mortality rate.  
121
7.0 Achievements and future steps 
 
The achievements of the Workshop can be listed 3. Developed a computer simulation model of 
as follows: fish bioenergetics and growth;  
 
4. Coupled the fish model to the NEMURO 
1. Developed the prototype model, 
lower trophic level model; 
NEMURO.FISH.  This was an extremely 
5. Adapted the fish bioenergetics model to 
important step because it translates our science 
into something tangible and economically Pacific herring (Clupea harengus pallasi) in 
the eastern North Pacific and Pacific saury 
relevant to human populations that rely on 
(Cololabis saira) in the western North Pacific; 
fishes for food - obtaining food from the seas 
on a sustainable basis; 
6. Made recommendations for future modeling 
activities.  
2. Assembled an international team of marine 
 
biologists, fisheries biologists, and physical 
oceanographers who collectively achieved a The significance of these achievements will 
ultimately be evaluated by how well the CCCC 
consensus on the structure and function of a 
Program effectively utilizes and embraces these 
PICES Climate Change and Carrying Capacity 
(CCCC) prototype lower trophic level (LTL) models as a basis of future modeling activity.  
ecosystem model for the North Pacific Ocean 
that included pelagic fishes, and named it 
“NEMURO.FISH”; 
 
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
 
This workshop was proposed and convened by financial support for this workshop.  We note this 
PICES, more precisely the PICES/CCCC- valuable support, for without it, the workshop 
IP/MODEL and REX Task Teams.  On behalf of would not have been possible.  Nemuro was 
the workshop participants, the co-conveners would selected as the venue due in large part to the 
like to express sincere thanks for giving us a invitation from the Nemuro Supporting 
timely and valuable opportunity to participate in Committee.  The conveners express their very 
the development of a linked higher trophic level - deep appreciation for the warm welcome and 
lower trophic level marine ecosystem model perfect support arranged and given by the Nemuro 
common among component programs of the Supporting Committee, their staff, and the people 
PICES GLOBEC Program. The Heiwa-Nakajima of Nemuro. 
Foundation of Japan contributed the major part of 
 
 
9.0 References
Arrhenius, F.  1998a.  Variable length of daily Arrhenius, F. and Hansson, S.  1996.  Growth and 
feeding period in bioenergetics modelling: a seasonal changes in energy content of young 
test with 0-group Baltic herring.  Journal of Baltic Sea herring (Clupea harengus L.).  
Fish Biology 52:855-860. ICES Journal of Marine Science 53:792-801. 
Arrhenius, F.  1998b.  Food intake and seasonal Batty, R. S.  1987.  Effect of light intensity on 
changes in energy content of young Baltic Sea activity and food-searching of larval herring, 
sprat (Sprattus sprattus L.).  ICES Journal of Clupea harengus: a laboratory study.  Marine 
Marine Science 55:319-324. Biology 94:323-327. 
122
Beamish, R.J., Noakes, D.J., Mcfarlane, G.A., theoretical optimum swimming speed of fish 
Klyashtorin, L., Ivanov, V.V., and Kurashov, larvae.  Journal of Fish Biology 32:443-458. 
R.  1999.  The regime concept and natural De Silva, S. S.  1973.  Food and feeding habits of 
trends in the production of Pacific salmon.  the herring Clupea harengus and the sprat C. 
Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 56: 516-526. sprattus in inshore waters of the west coast of 
Beamish, F. W. H.  1974.  Apparent specific Scotland.  Marine Biology 20:282-290. 
dynamic action of largemouth bass, De Silva, C. D. and Tytler, P.  1973.  The 
Micropterus salmoides. Journal of the influence of reduced environmental oxygen on 
Fisheries Research Board of Canada 31:1763- the metabolism and survival of herring and 
1769. 
plaice larvae.  Netherlands Journal of Sea 
Beamish, F. W. H. and Trippel, E. A.  1990.  Heat Research 7:345-362. 
increment: A static or dynamic dimension in De Silva, S. S. and Balbontin, F.  1974.  
bioenergetic models?  Transactions of the Laboratory studies on food intake, growth and 
American Fisheries Society 119:649-661. food conversion of young herring, Clupea 
Beitinger, T. L. and Magnuson, J. J.  1979.  harengus (L.).  Journal of Fish Biology 6:645-
Growth rates and temperature selection of 658. 
bluegill, Lepomis macrochirus.  Transactions Durbin, E. G. and Durbin, A. G.  1981.  
of the American Fisheries Society 108:378- Assimilation efficiency and nitrogen excretion 
382. of a filter-feeding planktivore, the Atlantic 
Bertalanffy, L. von.  1938.  A quantitative theory menhaden, Brevoortia tyrannus (Pisces: 
of organic growth (Inquiries on growth laws Clupeidae).  Fishery Bulletin U.S. 79:601-616. 
II).  Human Biology, 10(2): 181-213. Durbin, E. G. and Durbin, A. G.  1983.  Energy 
Blaxter, J. H. S. and Hunter, J. R.  1982.  The and nitrogen budgets for the Atlantic 
biology of clupeoid fishes.  In J. H. S. Blaxter, menhaden, Brevoortia tyrannus (Pisces: 
F. S. Russell, and M. Yonge (eds.) Advances Clupeidae), a filter-feeding planktivore.  
in Marine Biology Volume 20.  Academic Fishery Bulletin U.S. 81:177-199. 
Press, London, UK. Durbin, A. G., Durbin, E. G., Verity, P. G., and 
Brett, J. R.  1985.  Correction in use of Smayda, T. J.  1981.  Voluntary swimming 
oxycalorific equivalent.  Canadian Journal of speeds and respiration rates of a filter-feeding 
Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 42:1326-1327. planktivore, the Atlantic menhaden, 
Brett, J. R. and Groves, T. D. D.  1979.  Brevoortia tyrannus (Pisces: Clupeidae).  
Physiological energetics.  In W. S. Hoar, D. J. Fishery Bulletin U.S. 78:877-886. 
Randall, and J.R. Brett (eds.) Fish physiology Elliott, J. M.  1976a.  Energy losses in the waste 
Vol. VIII bioenergetics and growth.  products of brown trout (Salmo trutta L.).  
Academic Press, Inc., New York, pp. 279 – Journal of Animal Ecology 45:561-580. 
352. Elliott, J. M.  1976b.  The energetics of feeding, 
Cummins, K. W. and Wuycheck, J. C.  1971.  metabolism, and growth of brown trout (Salmo 
Caloric equivalents for investigations in trutta L.) in relation to body weight, water 
ecological energetics.  Mitteilungen temperature, and ration size.  Journal of 
Internationale Vereinigung fur Theoretische Animal Ecology 45:923-948. 
und Angewandte Limnologie 18. Elliott, J. M.  1979.  Energetics of freshwater 
Dabrowski, K.  1985.  Energy budget of coregonid teleosts.  Symposium Zoological Society of 
(Coregonus spp.) fish growth, metabolism and London 44:29-61. 
reproduction.  Oikos 45:358-364. Elliott, J. M. and Davison, W.  1975.  Energy 
Dabrowski, K.  1986.  Energy utilization during equivalents of oxygen consumption in animal 
swimming and cost of locomotion in larval energetics. Oecologia 19:195-201. 
and juvenile fish.  Sonderdruck aus Journal of Flath, L. E. and Diana, J. S.  1985.  Seasonal 
Applied Ichthyology 2:110-117. energy dynamics of the alewife in 
Dabrowski, K., Takashima, F. and Law, Y. K.  southeastern Lake Michigan.  Transactions of 
1988.  Bioenergetic model of planktivorous erican Fisheries Society 114:328-337. 
the Am
fish feeding, growth and metabolism: 
123
Fiksen, O. and Folkvord, A.  1999.  Modelling herring in British Columbia and Alaska. 
growth and ingestion processes in herring Herring: Expectations for a new millennium.  
Clupea harengus larvae.  Marine Ecology University of Alaska Sea Grant, AK-SG-01-
Progress Series 184:273-289. 04, Fairbanks, pp. 171-198.  
Foy, R. J. and Norcross, B. L.  1999.  Spatial and Hettler, W. F.  1976.  Influence of temperature and 
temporal variability in the diet of juvenile salinity on routine metabolic rate and growth 
Pacific herring (Clupea pallasi) in Prince of young Atlantic menhaden.  Journal of Fish 
William Sound, Alaska.  Canadian Journal of Biology 8:55-65. 
Zoology 77:697-706. Hollowed, A.B. and Wooster, W.S.  1992. 
Foy, R. J. and Paul, A. J.  1999.  Winter feeding 
Variability of winter ocean conditions and 
and changes in somatic energy content of age- strong year-classes of Northeast Pacific 
0 Pacific herring in Prince William Sound, groundfish.  ICES Mar. Sci. Symp. 195: 433-
Alaska.  Transactions of the American 444. 
Fisheries Society 128:1193-1200. Hollowed, A.B. and Wooster, W.S.  1995.  
Grabe, S. A.  1996.  Feeding chronology and Decadal scale variations in the eastern 
habits of Alosa spp. (Clupeidae) juveniles subarctic Pacific: II.  Response of Northeast 
from the lower Hudson River estuary, New Pacific fish stocks.  In R.J. Beamish. (ed.) 
York.  Environmental Biology of Fishes Climate change and northern fish populations.  
47:321-326. Canadian Special Publication of Fisheries and 
Giguère, L. A., Côté, B., and St-Pierre, J.-F.  1988.  Aquatic Sciences 121: 375-386.  
Metabolic rates scale isometrically in larval Ikeda, T.  1996.  Metabolism, body composition, 
fishes. Marine Ecology Progress Series 50:13- and energy budget of the mesopelagic fish 
19. Maurolicus muelleri in the Sea of Japan.  
Haegele, C.W.  1997.  The occurrence, abundance Fishery Bulletin U.S. 94:49-58. 
and food of juvenile herring and salmon in the James, A. G. and Probyn, T.  1989.  The 
Strait of Georgia, British Columbia in 1990 to relationship between respiration rate, 
1994.  Can. Man. Rep. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 2390: swimming speed and feeding behaviour in the 
124 pp.  Cape anchovy Engraulis capensis Gilchrist.  
Haist, V. and Stocker, M.  1985.  Growth and Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and 
maturation of Pacific herring (Clupea Ecology 131:81-100. 
harengus pallasi) in the Strait of Georgia.  Janssen, J.  1976.  Feeding modes and prey size 
Proceedings of The Symposium on the selection in the alewife (Alosa 
Biological Characteristics of Herring and pseudoharengus).  Journal of the Fisheries 
Their Implication for Management.  Can. J. Research Board of Canada 33:1972-1975. 
Aquat. Sci., vol. 42(l), pp. 138-146. Janssen, J. and Brandt, S. B.  1980.  Feeding 
Hanson, P. C., Johnson, T. B., Schindler, D. E., ecology and vertical migration of adult 
Kitchell, J. F.  1997.  Fish bioenergetics 3.0 alewives (Alosa pseudoharengus) in Lake 
for Windows. University of Wisconsin Sea Michigan.  Canadian Journal of Fisheries and 
Grant Institute.  Technical Report WISCU-T- Aquatic Sciences 37:177-184. 
97-001, Madison, Wisconsin, USA. Kamler, E.  1972.  Respiration of carp in relation 
Hartman, K. J. and Brandt, S. B.  1995.  to body size and temperature.  Polskie 
Estimating energy density of fish.  Archiwum Hydrobiologii 19: 325-331. 
Transactions of the American Fisheries Katz, H. M.  1978.  Circadian rhythms in juvenile 
Society 124:347-355. American shad, Alosa sapidissima.  Journal of 
Hay, D.E. and McCarter, P.B.  2001.  Spatial, Fish Biology 12:609-614. 
temporal and life-stage variation in herring Kaufmann, R.  1990.  Respiratory cost of 
diets in British Columbia.  PICES Workshop swimming in larval and juvenile cyprinids.  
Reports.  PICES Sci. Report 15: 95-98.   Journal of Experimental Biology 150:343-366. 
Hay, D.E., Thompson, M.J., and McCarter, P.B.  Kerr, S. R. and Dickie, L. M.  1985.  Bioenergetics 
2001.  Anatomy of a strong year class: 
of 0+ Atlantic herring (Clupea harengus 
Analysis of the 1977 year class of Pacific 
124
harengus). Canadian Journal of Fisheries and shad (Alosa sapidissima Wilson) in the 
Aquatic Sciences 42 (1):105-110. Hudson River Estuary, New York.  Doctoral 
Kiørboe, T., Munk, P. and Støttrup, J. G.  1985.  dissertation.  Cornell University, Ithaca, New 
First feeding by larval herring Clupea York. 
harengus L. Dana 5:95-107. Muir, B. S. and Niimi, A. J.  1972.  Oxygen 
Kiørboe, T., Munk, P. and Richardson, K.  1987.  consumption of the euryhaline fish aholehole 
Respiration and growth of larval herring (Kuhlia sandvicensis) with reference to 
Clupea harengus: relation between specific salinity, swimming, and food consumption.  
dynamic action and growth efficiency.  Marine Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of 
Ecological Progress Series 40:1-10. 
Canada 29:67-77. 
Kitchell, J. F., Koonce, J. F., O'Neill, R. V., Munk, P.  1992.  Foraging behaviour and prey size 
Shugart, H. H., Jr., Magnuson, J. J. and Booth, spectra of larval herring Clupea harengus.  
R. S.  1974. Model of fish biomass dynamics.  Marine Ecology Progress Series 80:149-158. 
Transactions of the American Fisheries Munk, P. and Kiorboe, T.  1985.  Feeding 
Society 103:786-798. behaviour and swimming activity of larval 
Klumb, R. A., Rudstam, L. G., and Mills, E. L.  herring (Clupea harengus) in relation to 
Respiration rates and swimming speeds of density of copepod nauplii.  Marine Ecology - 
larval and juvenile alewives Alosa Progress Series 24:15-21. 
pseudoharengus: implications for  Nakata, K., Ito, H., Ichikawa, T., and Sasaki, K.  
bioenergetics models.  Transactions of the 2002.  Reproduction of three Oncaea speices 
American Fisheries Society (in review). in the Kuroshio Extention in spring.  Fish. 
Klumpp, D. W. and Westernhagen, H. von.  1986.  Oceanogr. (submitted ). 
Nitrogen balance in marine fish larvae: Odate, S.  1977.  On distribution of Pacific saury 
influence of developmental stage and prey in the North Pacific Ocean.  Res. Inst. North 
density.  Marine Biology 93:189-199. Pac. Fish. Sp. Vol. 10 Faculty of Fisheries, 
Kosaka S.  2000.  Life history of the Pacific saury Hokkaido University, Hakodate, Japan, pp. 
Cololabis saira in the northwest Pacific and 353-382. 
considerations on resources fluctuations based Ohtani, K. and Azumaya, T.  1995.  Influence of 
on it.  Bull. Tohoku Natl. Fish. Res. Inst. 63: interannual changes in ocean conditions on the 
1-96. abundance of walleye pollock (Theragra 
Kurita Y. and Sugisaki, H.  2002.  Seasonal chalcogramma) in the eastern Bering Sea. In 
changes in daily ration of Pacific saury, R.J. Beamish. (ed.)  Climate change and 
Cololabis saria. to be submitted to Fish. northern fish populations.  Canadian Special 
Oceanogr. Publication of Fisheries and Aquat. Sci. 121: 
Laurence, G. C.  1976.  Caloric content of some 87-95.  
north Atlantic calanoid copepods.  Fishery Oozeki, Y. and Watanabe, Y.  2000.  Comparison 
Bulletin U.S. 78: 218-220. of somatic growth and otolith increment 
Leonov A.V and Sapozhnikov V.V.  1997.  growth in laboratory-reared larvae of Pacific 
Biohydrochemical model of organic substance saury, Cololabis saira, under different 
transformations and its applying for the temperature conditions.  Marine Biology 136: 
calculation of primary production in the 349-359. 
Okhots Sea ecosystem.  In  Complex studies Oozeki, Y. and Watanabe, Y.  2002.  Environment 
of the Okhotsk Sea ecosystem.  Publ. House factor affecting the larval growth of Pacific 
VNIRO, Moscow, pp. 143-166. (In Russian). saury, Cololabis saira, in the northwestern 
Leonov A.V. and Stygar O.V.  1999.  Seasonal Pacific Ocean.  Fish. Oceanogr. (submitted ). 
variations of biogenic substance  Paul, A. J. and Paul, J. M.  1998a.  Spring and 
concentrations and bioproductivity of waters summer whole-body energy content of 
in northern part of the Caspian Sea.  Vodnye Alaskan juvenile Pacific herring.  Alaska 
Resoursy V. 26 (6), pp. 743-756. (In Russian). Fishery Research Bulletin 5:131-136. 
Limburg, K. E.  1994.  Ecological constraints on Paul, A. J. and Paul, J. M.  1998b.  Comparisons 
growth and migration of juvenile American of whole body energy content of captive 
125
fasting age zero Alaskan Pacific herring lake trout, Salvelinus namaycush: application 
(Clupea pallasi Valenciennes) and cohorts to the Lake Michigan population.  Canadian 
over-wintering in nature.  Journal of Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 40: 
Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 681-698. 
226:75-86. Sugisaki H. and Kurita, Y.  2002.  Daily rhythm 
Paul, A. J., Paul, J. M., and Brown, E. D.  1998.  and seasonal variation of feeding habit of 
Fall and spring somatic energy content for saury.  Fish. Oceanogr. (submitted ). 
Alaskan Pacific herring (Clupea pallasi Suyama S., Sakurai, Y., and Shimazaki, K.  1996  
Valenciennes 1847) relative to age, size and Age and growth of pacific saury Cololabis 
sex.  Journal of Experimental Marine Biology 
saira (Brevoort) in the Western North Pacific 
and Ecology 223:133-142. Ocean estimated from daily otolith growth 
Pischalnik V.M. and Leonov A.V.  2001.  increments.  Fish. Science 62: 1-7. 
Experience of combined application of Suyama S., Kurita, Y., Kamei, Y., Kajiwara, Y., 
electronic atlas of oceanographical data for and Ueno, Y.  2002.  Annual change of the 
shelf zone of Sakhalin Island and simulation size in each year class of Pacific saury 
mathematical model for the study of (Cololabis saira) estimated based on the 
biotransformation processes in marine hyaline zone in the otolith.  Fish. Oceanogr. 
environment (examples for La Perouse Strait (submitted ). 
and Aniva Bay). (in press, in Russian).  Theilacker, G. H.  1987.  Feeding ecology and 
Polovina, J.J., Mitchum, G.T. and Evans, G.T.  growth energetics of larval northern anchovy, 
1995.  Decadal and basin-scale variation in Engraulis mordax.  Fishery Bulletin U.S. 
mixed layer depth and the impact on 85:213-228. 
biological production in the Central and North Thornton, K. W. and Lessem, A. S.  1978.  A 
Pacific 1960-1988.  Deep Sea Research temperature algorithm for modifying 
42:1701-1716. biological rates. Transactions of the American 
Post, J. R. and Lee, J. A.  1996.  Metabolic Fisheries Society 107:284-287. 
ontogeny of teleost fishes.  Canadian Journal Tian Y., Akamine, T., and Suda, M.  2002a.  
of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 53:910-923. Long-term variability in the abundance of 
Rose, K.A., Rutherford, E.S., McDermot, D.S., Pacific saury in the northwestern Pacific ocean 
Forney, J.L., and Miles, E.L.  1999.  and climate changes during the last century.  
Individual-based model of yellow perch and Bull. Jpn. Soc. Fish. Oceanogr. 66; 16-25. 
walleye populations in Oneida Lake.  Tian Y., Ueno, Y., Akamine, T., and Suda, M.  
Ecological Monographs 69(2): 127-154. 2002b.  Climate-ocean variability and the 
Rudstam, L. G.  1988.  Exploring the dynamics of response of Pacific saury (Cololabis saira) in 
herring consumption in the Baltic: applications the northwestern Pacific during the last 
of an energetic model of fish growth.  Kieler century.  Fish. Sci. (submitted). 
Meeresforschung Sonderheft 6:312-322. Wailes, G. H.  1936.  Food of Clupea pallasii in 
Sherman, K. and Honey, K. A.  1971.  Seasonal southern British Columbia waters.  Journal of 
variations in the food of larval herring in the Biology Board of Canada 1:477-? 
coastal waters of central Maine. Rapports et Watanabe. Y., and Butler, J. L., and Mori, T.  
Proces-Verbaux des Reunions.  Conseil 1988.  Growth of Pacific saury, Cololabis 
International pour l’Exploration de la Mer saira, in the northeastern and northwestern 
160:121-124. Pacific Ocean.  Fish. Bull. U.S. 86: 489-498. 
Stewart, D. J. and Binkowski, F. P.  1986.  Watanabe. Y., and Kuji, Y.  1991.  Verification of 
Dynamics of consumption and food daily growth increment formation in saury 
conversion by Lake Michigan alewives: an otolith by rearing larvae from hatching.  J. 
energetics-modeling synthesis.  Transactions Ichthyol. 38: 11-15. 
of the American Fisheries Society 115:643- Watanabe, Y., Oozeki, Y., and Kitagawa, D.  
661. 1997.  Larval parameters determining 
Stewart, D. J., Weininger, D., Rottiers, D. V., and 
preschooling juvenile production of Pacific 
Edsall, T. A.  1983.  An energetics model for saury (Cololabis Saira) in the northwestern 
126
Pacific.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci., 54: 1067- Ware, D. M.  1975.  Growth, metabolism, and 
1076. optimal swimming speed of a pelagic fish.  
Watanabe. Y., and Lo, N. C. H.  1989.  Larval Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of 
production and mortality of Pacific saury, Canada 32:33-41. 
Cololabis saira, in the northwestern Pacific Wieser, W. and Forstner, H.  1986.  Effects of 
Ocean.  Fish. Bull. U.S. 86: 601-613. temperature and size on the routine rate of 
Ware, D.M.and McFarlane, G.A.  1995.  Climate- oxygen consumption and on the relative scope 
induced changes in Pacific hake (Merluccius for activity in larval cyprinids.  Journal of 
productus) abundance in the Vancouver Island Comparative Physiology B 156:791-796. 
upwelling system.  In R.J. Beamish. (ed.)  Winberg, G.G.  1956.  Rate of metabolism and 
Climate change and northern fish populations.  food requirements of fishes.  Belorussian 
Canadian Special Publication of Fisheries and University, Minsk.  Translated from Russian: 
Aquat. Sci. 121: 509-521.   Fisheries Research Board of Canada 
Translation Service 194, 1960, Ottawa. 
 
127
 
128
Appendix 1 List of Nemuro 2002 workshop participants. 
 
Canada
 
 
KASHIWAI, Makoto B. 
HAY, Douglas E. 
Hokkaido National Fisheries Research Institute 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada 
Katsurakoi-116,  
Pacific Biological Station 
Kushiro, 085-0802  
3190 Hammond Bay Road 
Japan 
Nanaimo, BC. 
kashiwai@fra.affrc.go.jp 
Canada. V9R 5K6 
 
hayd@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
KISHI, Michio J. 
 
Hokkaido University 
 
Minato-cho 3-1-1 
Japan 
Hakodate, 041-8611 
 
Japan 
AZUMAYA, Tomomori 
kishi@salmon.fish.hokudai.ac.jp 
Hokkaido National Fisheries Research Institute 
 
Katsurakoi-116,  
KOBAYASHI, Tokimasa 
Kushiro, 085-0802  
Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute 
Japan 
Samemachi Shimomekurakubo 
azumaya@fra.affrc.go.jp 
Hachinohe, Aomori, 031-0841 
 
Japan 
CHIBA, Sanae 
tokikoba@fra.affrc.go.jp 
Frontier Research System for Global Change 
 
Showa-machi 3173-25, Kanazawaku, Yokohama 
MUKAI, Daiki 
Kanagawa, 236-001  
Hokkaido University 
Japan 
Minato-cho 3-1-1 
chibas@jamstec.go.jp 
Hakodate, 041-8611 
 
Japan 
FUJII, Masahiko 
f980102@ec.hokidai.ac.jp 
National Institute for Environmental Studies 
 
16-2 Onogawa, Tsukuba 
OKUNISHI, Takeshi 
Japan 
Hokkaido University 
fujii.masahiko@nies.go.jp.ac.jp 
Techo-park 1-2-14 Shinonoppro Atshetsu-ku 
 
Sapporo, Hokkaido, 005-8601  
INADA, Masakatsu 
Japan 
Hokkaido University 
t-okunishi@econixe.co.jp 
Minato-cho 3-1-1 
 
Hakodate, 041-8611 
SMITH, Lan S. 
Japan 
Frontier Research System for Global Change 
f990061@ec.hokudai.ac.jp 
Showa-machi 3173-25, Kanazawaku, Yokohama 
 
Kanagawa, 236-001  
ITO, Shin-ichi 
Japan 
Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute 
lanimal@jamstec.go.jp 
Shinhama-cho 3-27-5, Shiogama 
 
Miyagi, 985-0001 
TADOKORO, Kazuaki 
Japan 
Frontier Research System for Global Change 
goito@affrc.go.jp  
Showa-machi 3173-25, Kanazawaku, Yokohama 
 
Kanagawa, 236-001  
KATUKAWA, Toshio 
Japan 
Ocean Research Institute, University of Tokyo 
denden@jamstec.go.jp 
Minamidai-1-15-1, Shinjuku-ku 
 
Tokyo, 164-8639 
 
Japan 
 
katukawa@ori.u-tokyo.ac.jp 
129
TOMOKAZU, Aiki 
Russian Federation 
Hokkaido University 
 
Minato-cho 3-1-1 
ZUENKO, Yury I. 
Hakodate, 041-8611 
Pacific Fisheries Research Center 
Japan 
4 Shevchenko Alley  
f990001@ec.hokudai.ac.jp 
Vladivostok, 690950 
 
Russia 
TSUDA, Atsushi 
kheng@tinro.ru 
Hokkaido National Fisheries Research Institute 
 
Katsurakoi-116,  
LEONOV, Alexander 
Kushiro, 085-0802  
Shirshov Institute of Oceanology 
Japan 
36 Nakhimovsky Prospekt  
tsuda@fra.affrc.go.jp 
Moscow, 117997 
 
Russia 
YAMANAKA, Yasuhiro 
leonov@sio.rssi.ru 
Graduate School of Environmental Earth Science 
 
Hokkaido University 
NAVROTSKY, Vadim V. 
North 10, West 5 Kita-ku 
Pacific Oceanological Institute 
Sapporo, 060-0810 
43 Baltiyskaya Street  
Japan 
Vladivostok, 690041 
galapen@ees.hokudai.ac.jp 
Russia 
 
navr@online.vladivostok.ru 
YOSHIE, Naoki 
 
Graduate School of Environmental Earth Science 
 
Hokkaido University 
U.S.A. 
North 10, West 5 Kita-ku 
 
Sapporo, 060-0810 
KLUMB, Robert A. 
Japan 
Cornell University 
naoki@ees.hokudai.ac.jp 
Cornell Biological Field Station 
 
900 Shackelton Point Road 
 
Bridgeport, NY  13030 
People`s Republic of China 
U.S.A. 
 
rak11@cornell.edu 
HUANG, Daji 
 
2nd Institute of Oceanography 
MEGREY, Bernard A. 
P. O. Box 1207, Hangzhou 
National Marine Fisheries Service 
Zhejiang, 310012 
Alaska Fisheries Science Center 
People`s Republic of China 
7600 Sand Point Way N.E. 
dajih2001@yahoo.com 
Seattle, WA 98115-0070  
 
U.S.A. 
 
bern.megrey@noaa.gov 
Republic of Korea  
 WERNER, Francisco E. 
HONG, Chul-Hoon Department of Marine Science 
Pukyong National University University of North Carolina 
599-1 Daeyeon3-Dong Nam-Gu 
Chapel Hill 
Pusan, 608-737 NC 27599-3300  
Republic of Korea 
U.S.A. 
hongch@pknu.ac.kr cisco@marine.unc.edu 
 
130
Appendix 2 Herring bioenergetic model FORTRAN code for the base case. 
 
C ------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
C Bioenergetic herring model based on the paper of Rudstam (1988).  
C Exploring the dynamics of herring consumption in the Baltic:  
C Aplications of an energetic model of fish growth. 
C Kieler Meeresforsch Sonderth 6:312-322.  
C 
C Originally coded as difference equation in FORTRAN by Kenny Rose 26 Dec 01 
C 
C Corrected and changed to differential equation with Euler and  
C Runge Kutta numerical integration scheme 
C 
C                                    01/03/02 Bernard A. Megrey 
C 
C Added observed and predicted size at age data 
C                                    01/12/02 Bernard A. Megrey 
C 
C Added YOY formulations per Arrhenius (1998) 
C                                    01/22/02 Bernard A. Megrey  
C 
C All relic code removed for general distribution at  
C Nemuro 2002 workshop 
C                                    01/25/02 Bernard A. Megrey 
C 
C 
C ------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
        program NemuroHerring 
       
   include 'stuff.cmn' 
   include 'state.cmn' 
   include 'sizeaa.cmn' 
   REAL NYEARS, NSTEPS, NSTEP 
 
        OPEN(UNIT=11,FILE='nemuro.txt',STATUS='unknown') 
        OPEN(UNIT=8,FILE='compareEuler.out',STATUS='unknown') 
        OPEN(UNIT=9,FILE='sizeatage.out',STATUS='unknown')  
C 
C-----read in the 3 zoop groups from Nemuro output (7th, 9th and 11th columns) 
C 
        do 45 ii=1,731 
        READ(11,999)id(ii),zop1(ii),zop2(ii),zop3(ii) 
999    FORMAT(1x,i3,1x,5(13x,1x),2(e13.6,1x,13x,1x),e13.6) 
C 
C-----   take the first year for now 
C 
        IF(ii.le.365)then 
           zoop1(ii)=zop1(ii) 
           zoop2(ii)=zop2(ii) 
           zoop3(ii)=zop3(ii) 
        endif 
131
45    continue 
 
C------convert Nemuro zoop in uM N/L to g ww/m3 
C------  tt1 is conversion from uM N/liter to g ww/m3 
C------  14 ug N/uM * 1.0e-6 g/ug * 1 g dw/0.07 g N dw  
C------   * 1 g ww/0.2 g dw *  
C------   1.e3 liters/m3 
      do 55 i=1,365 
        tt1=14.0*1.0e-6*(1.0/0.07)*(1.0/0.2)*1.0e3  
        zoop1(i)=zoop1(i)*tt1 
        zoop2(i)=zoop2(i)*tt1 
        zoop3(i)=zoop3(i)*tt1 
 
C----initial weight and age of newly metamphosed herring 
       x(1)=0.2 
        iage=0 
        maxage=0 
  55 continue 
C 
C --- number of state variables 
C 
      nstate=1 
C 
C - time initialization 
C 
        TZERO = 0.0 
        NYEARS = 11.0 
        NSTEPS = 100.0 
        TEND = 365.0*NYEARS 
        dt= 1/NSTEPS 
        TPRINT = 1.0 
        TEPS = 1.0E-05 
 
C 
C --- MAIN TIME LOOP 
C 
      NSTEP=0.0 
      DO WHILE (time .LT. TEND) 
        NSTEP=NSTEP+1.0 
        time= TZERO + NSTEP*dt 
        CALL EULER(x,xdot,nstate,dt,time) 
C       CALL KUTTA(x,xdot,nstate,dt,time) 
        iday=int(amod(time,365.0))+1 
        iyr=int(time/365.)+1 
C 
C-----   update age every time iday 365 goes by and  
C-----   after NSTEP have gone by 
C-----   the NSTEPS test is to avoid incrementing iage 
C-----   every dt 
C 
        IF(iday.eq.365 .and. amod(NSTEP,NSTEPS).eq.0) then 
132
         iage=iage+1 
        jpage(iage)=iage 
         psizeaa(iage)=x(1) 
         if(iage .gt. maxpage) maxpage=iage 
        endif 
C 
C --- check for time to print 
C 
       IF(ABS(AMOD(time,TPRINT)) .LT. TEPS) THEN 
       write(8,1001) time, x(1), wtemp, gcmax 
1001   format(1x,4(f9.3,1x)) 
C      ENDIF 
      ENDIF 
      END DO 
      kage=min(maxoage,maxpage) 
C 
C --- write predicted and observed size-at-age output 
C 
      do 73 i=1,kage 
 write(9,1002) i, psizeaa(i), osizeaa(i) 
73    continue 
1002  format(1x,i4,2(1x,f9.3)) 
 
      close(8) 
      close(9) 
      STOP 
      END 
     SUBROUTINE DER(x,xdot,time) 
 
C------------------------------------------------------ 
C 
C Herring bioenergetics differential equation process. 
C Prey base are in units of micromoles N /m^3 and are  
C converted 
C via converson factors 
C 
C    programmed by BAM 01/05/02 
C 
C Added YOY formulations per Arrhenius (1998) 
C                       01/22/02 Bernard A. Megrey 
C 
C------------------------------------------------------ 
      
    include 'stuff.cmn' 
    include 'state.cmn' 
       
C  WRITE(*,*) 'IN DER', time 
 
       
    iday=int(amod(time,365.0))+1 
    iyr=int(time/365.)+1 
133
C 
C zero out xdot 
C 
 DO 15 i=1,nstate 
 xdot(i)=0.0 
  15 CONTINUE 
C----  start age-0 on day 200 
C----  jday is julian day (1,..., 400) but goes past 365 
C----  iday is counter for day in model simulation 
C----- jjday is julian day (i.e., jday reset for >365) 
C----  I start on day 200; i you want different then change 200 
C---   below and 165, which 365 minus the start day. 
           jday=iday+200 
           IF(jday.le.365)then 
              jjday=jday 
           else 
              jjday=iday-165 
           endif 
 
C 
C-----  generate daily temperatures for a year -- made up 
C   
        t1=float(jjday) 
        t2=12.75-10.99*cos(0.0172*t1)-6.63*sin(0.0172*t1) 
        wtemp=t2-5.0 
        IF(wtemp.le.1.0)wtemp=1.0 
C write(*,*) "wtemp",wtemp 
C50    continue 
 
C 
C Herring = x(1) 
C 
 
C 
C----- set vulnerabilities and k values for 3 zoop groups 
C 
      vul(1)=1.0 
      vul(2)=1.0 
      vul(3)=1.0 
 
      k(1)=100.0 
      k(2)=10.0 
      k(3)=100.0 
C 
C-----if using constant p rather than functional response, set p 
C-----here 
C      p=0.6 
 
 
C-----  loop over years 
C      do 100 iyr=1,9 
134
C----    loop over days for each year 
C        do 200 iday=1,365 
C write(*,*) 'iday jday jjday', iday,jday,jjday 
 
C-----iiday is running value of days in simulation (1,...., 2000) 
C           iiday=(iyr-1)*365+iday 
 
           tt1=1.0/x(1) 
           t1=0.0033*tt1**0.227 
C write(*,*) 't1 tt1', x(1), t1, tt1 
 
c----***this is the new stuff from Arrhenius (1998) for YOY only*** 
c-----   The 5.258 puts resp is in units of g zoop/g fish/day 
c----- [13560 joules/gram oxygen]/4.18 joules/cal = 3244 cal/gO2 
c------[2580 joules/gram zoop]/4.18 joules/cal = 617 cal/g zoop 
c------ 3244/617 = 5.258 
 
           IF(iage.eq.0)then 
             IF(wtemp.le.15.0)then 
                v=5.76*EXP(0.0238*wtemp)*x(1)**0.386 
             endif 
             IF(wtemp.gt.15.0)then 
                v=8.6*x(1)**0.386 
             endif 
             a=EXP((0.03-0.0*wtemp)*v) 
             resp=t1*EXP(0.0548*wtemp)*a*5.258 
           endif 
c------***back to the old equations for respiration for age-1 and 
C------older *** 
           IF(iage.ge.1)then 
             IF(wtemp.le.9.0)then 
              u=3.9*x(1)**0.13*EXP(0.149*wtemp) 
             else 
              u=15.0*x(1)**0.13 
             endif 
             resp=t1*EXP(0.0548*wtemp)*EXP(0.03*u)*5.258 
           endif 
C write(*,*) 'after new stuff' 
C   IF(wtemp.lt.9.0)then 
C              u=3.9*x(1)**0.13* exp(0.149*wtemp) 
C           else 
C              u=15.0*x(1)**0.13 
C           endif 
c--   ---  13,560 joules/g O2  1 cal/4.18 joules  1 g ww/5533 cal 
C         resp=t1*EXP(0.0548*wtemp)*EXP(0.03*u)*0.59 
 
C 
C-----     Thornton and Lessem (1978)temperature effect 
c----**Arrhenius (1998) for age-0  changed te4 from 25 to 23 degrees*** 
           IF(iage.eq.0)then 
             xk1=0.1 
135
             xk2=0.98 
             xk3=0.98 
             xk4=0.01 
 
             te1=1.0 
             te2=15.0 
             te3=17.0 
             te4=23.0 
           endif 
C 
           IF(iage.eq.1)then 
             xk1=0.1 
             xk2=0.98 
             xk3=0.98 
             xk4=0.01 
 
             te1=1.0 
             te2=15.0 
             te3=17.0 
             te4=25.0 
           endif 
           IF(iage.gt.1)then 
             xk1=0.1 
             xk2=0.98 
             xk3=0.98 
             xk4=0.01 
 
             te1=1.0 
             te2=13.0 
             te3=15.0 
             te4=23.0 
           endif 
C 
C- non age dependent temperature effect on consumption 
C             xk1=0.1 
C             xk2=0.98 
C             xk3=0.98 
C             xk4=0.01 
C             te1=1.0 
C             te2=13.0 
C             te3=15.0 
C             te4=23.0 
 
           tt5=(1.0/(te2-te1)) 
           t5=tt5 * alog(0.98*(1.0-xk1)/(0.02*xk1)) 
           t4=exp(t5*(wtemp-te1)) 
 
           tt7 = 1.0/(te4-te3) 
           t7=tt7*alog(0.98*(1.0-xk4)/(0.02*xk4)) 
           t6=exp(t7*(te4-wtemp)) 
 
136
           gcta=(xk1*t4)/(1.0+xk1*(t4-1.0)) 
           gctb=xk4*t6/(1.0+xk4*(t6-1.0)) 
           gctemp=gcta * gctb 
           gcmax=0.642*tt1**0.256*gctemp 
C 
C----- no tempeature effect 
C           gcmax=0.642*tt1**0.256*1.0 
 
C-----  either use fixed p or call functional response 
C      con=p*gcmax 
C      write(*,*) 'der time iday iyr jjday zoop123',time,iday,  
C      iyr,  
C      jjday, zoop1(jjday),zoop2(jjday), zoop3(jjday) 
      cnum=zoop1(jjday)*vul(1)/k(1)+zoop2(jjday)*vul(2)/k(2) 
     $      +zoop3(jjday)*vul(3)/k(3) 
           c1=gcmax*zoop1(jjday)*vul(1)/k(1) 
           c2=gcmax*zoop2(jjday)*vul(2)/k(2) 
           c3=gcmax*zoop3(jjday)*vul(3)/k(3) 
           con1=c1/(1.0+cnum) 
           con2=c2/(1.0+cnum) 
           con3=c3/(1.0+cnum) 
           con=con1+con2+con3 
C 
C --- for comparison to Kenny's version 
C 
C           con=0.75*gcmax 
C 
C --- to tune to observed size at age data 
           con=0.48*gcmax 
C 
C --- egestion 
C 
           f=0.16*con 
C 
C --- excretion 
           e=0.1*(con-f) 
C 
C --- Specific Dynamic Action 
C 
c------   *******Arrhenius (1998)  changed SDA from 17.5% to 15% **** 
           IF(iage.eq.0)sda=0.15*(con-f) 
           IF(iage.ge.1)sda=0.175*(con-f) 
 
 
c-----   J/g ww 1 cal=4.18 J 
C  con1=con*2580.0/5533.0 
C write(*,*) 'der',con1,resp,xdot(1) 
C 
C --- bioenergetics differential equation 
C 
          xdot(1)=(con-resp-f-e-sda)*x(1)*2580./5533. 
137
 
          IF(wtemp.le.1.0)xdot(1)=0.0 
      t1=float(jjday) 
  if(amod(t1,365.0).ge.152.0.and.amod(t1,365.0).le.156.0) then 
          write(*,*) 'in spawn' 
   xdot(1)=(con-resp-f-e-sda-0.20)*x(1)*2580./5533. 
          endif 
 
 
c-----   update age every time day 365 goes by 
c         IF(iday.eq.365) then 
c   iage=iage+1 
c        jage(iage)=iage 
c           psizeaa(iage)=x(1) 
c            write(*,*)'iday, iyr, jjday, iage, maxage',iday, iyr, 
c     $      jjday, iage, maxage 
c           if(iage .gt. maxage) maxage=iagec 
c     endif 
 
C WRITE(*,*) 'OUT OF DER' 
      RETURN 
      END 
 SUBROUTINE EULER(x,xdot,nstate,dt,time) 
C------------------------------------------------------ 
C 
C USE THE EULER METHOD TO SOLVE A SYSTEM OF NONLINEAR  
C DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS. A SUBROUTINE DER IS NEEDED  
C TO COMPUTE THE DERIVATIVS OF THE STATE VARIBALES 
C 
C X - STATE VARIABLE ARRAY 
C XDOT - ARRAY OF DERIVATIVES OF STATE ARIABLES 
C NSTATE - NUMBER OF STATE VARIABLES 
C DT - TIME STEP 
C TIME - CURRENT TIME 
C 
C------------------------------------------------------ 
 include 'stuff.cmn' 
 include 'state.cmn' 
 
 
      INTEGER I 
 
       CALL DER(x,xdot,time)  
 
        DO 10 i=1, nstate 
   x(i) =x(i) + dt * xdot(i) 
  10  CONTINUE 
 
      RETURN 
      END 
 SUBROUTINE KUTTA(x,xdot,nstate,dt,time) 
138
C------------------------------------------------------ 
C 
C USE THE 4TH ORDER RUNGE KUTTA METHOD TO SOLVE A SYSTEM OF NONLINEAR  
C DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS. A SUBROUTINE DER IS NEEDED  
C TO COMPUTE THE DERIVATIVS OF THE STATE VARIBALES 
C 
C X - STATE VARIABLE ARRAY 
C XDOT - ARRAY OF DERVATIVES OF STATE VARIABLES 
C NSTATE - NUMBER OF STATE VARIABLES 
C DT - TIME STEP 
C TIME - CURRENT TIME 
C 
C programmed by Bernard A. Megrey 01/06/02 
C 
C 
C------------------------------------------------------ 
      include 'stuff.cmn' 
 include 'state.cmn' 
 
      INTEGER I 
      REAL SUMDX(16), DTO2, XPLUS(16) 
C WRITE(*,*) 'IN KUTTA' 
 
      DTO2 = dt/2.0 
 
      CALL DER(x,xdot,time)  
 
      DO 10 I=1, nstate 
   XPLUS(I) = x(I) + DT02 * xdot(I) 
   SUMDX(I)= xdot(I) 
  10  CONTINUE 
 
      CALL DER(XPLUS,xdot,time) 
 
      DO 20 I=1, nstate 
  XPLUS(I) = x(I) + DTO2 * xdot(I) 
  SUMDX(I) = SUMDX(I) + 2.0 * xdot(I) 
  20  CONTINUE 
 
      CALL DER(XPLUS,xdot,time) 
 
      DO 30 I=1, nstate 
  XPLUS(I) = x(I) + dt * xdot(I) 
  SUMDX(I) = SUMDX(I) + 2.0 * xdot(I) 
   30 CONTINUE 
 
      CALL DER(XPLUS,xdot,time) 
 
      DO 40 I=1, nstate 
  SUMDX(I) = SUMDX(I) + xdot(I) 
  x(I) = x(I) + dt * SUMDX(I) / 6.0 
139
   40 CONTINUE 
C      WRITE(*,*) 'OUT OF KUTTA' 
      RETURN 
      END 
 
 
C========================================================== 
C 
C Include file: state.cmn 
C state variable declarations 
C 
C  BAM 1/02/02 
C---------------------------------------------------------- 
      REAL*4 dt, time, x(1), xdot(1) 
      INTEGER*4 nstate 
 
 
C========================================================== 
C 
C Include file: stuff.cmn 
C miscellaneous common block variables 
C 
C  BAM 1/2/02 
C---------------------------------------------------------- 
      COMMON /ZOO/ zoop1(365), zoop2(365), zoop3(365) 
      COMMON /ISV/ wtemp, con, gcmax,f, e ,sda, con1, resp 
  COMMON /TIMER/ iday, jday, iyr, iage 
  REAL*4 zoop1,zoop2,zoop3,k(3),vul(3) 
      REAL*4 zop1(731),zop2(731),zop3(731) 
  INTEGER*4 id(731) 
 
 
C========================================================== 
C 
C Include file: sizeaa.cmn 
C Size at age common block 
C 
C   BAM 1/06/02 
C 
C---------------------------------------------------------- 
      COMMON /SIZEAA/joage(25),jpage(25),psizeaa(25),osizeaa(25), 
     $                 maxoage,maxpage 
C --- joage Observed age 
C --- jpage Predicted age 
C --- psizeaa Predicted size at age 
C --- osizeaa Observed size at age 
 
      INTEGER*4 joage, jpage, maxoage, maxpage 
      REAL*4 psizeaa, osizeaa 
      DATA maxoage /11/ 
      DATA joage /1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,14*0/ 
140
C 
C --- observed size at age Pacific herring  data (wt) from the C  
C --- 1973 year class  
C --- as supplied by Doug Hay 
C 
      DATA osizeaa /8.75,63.0,87.66,124.13,139.26,152.98,177.43, 
     $              185.78,187.64,195.0,208.73,14*0.0/ 
 
141
 
142
Appendix 3 Fully customized herring subroutine.  See Appendix 2 for main program and 
common block including files. 
 
SUBROUTINE DER(x,xdot,time) 
 
C------------------------------------------------------ 
C 
C Herring bioenergetics differential equation process. 
C Prey base are in units of micromoles N /m^3 and are converted 
C via converson factors 
C 
C    programmed by B.A. Megrey 01/05/02 
C 
C Added YOY formulations per Arrhenius 1998 
C                       01/22/02 B.A. Megrey 
 
C modifications and customizations by F.E.Werner and R.A.Klumb 1/26/02 
C while at the Nemuro workshop 
C 
C------------------------------------------------------ 
      
      include 'stuff.cmn' 
      include 'state.cmn' 
       
C 
C- calculate date and year 
C       
      iday=int(amod(time,365.0))+1 
 iyr=int(time/365.)+1 
C 
C zeroout xdot 
C 
 DO 15 i=1,nstate 
 xdot(i)=0.0 
   15 CONTINUE 
c 
c----  start age-0 on day 200 
c----       jday is julian day (1,..., 400) but goes past 365 
c----       iday is counter for day in model simulation 
c----       jjday is julian day (i.e., jday reset for >365) 
c----      I start on day 200; i you want different then change 200 
c----       below and 165, which 365 minus the start day. 
           jday=iday+200 
           IF(jday.le.365)then 
              jjday=jday 
           else 
              jjday=iday-165 
           endif 
C 
C-----  generate daily temperatures for a year -- made up 
C   
143
        t1=float(jjday)                                    ! BaseCase T 
        t2=12.75-10.99*cos(0.0172*t1)-6.63*sin(0.0172*t1)  ! BaseCase T 
        wtemp=t2-5.0                                       ! BaseCase T 
        IF(wtemp.le.1.0)wtemp=1.0                          ! BaseCase T 
 pi=acos(-1.) 
 wtemp=7.717+(5.6796*0.5*(1.-cos(2.*pi*(t1-30.)/365.))) 
C 
C--- Herring weight state variable = x(1) 
C--- weight affect on respiration 
C 
           tt1=1.0/x(1) 
           t1=0.0033*tt1**0.227 
C 
C --- *********this is the new stuff from Arrhenius (1998) for YOY only********* 
C --- The 5.258 puts resp (g oxygen/fish) into units of g zoop/g fish/day 
C --- [13560 joules/gram oxygen]/4.18 joules/cal = 3244 cal/gO2 
C --- [2580 joules/gram zoop]/4.18 joules/cal = 617 cal/g zoop 
C --- so respiration in grams/oxygen/g fish/day is multiplied  
C --- by 3244/617 = 5.258 
C --- to get food energy equivalents of a gram of oxygen respired 
C 
c           IF(iage.eq.0)then                           ! BASE 
c             IF(wtemp.le.15.0)then                      ! BASE 
c                v=5.76*EXP(0.0238*wtemp)*x(1)**0.386    ! BASE 
c             endif                                      ! BASE 
c             IF(wtemp.gt.15.0)then                      ! BASE 
c                v=8.6*x(1)**0.386                       ! BASE 
c             endif                                      ! BASE 
c             a=EXP((0.03-0.0*wtemp)*v)                  ! BASE 
c             resp=t1*EXP(0.0548*wtemp)*a*5.258          ! BASE 
c           endif                                        ! BASE 
C 
           IF(iage.eq.0)then                    !  R.A. Klumb (26 Jan 2002) 
       t1=0.00528*tt1**0.007             !  R.A. Klumb (26 Jan 2002) 
       resp=t1*EXP(0.083*wtemp)*5.258    !  R.A. Klumb (26 Jan 2002) 
    end if                               !  R.A. Klumb (26 Jan 2002) 
C 
C --- *********back to the old equations for respiration for age-1 and  
C --- older******** 
C 
           IF(iage.ge.1)then 
C Base             IF(wtemp.le.9.0)then 
             IF(wtemp.le.9.655)then 
              u=3.9*x(1)**0.13*EXP(0.149*wtemp) 
             else 
              u=15.0*x(1)**0.13 
             endif 
             resp=t1*EXP(0.0548*wtemp)*EXP(0.03*u)*5.258 
           endif 
C 
C --- Thornton and Lessem temperature effect 
144
C --- age dependent values 
C --- *******Arrhenius (1998)for age-0  changed te4 from 25 to 23 degrees****** 
C 
           IF(iage.eq.0)then 
             xk1=0.1 
             xk2=0.98 
             xk3=0.98 
             xk4=0.01 
 
C Base             te1=1.0 
C Base             te2=15.0 
C Base             te3=17.0 
C Base             te4=23.0 
       
             te1=8.0 
             te2=10.897 
             te3=11.310 
             te4=12.552 
           endif 
C 
           IF(iage.eq.1)then 
             xk1=0.1 
             xk2=0.98 
             xk3=0.98 
             xk4=0.01 
 
C Base             te1=1.0 
C Base             te2=15.0 
C Base             te3=17.0 
C Base             te4=25.0 
       
             te1=8.0 
             te2=10.897 
             te3=11.310 
             te4=12.966 
           endif 
     
           IF(iage.gt.1)then 
             xk1=0.1 
             xk2=0.98 
             xk3=0.98 
             xk4=0.01 
 
C Base             te1=1.0 
C Base             te2=13.0 
C Base             te3=15.0 
C Base             te4=23.0 
       
             te1=8.0 
             te2=10.483 
             te3=10.897 
145
             te4=12.552 
           endif 
 
           tt5=(1.0/(te2-te1)) 
           t5=tt5 * alog(0.98*(1.0-xk1)/(0.02*xk1)) 
           t4=exp(t5*(wtemp-te1)) 
 
           tt7 = 1.0/(te4-te3) 
           t7=tt7*alog(0.98*(1.0-xk4)/(0.02*xk4)) 
           t6=exp(t7*(te4-wtemp)) 
 
           gcta=(xk1*t4)/(1.0+xk1*(t4-1.0)) 
           gctb=xk4*t6/(1.0+xk4*(t6-1.0)) 
           gctemp=gcta * gctb 
           gcmax=0.642*tt1**0.256*gctemp 
C       
C --- multispecies functional response  
C --- usse either this or adjust little p 
C       
C----- set vulnerabilities and k values for 3 zoop groups 
C 
      vul(1)=1.0 
      vul(2)=1.0 
      vul(3)=1.0 
 
      k(1)=0.3638 
      k(2)=0.0364 
      k(3)=0.3638 
       
c      k(1)=2000.0 
c      k(2)=200.0 
c      k(3)=2000.0 
 
      cnum=zoop1(jjday)*vul(1)/k(1)+zoop2(jjday)*vul(2)/k(2) 
     $      +zoop3(jjday)*vul(3)/k(3) 
           c1=gcmax*zoop1(jjday)*vul(1)/k(1) 
           c2=gcmax*zoop2(jjday)*vul(2)/k(2) 
           c3=gcmax*zoop3(jjday)*vul(3)/k(3) 
           con1=c1/(1.0+cnum) 
           con2=c2/(1.0+cnum) 
           con3=c3/(1.0+cnum) 
           con=con1+con2+con3 
C 
C-----if using constant p rather than functional response, set p here 
C --- to tune to observed size at age data. If using functional response 
C --- comment the next line out 
C 
        con=0.6375*gcmax 
C 
C --- egestion 
C 
146
           f=0.16*con                    ! Base Case 
           IF(iage.eq.0)f=0.125*con      ! Age-dependent – R.A. Klumb (26 Jan 2002) 
C 
C --- excretion 
           e=0.1*(con-f)                 ! Base Case 
           IF(iage.eq.0)e=0.078*con      ! Age-dependent – R.A. Klumb (26 Jan 2002) 
C 
C --- Specific Dynamic Action 
C 
c------   *******Arrhenius (1998) age dependent SDA from 17.5% to 15% **** 
           IF(iage.eq.0)sda=0.15*(con-f)    ! Base Case 
           IF(iage.eq.0)sda=0.125*(con-f)   ! Age-dependent – R.A. Klumb (26 Jan 2002) 
           IF(iage.ge.1)sda=0.175*(con-f) 
C 
C --- use the ratio of calories/g of zoop (2580) to calories/g of fish (5533) 
C 
C --- bioenergetics differential equation - constant energy density for herring 
C 
C          xdot(1)=(con-resp-f-e-sda)*x(1)*2580./5533. ! Base Case 
C 
C    include seasonal variation of energy density for .ge. 2 yr olds 
C 
          if(iage.ge.2)then 
             enMar1=5750. 
             jdMar1=60 
             enOct1=9800. 
             jdOct1=274 
             if(jjday.lt.60)then 
        delen=(enMar1-enOct1)/151 
        en=enOct1+(90+jjday)*delen 
      end if 
      if(jjday.ge.60.and.jjday.lt.274)then 
        delen=(enOct1-enMar1)/(jdOct1-jdMar1) 
        en=enMar1+(jjday-jdMar1)*delen 
      end if 
      if(jjday.ge.274)then 
        delen=(enMar1-enOct1)/151 
        en=enOct1+(jjday-jdOct1)*delen 
      end if 
   else 
      en=4460. 
   end if    
          xdot(1)=(con-resp-f-e-sda)*x(1)*2580./en       
 
          IF(wtemp.le.1.0)xdot(1)=0.0 
C 
C --- Spawning section. Assume loose 20% of body weight/day 
C     t1=float(jjday) 
c  if(amod(t1,365.0) .ge. 152.0 .and.  
c     &             amod(t1,365.0) .le. 156.0) then 
c   xdot(1)=(con-resp-f-e-sda-0.20)*x(1)*2580./5533. 
147
c          endif 
  
      RETURN 
      END 
148
Appendix 4 NEMURO.FISH (NEMURO FORTRAN code supplied by Yasuhiro Yamanaka) 
with the herring bioenergetic model (base case) (supplied by Bernard Megrey and Ken Rose).  
The herring model is linked to NEMURO in a one-way static link. 
!*********************************************************************** 
!     NEMURO model     Jun 13, 2002  written by Yasuhiro Yamanaka 
!***********************************************************************      
 program NEMURO.FISH 
      implicit none 
!     ..... Control for Time Ingration ..... 
      character(19)     :: Cstart = '0001/07/20 00:00:00'  ! Starting date 
      character(19)     :: Cend   = '0011/07/21 00:00:00'  ! Ending date 
      character(19)     :: Cstep  = '0000/00/00 01:00:00'  ! Time step  
      character(19)     :: Cmon   = '0000/00/01 00:00:00'  ! Monitor Interval 
      character(19)     :: CTime 
      real(8)           :: dt, TTime, Tbefore, Season, Tmon 
      integer           :: Iyr, Imon, Iday, Ihour, Imin, Isec 
!     ..... scale conversion ..... 
      real(8),parameter :: d2s       = 86400.0d0    ! day ---> sec 
      real(8),parameter :: mcr       = 1.0d-6       ! micro 
!     ..... Prognostic Variables (with initial conditions) and Thier Source Term ..... 
      real(8)           :: TPS    =  0.1D-6, QPS    ! Small Phytoplankton [molN/l] 
      real(8)           :: TPL    =  0.1D-6, QPL    ! Large Phytoplankton 
      real(8)           :: TZS    =  0.1D-6, QZS    ! Small Zooplankton 
      real(8)           :: TZL    =  0.1D-6, QZL    ! Large Zooplankton 
      real(8)           :: TZP    =  0.1D-6, QZP    ! Pradatory Zooplankton 
      real(8)           :: TNO3   =  5.0D-6, QNO3   ! Nitrate 
      real(8)           :: TNH4   =  0.1D-6, QNH4   ! Ammmonium 
      real(8)           :: TPON   =  0.1D-6, QPON   ! Particulate Organic Nitrogen 
      real(8)           :: TDON   =  0.1D-6, QDON   ! dissolved Organic Nitrogen 
      real(8)           :: TSiOH4 = 10.0D-6, QSiOH4 ! Silicate 
      real(8)           :: TOpal  =  0.1D-7, QOpal  ! Particulate Opal 
!     ..... Prognostic Variables (with initial conditions) and Thier Source Term ..... 
!      real(8)           :: THrr   =  0.2D0,  QHrrl  ! Particulate Opal 
!     ...... Light Condition Parameters ....... 
      real(8),parameter :: alpha1   = 4.0D-2     ! Light Dissipation coefficient of sea water[/m] 
      real(8),parameter :: alpha2   = 4.0D4      ! PS+PL Selfshading coefficientS+PL      [l/molN/m] 
      real(8),parameter :: IoptS    = 0.15D0     ! PS Optimum Light Intensity  S          [ly/min] 
      real(8),parameter :: IoptL    = 0.15D0     ! PL Optimum Light Intensity             [ly/min] 
      integer,parameter :: LLN      = 10         ! Number of sublayer for calculating of Lfc 
      real(8)           :: LfcS                  ! Light factor for PS 
      real(8)           :: LfcL                  ! Light factor for PL 
      real(8)           :: kappa, Lint, dLint, LfcUS, LfcUL, LfcDS, LfcDL 
      integer           :: L 
!     ...... biological Parameters ...... 
      real(8),parameter :: VmaxS    = 0.4D0/d2s  ! PS Maximum Photosynthetic rate @0degC   [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KNO3S    = 1.0D-6     ! PS Half satuation constant for Nitrate  [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: KNH4S    = 0.1D-6     ! PS Half satuation constant for Ammonium [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: PusaiS   = 1.5D6      ! PS Ammonium Inhibition Coefficient      [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: KGppS    = 6.93D-2    ! PS Temp. Coeff. for Photosynthetic Rate [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: MorPS0   = 5.85D4/d2s ! PS Mortality Rate @0degC                [/s] 
149
      real(8),parameter :: KMorPS   = 6.93D-2    ! PS Temp. Coeff. for Mortality           [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: ResPS0   = 0.03D0/d2s ! PS Respiration Rate at @0degC           [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KResPS   = 0.0519D0   ! PS Temp. Coeff. for Respiration         [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: GammaS   = 0.135D0    ! PS Ratio of Extracell. Excret. to Photo.[(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: VmaxL    = 0.8D0/d2s  ! PL Maximum Photosynthetic rate @0degC   [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KNO3L    = 3.00D-6    ! PL Half satuation constant for Nitrate  [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: KNH4L    = 0.30D-6    ! PL Half satuation constant for Ammonium [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: KSiL     = 6.00D-6    ! PL Half satuation constant for Silicate [molSi/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: PusaiL   = 1.50D6     ! PL Ammonium Inhibition Coefficient      [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: KGppL    = 6.93D-2    ! PL Temp. Coeff. for Photosynthetic Rate [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: MorPL0   = 2.90D4/d2s ! PL Mortality Rate @0degC                [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KMorPL   = 6.93D-2    ! PL Temp. Coeff. for Mortality           [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: ResPL0   = 0.03D0/d2s ! PL Respiration Rate at @0degC           [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KResPL   = 0.0519D0   ! PL Temp. Coeff. for Respiration         [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: GammaL   = 0.135D0    ! PL Ratio of Extracell. Excret. to Photo.[(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxS   = 0.40D0/d2s ! ZS Maximum Rate of Grazing PS @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KGraS    = 6.93D-2    ! ZS Temp. Coeff. for Grazing             [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: LamS     = 1.40D6     ! ZS Ivlev constant                       [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: PS2ZSstar= 0.043D-6   ! ZS Threshold Value for Grazing PS       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: AlphaZS  = 0.70D0     ! ZS Assimilation Efficiency              [(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: BetaZS   = 0.30D0     ! ZS Growth Efficiency                    [(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: MorZS0   = 5.85D4/d2s ! ZS Mortality Rate @0degC                [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KMorZS   = 0.0693D0   ! ZS Temp. Coeff. for Mortality           [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxLps = 0.10D0/d2s ! ZL Maximum Rate of Grazing PS @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxLpl = 0.40D0/d2s ! ZL Maximum Rate of Grazing PL @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxLzs = 0.40D0/d2s ! ZL Maximum Rate of Grazing ZS @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KGraL    = 6.93D-2    ! ZL Temp. Coeff. for Grazing             [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: LamL     = 1.4000D6   ! ZL Ivlev constant                       [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: PS2ZLstar= 4.00D-8    ! ZL Threshold Value for Grazing PS       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: PL2ZLstar= 4.00D-8    ! ZL Threshold Value for Grazing PL       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: ZS2ZLstar= 4.00D-8    ! ZL Threshold Value for Grazing ZS       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: AlphaZL  = 0.70D0     ! ZL Assimilation Efficiency              [(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: BetaZL   = 0.30D0     ! ZL Growth Efficiency                    [(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: MorZL0   = 5.85D4/d2s ! ZL Mortality Rate @0degC                [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KMorZL   = 0.0693D0   ! ZL Temp. Coeff. for Mortality           [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxPpl = 0.20D0/d2s ! ZP Maximum rate of grazing PL @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxPzs = 0.20D0/d2s ! ZP Maximum rate of grazing ZS @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxPzl = 0.20D0/d2s ! ZP Maximum rate of grazing ZL @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KGraP    = 6.93D-2    ! ZP Temp. Coeff. for grazing             [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: LamP     = 1.4000D6   ! ZP Ivlev constant                       [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: PL2ZPstar= 4.00D-8    ! ZP Threshold Value for Grazing PL       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: ZS2ZPstar= 4.00D-8    ! ZP Threshold Value for Grazing ZS       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: ZL2ZPstar= 4.00D-8    ! ZP Threshold Value for Grazing ZL       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: PusaiPL  = 4.605D6    ! ZP Preference Coeff. for PL             [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: PusaiZS  = 3.010D6    ! ZP Preference Coeff. for ZS             [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: AlphaZP  = 0.70D0     ! ZP Assimilation Efficiency              [(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: BetaZP   = 0.30D0     ! ZP Growth Efficiency                    [(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: MorZP0   = 5.85D4/d2s ! ZP Mortality Rate @0degC                [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KMorZP   = 0.0693D0   ! ZP Temp. Coeff. for Mortality           [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: Nit0     = 0.03D0/d2s ! NH4 Nitrification Rate @0degC           [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KNit     = 0.0693D0   ! NH4 Temp. coefficient for Nitrification [/degC] 
150
      real(8),parameter :: VP2N0    = 0.10D0/d2s ! PON Decomp. Rate to Ammonium @0degC     [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KP2N     = 6.93D-2    ! PON Temp. Coeff. for Decomp. to Ammon.  [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: VP2D0    = 0.10D0/d2s ! PON Decomp. Rate to DON @0degC          [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KP2D     = 6.93D-2    ! PON Temp. Coeff. for Decomp. to DON     [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: VD2N0    = 0.20D0/d2s ! DON Decomp. Rate to Ammonium @0degC     [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KD2N     = 6.93D-2    ! DON Temp. Coeff. for Decomp. to Ammon.  [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: VO2S0    = 0.10D0/d2s ! Opal Decomp. Rate to Silicate @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KO2S     = 6.93D-2    ! Opal Temp. Coeff. for Decomp.to Silicate[/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: RSiN     = 2.0D0          !Si/N ratio                      [molSi/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: RCN      = 106.0D0/16.0D0 !C/N ratio                        [molC/molN] 
!     ..... bottom boundary Condition ..... 
      real(8),parameter :: setVPON  = 40.0D0/d2s ! Settling velocity of PON                [m/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: setVOpal = 40.0D0/d2s ! Settling velocity of Opal               [m/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: TNO3d   =  25.0d-6    ! Nitrate Concentraion in the Deep Layer  [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: TSiOH4d =  35.0d-6    ! Silicate Concentraion in the Deep Layer [molSi/l] 
!     ...... Paramters of ZL Vertical Migration ..... 
      character(19)     :: CZup ='0000/04/01 00:00:00' ! Date Coming up to the Euphotic Layer 
      character(19)     :: CZdwn='0000/09/01 00:00:00' ! Date Returning to the Deep Layer 
      real(8)           :: TZup, TZdwn, TZLd, SVRate=0.2D0 
      integer           :: IyrU, ImonU, IdayU ,IhourU, IminU, IsecU 
      integer           :: IyrD, ImonD, IdayD ,IhourD, IminD, IsecD 
! 
      real(8)           :: GppPSn,  GppNPSn, GppAPSn, RnewS, ResPSn,  MorPSn,  ExcPSn 
      real(8)           :: GppPLn,  GppNPLn, GppAPLn, RnewL, ResPLn,  MorPLn,  ExcPLn 
      real(8)           :: GppPLsi, GppSiPLsi,               ResPLsi, MorPLsi, ExcPLsi 
      real(8)           :: GraPS2ZSn, GraPS2ZLn,  GraPL2ZLn, GraPL2ZLsi, GraZS2ZLn 
      real(8)           :: GraPL2ZPn, GraPL2ZPsi, GraZS2ZPn, GraZL2ZPn 
      real(8)           :: EgeZSn, MorZSn, ExcZSn, EgeZLn, EgeZLsi, MorZLn, ExcZLn 
      real(8)           ::                         EgeZPn, EgeZPsi, MorZPn, ExcZPn 
      real(8)           :: DecP2N, DecP2D, DecD2N, DecO2S, Nit 
      real(8)           :: ExpPON, ExpOpal,ExcNO3, ExcSiOH4 
      integer           :: lt=0 , nt 
! 
!     ..... Environmental Condition ..... 
      real(8)           :: Temp                            ! Temperature [degC] 
      real(8)           :: Lint0                           ! Light Intencity at sea surface [ly/min] 
      real(8)           :: MLD = 30.0d0                    ! Mixed Layer Depth [m] 
      real(8)           :: ExcTime = 1.0d0 / (100.0d0*d2s) ! Exch. Coeff. between Sur-Deep [/s] 
!     ..... statement function & def. type of functions ..... 
      real(8)           :: cd2tt, nd2tt 
      character(19)     :: tt2cd 
      real(8)           :: Td, GraF, Mich, a, b, c 
      Td  (a,b)   = a * exp(b*Temp) 
      GraF(a,b,c) = MAX( 0.0D0, 1.0 - exp(a * (b - c))) 
      Mich(a,b)   = b / ( a + b ) 
! 
!     ***** Initial Setting ***** 
!     ..... for time control ..... 
      TTime = cd2tt(Cstart)                                ! Starting Date 
      CTime = TT2CD(TTime)                                 ! present time (charactor form) 
      dt    = cd2tt(Cstep) - cd2tt('0000/00/00 00:00:00')  ! Time Step (real8 form) 
151
      Tmon  = cd2tt(Cmon)  - cd2tt('0000/00/00 00:00:00')  ! Monitor Interval (real8 form) 
      nt = NINT( ( cd2tt(Cend) - cd2tt(Cstart) ) / dt )    ! Total Time Steps 
!     ..... for Vertical Migration ...... 
      TZup  = CD2TT( CZup  ) 
      TZdwn = CD2TT( CZdwn ) 
      call TT2ND(IyrU, ImonU, IdayU ,IhourU, IminU, IsecU ,TZup ) 
      call TT2ND(IyrD, ImonD, IdayD ,IhourD, IminD, IsecD ,TZdwn) 
      TZLd = TZL  ! ZL living in the deep layer at the initial condition 
      TZL  = 0.0 
!     ..... File Open for monitoring output ..... 
      open( 10, file='Results.csv', form='FORMATTED' ) 
      write(10,'(A,13(",", A))') 'Time(day)', & 
                    'NO3'   , 'NH4'     , 'PS'     , 'PL'      , & 
                    'ZS'    , 'ZL'      , 'ZP'     , 'PON'     , & 
                    'DON'   , 'SiOH4'   , 'Opal'   , 'TotalN'  , 'TotalSi' 
      write(10,'(A,11(",", F8.4))') CTime, & 
                    TNO3/mcr, TNH4  /mcr, TPS  /mcr, TPL /mcr, & 
                    TZS /mcr, TZL   /mcr, TZP  /mcr, TPON/mcr, & 
                    TDON/mcr, TSiOH4/mcr, TOpal/mcr 
      open( 11, file='Forcing.csv', form='FORMATTED' ) 
      write(11,'(A,13(",", A))') 'Time(day)','Lint0', 'TMP', 'MLD', 'ExcTime' 
      write(11,'(A,13(",", 1PE10.4))') CTime, Lint0, Temp, MLD, ExcTime*d2s 
! 
!     ****** Main Loop ***** 
      do lt = 1, nt 
!        ..... time control (Season : 0 to 1, parcentage in a year)..... 
         Tbefore = TTime                                 ! one step before present time 
         TTime   = TTime + dt                            ! present time (real8 form) 
         CTime = TT2CD(TTime)                            ! present time (charactor form) 
         CALL TT2ND(Iyr, Imon, Iday ,Ihour, Imin, Isec ,TTime) 
         Season = ( TTime                  - ND2TT(Iyr  ,1,1,0,0,0) )/  & 
                  ( ND2TT(Iyr+1,1,1,0,0,0) - ND2TT(Iyr  ,1,1,0,0,0) ) 
! 
!        ..... Example of Boundray condition ..... 
         Lint0 = 0.1d0 * ( 1.0D0 + 0.3d0 * cos( 2.0d0*3.1415926536d0*(Season - 0.50D0) ) ) 
         Temp  =           6.0D0 + 4.0d0 * cos( 2.0d0*3.1415926536d0*(Season - 0.65D0) ) 
         if (Temp .lt. 4.0 ) then 
            MLD = MLD + dt * (150.0d0 - MLD ) / ( 100.0d0 * d2s ) 
            ExcTime = ExcTime + dt * ( 1.0d0/( 40.0d0*d2s) - ExcTime ) / (100.0d0*d2s) 
         else 
            MLD = MLD + dt * ( 30.0d0 - MLD ) / (   5.0d0 * d2s ) 
            ExcTime = ExcTime + dt * ( 1.0d0/(100.0d0*d2s) - ExcTime ) / (  5.0d0*d2s) 
         end if 
! 
!        ..... Light Factors (LfcS, LfcL)..... 
         Lint = Lint0 
         LfcDS = Lint/IoptS * exp(1.0D0 - Lint/IoptS) 
         LfcDL = Lint/IoptL * exp(1.0D0 - Lint/IoptL) 
         LfcS  = 0.0D0 
         LfcL  = 0.0D0 
         Kappa = alpha1 + alpha2 * ( TPS + TPL ) 
152
         dLint = exp( -Kappa * (MLD/LLN) ) 
         do L = 1, LLN 
            LfcUS  = LfcDS 
            LfcUL  = LfcDL 
            Lint   = Lint       * dLint 
            LfcDS  = Lint/IoptS * exp( 1.0D0 - Lint/IoptS ) 
            LfcDL  = Lint/IoptL * exp( 1.0D0 - Lint/IoptL ) 
            LfcS   = LfcS + ( LfcUS + LfcDS ) * 0.5D0 / LLN 
            LfcL   = LfcL + ( LfcUL + LfcDL ) * 0.5D0 / LLN 
         end do 
!        ..... Photosynthesis of PS ..... 
         GppNPSn   = Mich( KNO3S, TNO3 ) * exp( - PusaiS * TNH4 ) 
         GppAPSn   = Mich( KNH4S, TNH4 ) 
         GppPSn    = Td(VmaxS, KGppS) * LfcS * TPS * ( GppNPSn + GppAPSn ) 
         RnewS     = GppNPSn / ( GppNPSn + GppAPSn ) 
         ResPSn    = Td( ResPS0, KResPS ) * TPS 
         MorPSn    = Td( MorPS0, KMorPS ) * TPS * TPS 
         ExcPSn    = GammaS               * GppPSn 
!        ..... Photosynthesis of PL ..... 
         GppNPLn   = Mich( KNO3L, TNO3   ) * exp( - PusaiL * TNH4 ) 
         GppAPLn   = Mich( KNH4L, TNH4   ) 
         GppSiPLsi = Mich( KSiL , TSiOH4 ) 
         GppPLn    = Td(VmaxL, KGppL) * LfcL * TPL * min( ( GppNPLn + GppAPLn ), GppSiPLsi ) 
         RnewL     = GppNPLn / ( GppNPLn + GppAPLn ) 
         ResPLn    = Td( ResPL0, KResPL ) * TPL 
         MorPLn    = Td( MorPL0, KMorPL ) * TPL * TPL 
         ExcPLn    = GammaL               * GppPLn 
!        ..... Grazing PS, PL, ZS, ZL --> ZS, ZL, ZP ..... 
         GraPS2ZSn = Td(GRmaxS,  KGraS) *GraF(LamS,PS2ZSstar,TPS) *TZS 
         GraPS2ZLn = Td(GRmaxLps,KGraL) *GraF(LamL,PS2ZLstar,TPS) *TZL 
         GraPL2ZLn = Td(GRmaxLpl,KGraL) *GraF(LamL,PL2ZLstar,TPL) *TZL 
         GraZS2ZLn = Td(GRmaxLzs,KGraL) *GraF(LamL,ZS2ZLstar,TZS) *TZL 
         GraPL2ZPn = Td(GRmaxPpl,KGraP) *GraF(LamP,PL2ZPstar,TPL) *TZP * exp( -PusaiPL *(TZL   
+ TZS)) 
         GraZS2ZPn = Td(GRmaxPzs,KGraP) *GraF(LamP,ZS2ZPstar,TZS) *TZP * exp( -PusaiZS * TZL ) 
         GraZL2ZPn = Td(GRmaxPzl,KGraP) *GraF(LamP,ZL2ZPstar,TZL) *TZP 
!        ..... Mortality, Excration, Egestion for Zooplanktons 
!        ..... Commented out after Saito-san Meeting at 19 Jun, 2000 ..... 
!        BetaZS = 0.3 ** (  1.0 + Mich( TPL, TPS )  ) 
         ExcZSn = (AlphaZS-  BetaZS)   * GraPS2ZSn 
         EgeZSn = (1.0    - AlphaZS)   * GraPS2ZSn 
         MorZSn = Td( MorZS0, KMorZS ) * TZS * TZS 
         ExcZLn = (AlphaZL-  BetaZL)   * (GraPS2ZLn+GraPL2ZLn+GraZS2ZLn) 
         EgeZLn = (1.0    - AlphaZL)   * (GraPS2ZLn+GraPL2ZLn+GraZS2ZLn) 
         MorZLn = Td( MorZL0, KMorZL ) * TZL * TZL 
         ExcZPn = (AlphaZP-  BetaZP)   * (GraPL2ZPn+GraZS2ZPn+GraZL2ZPn) 
         EgeZPn = (1.0    - AlphaZP)   * (GraPL2ZPn+GraZS2ZPn+GraZL2ZPn) 
         MorZPn = Td( MorZP0, KMorZP ) * TZP * TZP 
!        ..... Decomposition PON, DON, Opal ---> NH4, DON, SiOH4 ..... 
         DecP2N    = Td( VP2N0  , KP2N ) * TPON  
         DecP2D    = Td( VP2D0  , KP2D ) * TPON  
153
         DecD2N    = Td( VD2N0  , KD2N ) * TDON  
         DecO2S    = Td( VO2S0  , KO2S ) * TOpal 
         Nit       = Td( Nit0   , KNit ) * TNH4  
!        ..... silica fluxes ..... 
         GppPLsi    = GppPLn    * RSiN 
         ResPLsi    = ResPLn    * RSiN 
         MorPLsi    = MorPLn    * RSiN 
         ExcPLsi    = ExcPLn    * RSiN 
         GraPL2ZLsi = GraPL2ZLn * RSiN 
         GraPL2ZPsi = GraPL2ZPn * RSiN 
         EgeZLsi    = GraPL2ZLsi 
         EgeZPsi    = GraPL2ZPsi 
! 
!        ..... Tendency Terms for biological processes ..... 
         QNO3   = -( GppPSn - ResPSn ) * RnewS   & 
                  -( GppPLn - ResPLn ) * RnewL + Nit 
         QNH4   = -( GppPSn - ResPSn ) * (1.0 - RnewS)   & 
                  -( GppPLn - ResPLn ) * (1.0 - RnewL)   & 
                  - Nit + DecP2N + DecD2N + ExcZSn + ExcZLn + ExcZPn 
         QPS    = GppPSn - ResPSn - MorPSn - ExcPSn - GraPS2ZSn - GraPS2ZLn 
         QPL    = GppPLn - ResPLn - MorPLn - ExcPLn - GraPL2ZLn - GraPL2ZPn 
         QZS    = GraPS2ZSn - GraZS2ZLn - MorZSn - ExcZSn - EgeZSn - GraZS2ZPn 
         QZL    = GraPL2ZLn + GraZS2ZLn - MorZLn - ExcZLn - EgeZLn + GraPS2ZLn - GraZL2ZPn 
         QZP    = GraPL2ZPn + GraZS2ZPn - MorZPn - ExcZPn - EgeZPn + GraZL2ZPn 
         QPON   = MorPSn  + MorPLn  + MorZSn  + MorZLn + MorZPn   & 
                + EgeZPn  + EgeZSn  + EgeZLn  - DecP2N - DecP2D 
         QDON   = ExcPSn  + ExcPLn  + DecP2D  - DecD2N 
         QSiOH4 =-GppPLsi + ResPLsi + ExcPLsi + DecO2S 
         QOpal  = MorPLsi + EgeZLsi + EgeZPsi - DecO2S 
! 
!        ..... Exchange Fluxes between the Surface and Deep Layers ..... 
         ExpPON   = setVPON  / MLD * TPON 
         ExpOpal  = setVOpal / MLD * TOpal 
         ExcNO3   = ExcTime * ( TNO3d   - TNO3   ) 
         ExcSiOH4 = ExcTime * ( TSiOH4d - TSiOH4 ) 
         QNO3   = QNO3   + ExcNO3 
         QSiOH4 = QSiOH4 + ExcSiOH4 
         QPON   = QPON   - ExpPON 
         QOpal  = QOpal  - ExpOpal 
! 
!        ...... Time Integration with Forward Scheme ..... 
         TNO3   = TNO3   + dt * QNO3   
         TNH4   = TNH4   + dt * QNH4   
         TPS    = TPS    + dt * QPS    
         TPL    = TPL    + dt * QPL    
         TZS    = TZS    + dt * QZS    
         TZL    = TZL    + dt * QZL    
         TZP    = TZP    + dt * QZP    
         TPON   = TPON   + dt * QPON   
         TDON   = TDON   + dt * QDON   
         TSiOH4 = TSiOH4 + dt * QSiOH4 
154
         TOpal  = TOpal  + dt * QOpal 
! 
!        ..... Vertical Migration of ZL ..... 
         TZdwn = ND2TT(Iyr, ImonD, IdayD ,IhourD, IminD, IsecD ) 
         TZup  = ND2TT(Iyr, ImonU, IdayU ,IhourU, IminU, IsecU ) 
         if ( (Tbefore .lt. TZdwn).and.(TTime .ge. TZdwn) ) then 
            TZLd = TZL 
            TZL  = 0.0 
            write(*,*) '*** Down ***', CTime 
         end if 
         if ( (Tbefore .lt. TZup).and.(TTime .ge. TZup) ) then 
            TZL = SVRate * TZLd 
            write(*,*) '***  UP  ***', CTime 
         end if 
! 
         call Herring(TTime, Tbefore, TZS, TZL, TZP, Temp) 
! 
!        ..... Monitor ..... 
         if ( int(TTime/Tmon).ne. int(Tbefore/Tmon) ) then 
!           write(*,'(A,13(",", F8.4))') CTime, Season 
            write(10,'(A,11(",", F8.4))') CTime, & 
                    TNO3/mcr, TNH4  /mcr, TPS  /mcr, TPL /mcr, & 
                    TZS /mcr, TZL   /mcr, TZP  /mcr, TPON/mcr, & 
                    TDON/mcr, TSiOH4/mcr, TOpal/mcr 
            write(11,'(A,13(",", 1PE10.4))') CTime, Lint0, Temp, MLD, ExcTime*d2s 
         end if 
      end do 
! 
      close(10); close(11) 
! 
      stop 
      end 
!************************************************************************************ 
      Subroutine Herring(TTime, Tbefore, TZS, TZL, TZP, Temp) 
! 
      implicit none 
      real(8)           :: TTime, Tbefore, TZS, TZL, TZP, Temp 
      real(8),parameter :: d2s       = 86400.0d0    ! day ---> sec 
      integer           :: Iyr, Imon, Iday, Ihour, Imin, Isec 
      character(19)     :: CAge ='0000/07/19 00:00:00' ! Date of Aging ( JJday = 200 ) 
      character(19)     :: CTime 
      real(8)           :: TAge 
      integer           :: iage = 0 
      integer, save     :: IyrA, ImonA, IdayA ,IhourA, IminA, IsecA 
      integer           :: JJday 
      real(8)           :: ZooP1, ZooP2, ZooP3, tt1 
      real(8)           :: t1,t2,wtemp 
      real(8)           :: x(1) =0.2d0, xdot(1) 
      real(8)           :: cd2tt, nd2tt 
      character(19)     :: tt2cd 
      real(8)           :: vul(3), k(3) 
155
      integer(4)        :: id(365) 
      real(8)           :: zop1(365), zop2(365), zop3(365) 
      real(8):: v, a, u, resp 
     real(8) :: xk1,xk2,xk3,xk4,te1,te2,te3,te4,tt5,t5,t4,tt7,t7,t6, gcta,gctb,gctemp,gcmax 
     real(8) :: cnum,c1,c2,c3,con1,con2,con3,con 
     real(8) :: f,e, sda 
! 
      integer, save     :: First = 1 
! 
!     ==================  
      if ( First .eq. 1 ) then; First = 0 
         TAge  = CD2TT( CAge  ) 
         call TT2ND(IyrA, ImonA, IdayA ,IhourA, IminA, IsecA ,TAge ) 
         open( 20, file='Herring.csv', form='FORMATTED' ) 
! 
!!!!        OPEN(UNIT=111,FILE='nemuro.txt',STATUS='unknown') 
!!!!        -----read in the 3 zoop groups from Nemuro output last 3 columns 
!!!!        do JJday=1,365 
!!!!           READ(111,999)id(JJday),zop1(JJday),zop2(JJday),zop3(JJday) 
!!!!  999      FORMAT(1x,i3,1x,3(e13.6,1x)) 
!!!!        end do 
      end if 
!     ================== 
! 
      CTime = TT2CD(TTime)                                 ! present time (charactor form) 
      CALL TT2ND(Iyr, Imon, Iday ,Ihour, Imin, Isec ,TTime) 
      JJday = 1 + ( TTime - ND2TT(Iyr  ,1,1,0,0,0) ) / d2s 
! 
!------convert Nemuro zoop in uM N/L to g ww/m3 
!------  tt1 is conversion from uM N/liter to g ww/m3 
!------  14 ug N/uM * 1.0e-6 g/ug * 1 g dw/0.07 g N dw * 1 g ww/0.2 g dw * 
!------      1.0e3 liters/m3 
! 
      tt1=14.0*1.0e-6*(1.0/0.07)*(1.0/0.2)*1.0e3 
      zoop1 = TZS*tt1 *1.0d6  
      zoop2 = TZL*tt1 *1.0d6  
      zoop3 = TZP*tt1 *1.0d6  
!!!!     zoop1 = zop1(JJday) * tt1 
!!!!     zoop2 = zop2(JJday) * tt1 
!!!!     zoop3 = zop3(JJday) * tt1 
! 
!     ..... Temperature Seting ..... 
! 
      t1=float(jjday) 
      t2=12.75-10.99*cos(0.0172*t1)-6.63*sin(0.0172*t1) 
      wtemp=t2-5.0 
      IF(wtemp.le.1.0)wtemp=1.0 
 
!      write(*,*) TT2CD(cd2tt('0002/01/01 00:00:00')+200.0*86400.0) 
!      stop 
!     ..... Aging of Herring ...... 
156
      TAge = ND2TT(Iyr, ImonA, IdayA ,IhourA, IminA, IsecA ) 
      if ( (Tbefore .lt. TAge).and.(TTime .ge. TAge) ) then 
            write(*,*) '*** Aging +1 of Herring ***', CTime 
            iage = iage + 1 
       end if 
! 
!--- Herring weight state variable = x(1) 
! 
!----- set vulnerabilities and k values for 3 zoop groups 
! 
      vul(1) =   1.0; vul(2) =  1.0; vul(3) =   1.0 
      k  (1) = 0.3638; k  (2) = 0.0364; k  (3) = 0.3638 
! 
! --- weight affect on respiration 
! 
      tt1 = 1.0 / x(1) 
      t1  = 0.0033 * tt1**0.227 
! --- *********this is the new stuff from Ahhrenius for YOY only********* 
! --- The 5.258 puts resp (g oxygen/fish) into units of g zoop/g fish/day 
! --- [13560 joules/gram oxygen]/4.18 joules/cal = 3244 cal/gO2 
! --- [2580 joules/gram zoop]/4.18 joules/cal = 617 cal/g zoop 
! --- so respiration in grams/oxygen/g fish/day is multiplied by 3244/617 = 5.258 
! --- to get food energy equivalents of a gram of oxygen respired 
! 
      IF (iage .eq. 0 )then 
         IF(wtemp.le.15.0)then 
            v = 5.76 * exp( 0.0238 * wtemp ) * x(1)**0.386 
         else 
            v = 8.6 * x(1)**0.386 
         endif 
         a=EXP((0.03-0.0*wtemp)*v) 
         resp=t1*EXP(0.0548*wtemp)*a*5.258 
! --- *********back to the old equations for respiration for age-1 and older******** 
      else   ! (iage .gt. 0) 
         IF (wtemp.le.9.0)then 
            u=3.9*x(1)**0.13*EXP(0.149*wtemp) 
         else 
            u=15.0*x(1)**0.13 
         endif 
            resp=t1*EXP(0.0548*wtemp)*EXP(0.03*u)*5.258 
      endif 
!C 
!C --- Thornton and Lessem temperature effect 
!C --- age dependent values 
!C --- *******Arrhenius for age-0 he changed te4 from 25 to 23 degrees****** 
!C 
      if ( iage .eq. 0 ) then 
         xk1 = 0.1;  xk2 = 0.98;  xk3 = 0.98;  xk4 = 0.01 
         te1 = 1.0;  te2 = 15.0;  te3 = 17.0;  te4 = 23.0 
      else if ( iage .eq. 1 ) then 
         xk1 = 0.1;  xk2 = 0.98;  xk3 = 0.98;  xk4 = 0.01 
157
         te1 = 1.0;  te2 = 15.0;  te3 = 17.0;  te4 = 25.0 
      else if( iage .gt. 1 ) then 
         xk1 = 0.1;  xk2 = 0.98;  xk3 = 0.98;  xk4 = 0.01 
         te1 = 1.0;  te2 = 13.0;  te3 = 15.0;  te4 = 23.0 
      endif 
! 
      tt5 = ( 1.0 / ( te2 - te1 ) ) 
      t5  = tt5 * log( 0.98 * ( 1.0 - xk1 ) / ( 0.02 * xk1 ) ) 
      t4  = exp( t5 * ( wtemp - te1 ) ) 
! 
      tt7 = 1.0 /( te4 - te3 ) 
      t7  = tt7 * log( 0.98 * ( 1.0 - xk4 ) / ( 0.02 * xk4 ) ) 
      t6  = exp( t7 * ( te4 - wtemp ) ) 
! 
      gcta  = ( xk1 * t4 ) / ( 1.0 + xk1 * ( t4 - 1.0 ) ) 
      gctb  = xk4 * t6 / ( 1.0 + xk4 * ( t6 - 1.0 ) ) 
      gctemp= gcta * gctb 
      gcmax = 0.642 * tt1**0.256 * gctemp 
! 
! --- multispecies functional response  
! --- usse either this or adjust little p 
!       
      cnum=zoop1 * vul(1)/k(1) + zoop2*vul(2)/k(2) +zoop3 * vul(3)/k(3) 
      c1=gcmax*zoop1*vul(1)/k(1) 
      c2=gcmax*zoop2*vul(2)/k(2) 
      c3=gcmax*zoop3*vul(3)/k(3) 
      con1=c1/(1.0+cnum) 
      con2=c2/(1.0+cnum) 
      con3=c3/(1.0+cnum) 
      con= con1+con2+con3 
! 
!-----if using constant p rather than functional response, set p here 
! --- to tune to observed size at age data 
!     con=0.425*gcmax 
! 
! --- egestion 
! 
           f=0.16*con 
! 
! --- excretion 
           e=0.1*(con-f) 
! 
! 
! --- Specific Dynamic Action 
! 
!c------   *******Arrhenius age dependent SDA from 17.5% to 15% **** 
           IF ( iage .eq. 0 ) then 
              sda=0.15*(con-f) 
           else 
              sda=0.175*(con-f) 
           end if 
158
!C 
!C --- use the ratio of calories/g of zoop (2580) to calories/g of fish (5533) 
!C 
!C --- bioenergetics differential equation 
!C 
          xdot(1)=(con-resp-f-e-sda)*x(1)*2580./5533. 
! 
          IF(wtemp.le.1.0)xdot(1)=0.0 
!C 
!C --- Spawning section. Assume loose 20% of bosy weight/day 
!C     t1=float(jjday) 
!      if( mod(JJday,365) .ge. 152.0 .and. mod(JJday,365) .le. 156.0) then 
!          xdot(1)=(con-resp-f-e-sda-0.20)*x(1)*2580./5533. 
!          write(*,*) '### Spawning ###' 
!      endif 
! 
!     if (iage .eq. 1 ) then 
!      write(*,*) JJday, wtemp, x(1), xdot(1) 
!      stop 
!      end if 
!      write(*,'(A,I4,3(1PE14.5))') Ctime, JJday, wtemp, x(1), xdot(1) 
! 
!     Time Integration 
! 
      x(1) = x(1) + 3600.0d0 /d2s * xdot(1) 
! 
!     ..... for Check ..... 
     if ( int(TTime/d2s) .ne. int(Tbefore/d2s) ) then 
!!        write(*,'(A,I4,3(1PE14.5))') Ctime, JJday, wtemp, x(1), xdot(1) 
!!         stop 
!!      write(*,*) TZS, zop1(JJday), TZL,zop2(JJday), TZP,zop3(JJday) 
!!      write(*,*) TZP*1.0d6, zop3(JJday) 
        write(20,'(A,11(",", F12.4))') CTime, x(1), wtemp, gcmax 
      end if 
! 
      return 
! 
      stop 
      end 
!************************************************************************************ 
!* Utilities for Date Control  Writtien by Yasuhiro Yamanaka (galapen@ees.hokudai.ac.jp) * 
!************************************************************************************ 
!     exp. 1997/12/31 23:59:59 --> 6.223158719900000E+10 
!     exp. 0000/01/01 00:00:00 --> 0.000000000000000E+00 
!************************************************************************************ 
      real(8) function CD2TT( Cdate ) 
! 
      integer       :: Iyr, Imon, Iday , Ihour, Imin, Isec 
      real(8)       :: ND2TT 
      character(19) :: Cdate 
! 
159
      if ( len( Cdate ) .ne. 19 ) then 
         write(*,*) '### Length of date is no good ###' 
         stop 
      end if 
      read (Cdate( 1: 4),*)  Iyr 
      read (Cdate( 6: 7),*)  Imon 
      read (Cdate( 9:10),*)  Iday 
      read (Cdate(12:13),*)  Ihour 
      read (Cdate(15:16),*)  Imin 
      read (Cdate(18:19),*)  Isec 
! 
      CD2TT = ND2TT(Iyr, Imon, Iday , Ihour, Imin, Isec) 
! 
      return 
      end function 
!*********************************************************************** 
!     exp. 6.223158719900000E+10 --> 1997/12/31 23:59:59 
!*********************************************************************** 
      character(19) function TT2CD(tt) 
! 
      integer :: Iyr, Imon, Iday , Ihour, Imin, Isec 
      real(8) :: tt 
! 
      call TT2ND( Iyr, Imon, Iday, Ihour, Imin, Isec , tt ) 
! 
      write(TT2CD,'(I4.4,5(A,I2.2))') Iyr, '/', Imon, '/', Iday, & 
                               ' ', Ihour, ':', Imin, ':', Isec 
! 
      return 
      end function 
!*********************************************************************** 
!     exp. 1997,12,31,23,59,59 --> 6.223158719900000E+10 
!*********************************************************************** 
      real(8) function ND2TT(Iyr, Imon, Iday, Ihour, Imin, Isec) 
! 
      integer   :: IM2D(12,0:1) = & 
         reshape( (/ 0,31,59,90,120,151,181,212,243,273,304,334,  & 
                     0,31,60,91,121,152,182,213,244,274,305,335  /), (/12,2/) ) 
      integer   :: Iyr, Imon, Iday, Ihour, Imin, Isec 
      integer   :: Iy4, Iy1, Ileap, Im, Itt 
! 
! 
      Iy4 = 1461 * ( Iyr / 4 ) 
      Iy1 = 365 * mod( Iyr, 4 ) 
! 
      if ( mod( Iyr, 4 ) .ne. 0 ) then 
         Ileap = 0 
      else 
         Ileap = 1 
      end if 
      Im = IM2D( Imon, Ileap) 
160
! 
      Itt = Iy4 + Iy1 + Im + Iday - Ileap 
! 
      ND2TT = Ihour * 3600 + Imin * 60 + Isec 
      ND2TT = ND2TT + Itt * 86400.0D0 
! 
      return 
      end function 
!*********************************************************************** 
!     exp. 6.223158719900000E+10 --> 1997,12,31,23,59,59 
!*********************************************************************** 
      subroutine TT2ND(                                        & 
                 Iyr   , Imon  , Iday   , Ihour, Imin, Isec,   & !O & I 
                 tt    ) 
! 
      integer :: Iyr, Imon, Iday , Ihour, Imin, Isec 
      integer :: Itt, Iy, Iy4, Iyd, Iy1, Ileap, Imd, Im, Its 
      integer   :: IM2D(12,0:1) = & 
         reshape( (/ 0,31,59,90,120,151,181,212,243,273,304,334,  & 
                     0,31,60,91,121,152,182,213,244,274,305,335  /), (/12,2/) ) 
      integer :: IY2D(4) = (/0,366,731,1096/) 
      real(8) :: tt, tt0, ND2TT 
! 
! 
!     ..... ITT [day] ..... 
      Itt = 1 + tt / 86400.0D0 
! 
      Iy4   = (Itt-1) / 1461 
      Iyd   = Itt - Iy4 * 1461 
      do IY = 1, 4 
         if ( IY2D(Iy) + 1 .le. Iyd ) then 
            Iy1 = Iy 
         end if 
      end do 
! 
      Iyr   = Iy4 * 4 + Iy1 - 1 
      if ( mod(Iyr,4) .ne. 0 ) then 
         Ileap = 0 
      else 
         Ileap = 1 
      end if 
      IMD = IYD - IY2D(IY1) 
! 
      do IM = 1, 12 
         if ( IM2D(IM,ILEAP)+1 .le. IMD ) then 
            IMON = IM 
         end if 
      end do 
      IDAY = IMD - IM2D(IMON,ILEAP) 
! 
      TT0 = ND2TT(IYR, IMON, IDAY ,0,0,0) 
161
      ITS = nint(  TT - TT0 ) 
      Ihour = ITS / 3600 
      Imin  = ( ITS - Ihour * 3600 ) / 60 
      Isec  = ITS - Ihour * 3600 - Imin * 60 
! 
      return 
      end subroutine 
! 
162
Appendix 5 NEMURO.FISH (NEMURO FORTRAN code supplied by Yasuhiro Yamanaka) 
with the saury bioenergetic model (base case) (supplied by Bernard Megrey and Ken Rose and 
modified by “team saury”).  The saury model is linked to NEMURO in a one-way static link. 
 
!************************************************************************************ 
!     NEMURO model     Jun 13, 2002  written by Yasuhiro Yamanaka 
!                                    modified by Masahiko Fujii 
!                                                Shin-ichi Ito 
!************************************************************************************ 
      program NEMURO 
      implicit none 
!     ..... Control for Time Ingration ..... 
      character(19)     :: Cstart = '0001/02/01 00:00:00'  ! Starting date 
      character(19)     :: Cend   = '0003/02/01 00:00:00'  ! Ending date 
      character(19)     :: Cstep  = '0000/00/00 01:00:00'  ! Time step  
      character(19)     :: Cmon   = '0000/00/01 00:00:00'  ! Monitor Interval 
      character(19)     :: CTime 
      real(8)           :: dt, TTime, Tbefore, Season, Tmon 
      integer           :: Iyr, Imon, Iday, Ihour, Imin, Isec 
!     ..... scale conversion ..... 
      real(8),parameter :: d2s       = 86400.0d0    ! day ---> sec 
      real(8),parameter :: mcr       = 1.0d-6       ! micro 
!     ..... Prognostic Variables (with initial conditions) and Thier Source Term ..... 
      real(8)           :: TPS    =  0.1D-6, QPS    ! Small Phytoplankton [molN/l] 
      real(8)           :: TPL    =  0.1D-6, QPL    ! Large Phytoplankton 
      real(8)           :: TZS    =  0.1D-6, QZS    ! Small Zooplankton 
      real(8)           :: TZL    =  0.1D-6, QZL    ! Large Zooplankton 
      real(8)           :: TZP    =  0.1D-6, QZP    ! Pradatory Zooplankton 
      real(8)           :: TNO3   =  5.0D-6, QNO3   ! Nitrate 
      real(8)           :: TNH4   =  0.1D-6, QNH4   ! Ammmonium 
      real(8)           :: TPON   =  0.1D-6, QPON   ! Particulate Organic Nitrogen 
      real(8)           :: TDON   =  0.1D-6, QDON   ! dissolved Organic Nitrogen 
      real(8)           :: TSiOH4 = 10.0D-6, QSiOH4 ! Silicate 
      real(8)           :: TOpal  =  0.1D-7, QOpal  ! Particulate Opal 
!     ..... Prognostic Variables (with initial conditions) and Thier Source Term ..... 
!      real(8)           :: THrr   =  0.2D0,  QHrrl  ! Particulate Opal 
!     ...... Light Condition Parameters ....... 
      real(8),parameter :: alpha1   = 4.0D-2     ! Light Dissipation coefficient of sea water[/m] 
      real(8),parameter :: alpha2   = 4.0D4      ! PS+PL Selfshading coefficientS+PL      [l/molN/m] 
      real(8),parameter :: IoptS    = 0.15D0     ! PS Optimum Light Intensity  S          [ly/min] 
      real(8),parameter :: IoptL    = 0.15D0     ! PL Optimum Light Intensity             [ly/min] 
      integer,parameter :: LLN      = 10         ! Number of sublayer for calculating of Lfc 
      real(8)           :: LfcS                  ! Light factor for PS 
      real(8)           :: LfcL                  ! Light factor for PL 
      real(8)           :: kappa, Lint, dLint, LfcUS, LfcUL, LfcDS, LfcDL 
      integer           :: L 
!     ...... biological Parameters ...... 
      real(8),parameter :: VmaxS    = 0.4D0/d2s  ! PS Maximum Photosynthetic rate @0degC   [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KNO3S    = 1.0D-6     ! PS Half satuation constant for Nitrate  [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: KNH4S    = 0.1D-6     ! PS Half satuation constant for Ammonium [molN/l] 
163
      real(8),parameter :: PusaiS   = 1.5D6      ! PS Ammonium Inhibition Coefficient      [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: KGppS    = 6.93D-2    ! PS Temp. Coeff. for Photosynthetic Rate [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: MorPS0   = 5.85D4/d2s ! PS Mortality Rate @0degC                [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KMorPS   = 6.93D-2    ! PS Temp. Coeff. for Mortality           [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: ResPS0   = 0.03D0/d2s ! PS Respiration Rate at @0degC           [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KResPS   = 0.0519D0   ! PS Temp. Coeff. for Respiration         [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: GammaS   = 0.135D0    ! PS Ratio of Extracell. Excret. to Photo.[(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: VmaxL    = 0.8D0/d2s  ! PL Maximum Photosynthetic rate @0degC   [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KNO3L    = 3.00D-6    ! PL Half satuation constant for Nitrate  [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: KNH4L    = 0.30D-6    ! PL Half satuation constant for Ammonium [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: KSiL     = 6.00D-6    ! PL Half satuation constant for Silicate [molSi/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: PusaiL   = 1.50D6     ! PL Ammonium Inhibition Coefficient      [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: KGppL    = 6.93D-2    ! PL Temp. Coeff. for Photosynthetic Rate [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: MorPL0   = 2.90D4/d2s ! PL Mortality Rate @0degC                [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KMorPL   = 6.93D-2    ! PL Temp. Coeff. for Mortality           [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: ResPL0   = 0.03D0/d2s ! PL Respiration Rate at @0degC           [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KResPL   = 0.0519D0   ! PL Temp. Coeff. for Respiration         [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: GammaL   = 0.135D0    ! PL Ratio of Extracell. Excret. to Photo.[(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxS   = 0.40D0/d2s ! ZS Maximum Rate of Grazing PS @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KGraS    = 6.93D-2    ! ZS Temp. Coeff. for Grazing             [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: LamS     = 1.40D6     ! ZS Ivlev constant                       [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: PS2ZSstar= 0.043D-6   ! ZS Threshold Value for Grazing PS       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: AlphaZS  = 0.70D0     ! ZS Assimilation Efficiency              [(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: BetaZS   = 0.30D0     ! ZS Growth Efficiency                    [(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: MorZS0   = 5.85D4/d2s ! ZS Mortality Rate @0degC                [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KMorZS   = 0.0693D0   ! ZS Temp. Coeff. for Mortality           [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxLps = 0.10D0/d2s ! ZL Maximum Rate of Grazing PS @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxLpl = 0.40D0/d2s ! ZL Maximum Rate of Grazing PL @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxLzs = 0.40D0/d2s ! ZL Maximum Rate of Grazing ZS @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KGraL    = 6.93D-2    ! ZL Temp. Coeff. for Grazing             [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: LamL     = 1.4000D6   ! ZL Ivlev constant                       [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: PS2ZLstar= 4.00D-8    ! ZL Threshold Value for Grazing PS       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: PL2ZLstar= 4.00D-8    ! ZL Threshold Value for Grazing PL       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: ZS2ZLstar= 4.00D-8    ! ZL Threshold Value for Grazing ZS       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: AlphaZL  = 0.70D0     ! ZL Assimilation Efficiency              [(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: BetaZL   = 0.30D0     ! ZL Growth Efficiency                    [(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: MorZL0   = 5.85D4/d2s ! ZL Mortality Rate @0degC                [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KMorZL   = 0.0693D0   ! ZL Temp. Coeff. for Mortality           [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxPpl = 0.20D0/d2s ! ZP Maximum rate of grazing PL @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxPzs = 0.20D0/d2s ! ZP Maximum rate of grazing ZS @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxPzl = 0.20D0/d2s ! ZP Maximum rate of grazing ZL @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KGraP    = 6.93D-2    ! ZP Temp. Coeff. for grazing             [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: LamP     = 1.4000D6   ! ZP Ivlev constant                       [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: PL2ZPstar= 4.00D-8    ! ZP Threshold Value for Grazing PL       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: ZS2ZPstar= 4.00D-8    ! ZP Threshold Value for Grazing ZS       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: ZL2ZPstar= 4.00D-8    ! ZP Threshold Value for Grazing ZL       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: PusaiPL  = 4.605D6    ! ZP Preference Coeff. for PL             [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: PusaiZS  = 3.010D6    ! ZP Preference Coeff. for ZS             [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: AlphaZP  = 0.70D0     ! ZP Assimilation Efficiency              [(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: BetaZP   = 0.30D0     ! ZP Growth Efficiency                    [(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: MorZP0   = 5.85D4/d2s ! ZP Mortality Rate @0degC                [/s] 
164
      real(8),parameter :: KMorZP   = 0.0693D0   ! ZP Temp. Coeff. for Mortality           [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: Nit0     = 0.03D0/d2s ! NH4 Nitrification Rate @0degC           [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KNit     = 0.0693D0   ! NH4 Temp. coefficient for Nitrification [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: VP2N0    = 0.10D0/d2s ! PON Decomp. Rate to Ammonium @0degC     [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KP2N     = 6.93D-2    ! PON Temp. Coeff. for Decomp. to Ammon.  [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: VP2D0    = 0.10D0/d2s ! PON Decomp. Rate to DON @0degC          [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KP2D     = 6.93D-2    ! PON Temp. Coeff. for Decomp. to DON     [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: VD2N0    = 0.20D0/d2s ! DON Decomp. Rate to Ammonium @0degC     [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KD2N     = 6.93D-2    ! DON Temp. Coeff. for Decomp. to Ammon.  [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: VO2S0    = 0.10D0/d2s ! Opal Decomp. Rate to Silicate @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KO2S     = 6.93D-2    ! Opal Temp. Coeff. for Decomp.to Silicate[/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: RSiN     = 2.0D0          !Si/N ratio                      [molSi/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: RCN      = 106.0D0/16.0D0 !C/N ratio                        [molC/molN] 
!     ..... bottom boundary Condition ..... 
      real(8),parameter :: setVPON  = 40.0D0/d2s ! Settling velocity of PON                [m/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: setVOpal = 40.0D0/d2s ! Settling velocity of Opal               [m/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: TNO3d   =  25.0d-6    ! Nitrate Concentraion in the Deep Layer  [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: TSiOH4d =  35.0d-6    ! Silicate Concentraion in the Deep Layer [molSi/l] 
!     ...... Paramters of ZL Vertical Migration ..... 
      character(19)     :: CZup ='0000/04/01 00:00:00' ! Date Coming up to the Euphotic Layer 
      character(19)     :: CZdwn='0000/09/01 00:00:00' ! Date Returning to the Deep Layer 
      real(8)           :: TZup, TZdwn, TZLd, SVRate=0.2D0 
      integer           :: IyrU, ImonU, IdayU ,IhourU, IminU, IsecU 
      integer           :: IyrD, ImonD, IdayD ,IhourD, IminD, IsecD 
! 
      real(8)           :: GppPSn,  GppNPSn, GppAPSn, RnewS, ResPSn,  MorPSn,  ExcPSn 
      real(8)           :: GppPLn,  GppNPLn, GppAPLn, RnewL, ResPLn,  MorPLn,  ExcPLn 
      real(8)           :: GppPLsi, GppSiPLsi,               ResPLsi, MorPLsi, ExcPLsi 
      real(8)           :: GraPS2ZSn, GraPS2ZLn,  GraPL2ZLn, GraPL2ZLsi, GraZS2ZLn 
      real(8)           :: GraPL2ZPn, GraPL2ZPsi, GraZS2ZPn, GraZL2ZPn 
      real(8)           :: EgeZSn, MorZSn, ExcZSn, EgeZLn, EgeZLsi, MorZLn, ExcZLn 
      real(8)           ::                         EgeZPn, EgeZPsi, MorZPn, ExcZPn 
      real(8)           :: DecP2N, DecP2D, DecD2N, DecO2S, Nit 
      real(8)           :: ExpPON, ExpOpal,ExcNO3, ExcSiOH4 
      integer           :: lt=0 , nt 
! 
!     ..... Environmental Condition ..... 
      real(8)           :: Temp                            ! Temperature [degC] 
      real(8)           :: Lint0                           ! Light Intencity at sea surface [ly/min] 
      real(8)           :: MLD = 30.0d0                    ! Mixed Layer Depth [m] 
      real(8)           :: ExcTime = 1.0d0 / (100.0d0*d2s) ! Exch. Coeff. between Sur-Deep [/s] 
!     ..... statement function & def. type of functions ..... 
      real(8)           :: cd2tt, nd2tt 
      character(19)     :: tt2cd 
      real(8)           :: Td, GraF, Mich, a, b, c 
      Td  (a,b)   = a * exp(b*Temp) 
      GraF(a,b,c) = MAX( 0.0D0, 1.0 - exp(a * (b - c))) 
      Mich(a,b)   = b / ( a + b ) 
! 
!     ***** Initial Setting ***** 
!     ..... for time control ..... 
165
      TTime = cd2tt(Cstart)                                ! Starting Date 
      CTime = TT2CD(TTime)                                 ! present time (charactor form) 
      dt    = cd2tt(Cstep) - cd2tt('0000/00/00 00:00:00')  ! Time Step (real8 form) 
      Tmon  = cd2tt(Cmon)  - cd2tt('0000/00/00 00:00:00')  ! Monitor Interval (real8 form) 
      nt = NINT( ( cd2tt(Cend) - cd2tt(Cstart) ) / dt )    ! Total Time Steps 
!     ..... for Vertical Migration ...... 
      TZup  = CD2TT( CZup  ) 
      TZdwn = CD2TT( CZdwn ) 
      call TT2ND(IyrU, ImonU, IdayU ,IhourU, IminU, IsecU ,TZup ) 
      call TT2ND(IyrD, ImonD, IdayD ,IhourD, IminD, IsecD ,TZdwn) 
      TZLd = TZL  ! ZL living in the deep layer at the initial condition 
      TZL  = 0.0 
!     ..... File Open for monitoring output ..... 
      open( 10, file='Results.csv', form='FORMATTED' ) 
      write(10,'(A,13(",", A))') 'Time(day)', & 
                    'NO3'   , 'NH4'     , 'PS'     , 'PL'      , & 
                    'ZS'    , 'ZL'      , 'ZP'     , 'PON'     , & 
                    'DON'   , 'SiOH4'   , 'Opal'   , 'TotalN'  , 'TotalSi' 
      write(10,'(A,11(",", F8.4))') CTime, & 
                    TNO3/mcr, TNH4  /mcr, TPS  /mcr, TPL /mcr, & 
                    TZS /mcr, TZL   /mcr, TZP  /mcr, TPON/mcr, & 
                    TDON/mcr, TSiOH4/mcr, TOpal/mcr 
      open( 11, file='Forcing.csv', form='FORMATTED' ) 
      write(11,'(A,13(",", A))') 'Time(day)','Lint0', 'TMP', 'MLD', 'ExcTime' 
      write(11,'(A,13(",", 1PE10.4))') CTime, Lint0, Temp, MLD, ExcTime*d2s 
! 
!     ****** Main Loop ***** 
      do lt = 1, nt 
!        ..... time control (Season : 0 to 1, parcentage in a year)..... 
         Tbefore = TTime                                 ! one step before present time 
         TTime   = TTime + dt                            ! present time (real8 form) 
         CTime = TT2CD(TTime)                            ! present time (charactor form) 
         CALL TT2ND(Iyr, Imon, Iday ,Ihour, Imin, Isec ,TTime) 
         Season = ( TTime                  - ND2TT(Iyr  ,1,1,0,0,0) )/  & 
                  ( ND2TT(Iyr+1,1,1,0,0,0) - ND2TT(Iyr  ,1,1,0,0,0) ) 
! 
!        ..... Example of Boundray condition ..... 
         Lint0 = 0.1d0 * ( 1.0D0 + 0.3d0 * cos( 2.0d0*3.1415926536d0*(Season - 0.50D0) ) ) 
         Temp  =           6.0D0 + 4.0d0 * cos( 2.0d0*3.1415926536d0*(Season - 0.65D0) ) 
         if (Temp .lt. 4.0 ) then 
            MLD = MLD + dt * (150.0d0 - MLD ) / ( 100.0d0 * d2s ) 
            ExcTime = ExcTime + dt * ( 1.0d0/( 40.0d0*d2s) - ExcTime ) / (100.0d0*d2s) 
         else 
            MLD = MLD + dt * ( 30.0d0 - MLD ) / (   5.0d0 * d2s ) 
            ExcTime = ExcTime + dt * ( 1.0d0/(100.0d0*d2s) - ExcTime ) / (  5.0d0*d2s) 
         end if 
! 
!        ..... Light Factors (LfcS, LfcL)..... 
         Lint = Lint0 
         LfcDS = Lint/IoptS * exp(1.0D0 - Lint/IoptS) 
         LfcDL = Lint/IoptL * exp(1.0D0 - Lint/IoptL) 
166
         LfcS  = 0.0D0 
         LfcL  = 0.0D0 
         Kappa = alpha1 + alpha2 * ( TPS + TPL ) 
         dLint = exp( -Kappa * (MLD/LLN) ) 
         do L = 1, LLN 
            LfcUS  = LfcDS 
            LfcUL  = LfcDL 
            Lint   = Lint       * dLint 
            LfcDS  = Lint/IoptS * exp( 1.0D0 - Lint/IoptS ) 
            LfcDL  = Lint/IoptL * exp( 1.0D0 - Lint/IoptL ) 
            LfcS   = LfcS + ( LfcUS + LfcDS ) * 0.5D0 / LLN 
            LfcL   = LfcL + ( LfcUL + LfcDL ) * 0.5D0 / LLN 
         end do 
!        ..... Photosynthesis of PS ..... 
         GppNPSn   = Mich( KNO3S, TNO3 ) * exp( - PusaiS * TNH4 ) 
         GppAPSn   = Mich( KNH4S, TNH4 ) 
         GppPSn    = Td(VmaxS, KGppS) * LfcS * TPS * ( GppNPSn + GppAPSn ) 
         RnewS     = GppNPSn / ( GppNPSn + GppAPSn ) 
 
         ResPSn    = Td( ResPS0, KResPS ) * TPS 
         MorPSn    = Td( MorPS0, KMorPS ) * TPS * TPS 
         ExcPSn    = GammaS               * GppPSn 
!        ..... Photosynthesis of PL ..... 
         GppNPLn   = Mich( KNO3L, TNO3   ) * exp( - PusaiL * TNH4 ) 
         GppAPLn   = Mich( KNH4L, TNH4   ) 
         GppSiPLsi = Mich( KSiL , TSiOH4 ) 
         GppPLn    = Td(VmaxL, KGppL) * LfcL * TPL * min( ( GppNPLn + GppAPLn ), GppSiPLsi ) 
         RnewL     = GppNPLn / ( GppNPLn + GppAPLn ) 
         ResPLn    = Td( ResPL0, KResPL ) * TPL 
         MorPLn    = Td( MorPL0, KMorPL ) * TPL * TPL 
         ExcPLn    = GammaL               * GppPLn 
!        ..... Grazing PS, PL, ZS, ZL --> ZS, ZL, ZP ..... 
         GraPS2ZSn = Td(GRmaxS,  KGraS) *GraF(LamS,PS2ZSstar,TPS) *TZS 
         GraPS2ZLn = Td(GRmaxLps,KGraL) *GraF(LamL,PS2ZLstar,TPS) *TZL 
         GraPL2ZLn = Td(GRmaxLpl,KGraL) *GraF(LamL,PL2ZLstar,TPL) *TZL 
         GraZS2ZLn = Td(GRmaxLzs,KGraL) *GraF(LamL,ZS2ZLstar,TZS) *TZL 
         GraPL2ZPn = Td(GRmaxPpl,KGraP) *GraF(LamP,PL2ZPstar,TPL) *TZP * exp( -PusaiPL *(TZL 
+ TZS)) 
         GraZS2ZPn = Td(GRmaxPzs,KGraP) *GraF(LamP,ZS2ZPstar,TZS) *TZP * exp( -PusaiZS * TZL ) 
         GraZL2ZPn = Td(GRmaxPzl,KGraP) *GraF(LamP,ZL2ZPstar,TZL) *TZP 
!        ..... Mortality, Excration, Egestion for Zooplanktons 
!        ..... Commented out after Saito-san Meeting at 19 Jun, 2000 ..... 
!        BetaZS = 0.3 ** (  1.0 + Mich( TPL, TPS )  ) 
         ExcZSn = (AlphaZS-  BetaZS)   * GraPS2ZSn 
         EgeZSn = (1.0    - AlphaZS)   * GraPS2ZSn 
         MorZSn = Td( MorZS0, KMorZS ) * TZS * TZS 
         ExcZLn = (AlphaZL-  BetaZL)   * (GraPS2ZLn+GraPL2ZLn+GraZS2ZLn) 
         EgeZLn = (1.0    - AlphaZL)   * (GraPS2ZLn+GraPL2ZLn+GraZS2ZLn) 
         MorZLn = Td( MorZL0, KMorZL ) * TZL * TZL 
         ExcZPn = (AlphaZP-  BetaZP)   * (GraPL2ZPn+GraZS2ZPn+GraZL2ZPn) 
         EgeZPn = (1.0    - AlphaZP)   * (GraPL2ZPn+GraZS2ZPn+GraZL2ZPn) 
167
         MorZPn = Td( MorZP0, KMorZP ) * TZP * TZP 
!        ..... Decomposition PON, DON, Opal ---> NH4, DON, SiOH4 ..... 
         DecP2N    = Td( VP2N0  , KP2N ) * TPON  
         DecP2D    = Td( VP2D0  , KP2D ) * TPON  
         DecD2N    = Td( VD2N0  , KD2N ) * TDON  
         DecO2S    = Td( VO2S0  , KO2S ) * TOpal 
         Nit       = Td( Nit0   , KNit ) * TNH4  
!        ..... silica fluxes ..... 
         GppPLsi    = GppPLn    * RSiN 
         ResPLsi    = ResPLn    * RSiN 
         MorPLsi    = MorPLn    * RSiN 
         ExcPLsi    = ExcPLn    * RSiN 
         GraPL2ZLsi = GraPL2ZLn * RSiN 
         GraPL2ZPsi = GraPL2ZPn * RSiN 
         EgeZLsi    = GraPL2ZLsi 
         EgeZPsi    = GraPL2ZPsi 
! 
!        ..... Tendency Terms for biological processes ..... 
         QNO3   = -( GppPSn - ResPSn ) * RnewS   & 
                  -( GppPLn - ResPLn ) * RnewL + Nit 
         QNH4   = -( GppPSn - ResPSn ) * (1.0 - RnewS)   & 
                  -( GppPLn - ResPLn ) * (1.0 - RnewL)   & 
                  - Nit + DecP2N + DecD2N + ExcZSn + ExcZLn + ExcZPn 
         QPS    = GppPSn - ResPSn - MorPSn - ExcPSn - GraPS2ZSn - GraPS2ZLn 
         QPL    = GppPLn - ResPLn - MorPLn - ExcPLn - GraPL2ZLn - GraPL2ZPn 
         QZS    = GraPS2ZSn - GraZS2ZLn - MorZSn - ExcZSn - EgeZSn - GraZS2ZPn 
         QZL    = GraPL2ZLn + GraZS2ZLn - MorZLn - ExcZLn - EgeZLn + GraPS2ZLn - GraZL2ZPn 
         QZP    = GraPL2ZPn + GraZS2ZPn - MorZPn - ExcZPn - EgeZPn + GraZL2ZPn 
         QPON   = MorPSn  + MorPLn  + MorZSn  + MorZLn + MorZPn   & 
                + EgeZPn  + EgeZSn  + EgeZLn  - DecP2N - DecP2D 
         QDON   = ExcPSn  + ExcPLn  + DecP2D  - DecD2N 
         QSiOH4 =-GppPLsi + ResPLsi + ExcPLsi + DecO2S 
         QOpal  = MorPLsi + EgeZLsi + EgeZPsi - DecO2S 
! 
!        ..... Exchange Fluxes between the Surface and Deep Layers ..... 
         ExpPON   = setVPON  / MLD * TPON 
         ExpOpal  = setVOpal / MLD * TOpal 
         ExcNO3   = ExcTime * ( TNO3d   - TNO3   ) 
         ExcSiOH4 = ExcTime * ( TSiOH4d - TSiOH4 ) 
         QNO3   = QNO3   + ExcNO3 
         QSiOH4 = QSiOH4 + ExcSiOH4 
         QPON   = QPON   - ExpPON 
         QOpal  = QOpal  - ExpOpal 
! 
!        ...... Time Integration with Forward Scheme ..... 
         TNO3   = TNO3   + dt * QNO3   
         TNH4   = TNH4   + dt * QNH4   
         TPS    = TPS    + dt * QPS    
         TPL    = TPL    + dt * QPL    
         TZS    = TZS    + dt * QZS    
         TZL    = TZL    + dt * QZL    
168
         TZP    = TZP    + dt * QZP    
         TPON   = TPON   + dt * QPON   
         TDON   = TDON   + dt * QDON   
         TSiOH4 = TSiOH4 + dt * QSiOH4 
         TOpal  = TOpal  + dt * QOpal 
! 
!        ..... Vertical Migration of ZL ..... 
         TZdwn = ND2TT(Iyr, ImonD, IdayD ,IhourD, IminD, IsecD ) 
         TZup  = ND2TT(Iyr, ImonU, IdayU ,IhourU, IminU, IsecU ) 
         if ( (Tbefore .lt. TZdwn).and.(TTime .ge. TZdwn) ) then 
            TZLd = TZL 
            TZL  = 0.0 
            write(*,*) '*** Down ***', CTime 
         end if 
         if ( (Tbefore .lt. TZup).and.(TTime .ge. TZup) ) then 
            TZL = SVRate * TZLd 
            write(*,*) '***  UP  ***', CTime 
         end if 
! 
         call Saury(TTime, Tbefore, TZS, TZL, TZP, Temp) 
! 
!        ..... Monitor ..... 
         if ( int(TTime/Tmon).ne. int(Tbefore/Tmon) ) then 
!           write(*,'(A,13(",", F8.4))') CTime, Season 
            write(10,'(A,11(",", F8.4))') CTime, & 
                    TNO3/mcr, TNH4  /mcr, TPS  /mcr, TPL /mcr, & 
                    TZS /mcr, TZL   /mcr, TZP  /mcr, TPON/mcr, & 
                    TDON/mcr, TSiOH4/mcr, TOpal/mcr 
            write(11,'(A,13(",", 1PE10.4))') CTime, Lint0, Temp, MLD, ExcTime*d2s 
         end if 
      end do 
! 
      close(10); close(11) 
! 
      stop 
      end 
!************************************************************************************ 
      Subroutine Saury(TTime, Tbefore, TZS, TZL, TZP, Temp) 
! 
      implicit none 
      real(8)           :: TTime, Tbefore, TZS, TZL, TZP, Temp 
      real(8),parameter :: d2s       = 86400.0d0    ! day ---> sec 
      integer           :: Iyr, Imon, Iday, Ihour, Imin, Isec 
      character(19)     :: CAge ='0000/03/01 00:00:00' ! Date of Aging ( JJday = 200 ) 
      character(19)     :: CTime 
      character(19)     :: CAge2 ='0000/07/01 00:00:00' ! Date of Aging ( JJday = 200 ) 
      character(19)     :: CTime2 
      real(8)           :: TAge 
      real(8)           :: TAge2 
      integer           :: iage = 0 
      integer, save     :: IyrA, ImonA, IdayA ,IhourA, IminA, IsecA 
169
      integer, save     :: IyrB, ImonB, IdayB ,IhourB, IminB, IsecB 
      integer           :: JJday 
      real(8)           :: ZooP1, ZooP2, ZooP3, tt1 
      real(8)           :: t1,t2,wtemp 
      real(8)           :: x(1) =0.2d0, xdot(1) 
      real(8)           :: cd2tt, nd2tt 
      character(19)     :: tt2cd 
      real(8)           :: vul(3), k(3) 
      integer(4)        :: id(365) 
      real(8)           :: zop1(365), zop2(365), zop3(365) 
      real(8):: v, a, u, resp 
     real(8) :: xk1,xk2,xk3,xk4,te1,te2,te3,te4,tt5,t5,t4,tt7,t7,t6, gcta,gctb,gctemp,gcmax 
     real(8) :: cnum,c1,c2,c3,con1,con2,con3,con 
     real(8) :: f,e, sda 
     real(8) :: phalf 
! 
      integer, save     :: First = 1 
! 
      PHalf=0.100 
 
!     ==================  
      if ( First .eq. 1 ) then; First = 0 
         TAge  = CD2TT( CAge  ) 
         call TT2ND(IyrA, ImonA, IdayA ,IhourA, IminA, IsecA ,TAge ) 
         TAge2  = CD2TT( CAge2  ) 
         call TT2ND(IyrB, ImonB, IdayB ,IhourB, IminB, IsecB ,TAge2 ) 
         open( 20, file='saury.csv', form='FORMATTED' ) 
 
! 
!!!!        OPEN(UNIT=111,FILE='nemuro.txt',STATUS='unknown') 
!!!!        -----read in the 3 zoop groups from Nemuro output last 3 columns 
!!!!        do JJday=1,365 
!!!!           READ(111,999)id(JJday),zop1(JJday),zop2(JJday),zop3(JJday) 
!!!!  999      FORMAT(1x,i3,1x,3(e13.6,1x)) 
!!!!        end do 
      end if 
!     ================== 
 
! 
      CTime = TT2CD(TTime)                                 ! present time (charactor form) 
      CALL TT2ND(Iyr, Imon, Iday ,Ihour, Imin, Isec ,TTime) 
      JJday = 1 + ( TTime - ND2TT(Iyr  ,1,1,0,0,0) ) / d2s 
! 
!------convert Nemuro zoop in uM N/L to g ww/m3 
!------  tt1 is conversion from uM N/liter to g ww/m3 
!------  14 ug N/uM * 1.0e-6 g/ug * 1 g dw/0.07 g N dw * 1 g ww/0.2 g dw 
!------      1.0e3 liters/m3 
! 
      tt1=14.0*1.0e-6*(1.0/0.07)*(1.0/0.2)*1.0e3 
      zoop1 = TZS*tt1 *1.0d6  
      zoop2 = TZL*tt1 *1.0d6  
170
      zoop3 = TZP*tt1 *1.0d6  
!!!!     zoop1 = zop1(JJday) * tt1 
!!!!     zoop2 = zop2(JJday) * tt1 
!!!!     zoop3 = zop3(JJday) * tt1 
! 
!     ..... Temperature Seting ..... 
! 
      t1=float(jjday) 
      t2=12.75-10.99*cos(0.0172*t1)-6.63*sin(0.0172*t1) 
      wtemp=t2-5.0 
      IF(wtemp.le.1.0)wtemp=1.0 
 
!      write(*,*) TT2CD(cd2tt('0002/01/01 00:00:00')+200.0*86400.0) 
!      stop 
!     ..... Aging of saury ...... 
      TAge = ND2TT(Iyr, ImonA, IdayA ,IhourA, IminA, IsecA ) 
      if ( (Tbefore .lt. TAge).and.(TTime .ge. TAge) .and. (iage.eq.0)) then 
            write(*,*) '*** Aging +1 of saury ***', CTime 
            iage = iage + 1 
      end if 
      TAge2 = ND2TT(Iyr, ImonB, IdayB ,IhourB, IminB, IsecB ) 
      if ( (Tbefore .lt. TAge2).and.(TTime .ge. TAge2) .and. (iage.eq.1) ) then 
            write(*,*) '*** Aging +1 of saury ***', CTime 
            iage = iage + 1 
      end if 
! 
!--- saury weight state variable = x(1) 
! 
!----- set vulnerabilities and k values for 3 zoop groups 
! 
      if ( iage .eq. 0 ) then 
        vul(1) =   1.0; vul(2) =  0.0; vul(3) =   0.0 
        k  (1) = phalf; k  (2) = phalf; k  (3) = phalf 
      else if ( iage .eq. 1 ) then 
        vul(1) =   1.0; vul(2) =  1.0; vul(3) =   0.0 
        k  (1) = phalf; k  (2) = phalf; k  (3) = phalf 
      else 
        vul(1) =   0.0; vul(2) =  1.0; vul(3) =   1.0 
        k  (1) = phalf; k  (2) = phalf; k  (3) = phalf 
      endif 
!    
! --- weight affect on respiration 
! 
      tt1 = 1.0 / x(1) 
      t1  = 0.0033 * tt1**0.227 
! --- *********this is the new stuff from Ahhrenius for YOY only********* 
! --- The 5.258 puts resp (g oxygen/fish) into units of g zoop/g fish/day 
! --- [13560 joules/gram oxygen]/4.18 joules/cal = 3244 cal/gO2 
! --- [2580 joules/gram zoop]/4.18 joules/cal = 617 cal/g zoop 
! --- so respiration in grams/oxygen/g fish/day is multiplied by 3244/617 = 5.258 
! --- to get food energy equivalents of a gram of oxygen respired 
171
! 
!ccc      IF (iage .eq. 0 )then 
!ccc         IF(wtemp.le.15.0)then 
!ccc            v = 5.76 * exp( 0.0238 * wtemp ) * x(1)**0.386 
!ccc         else 
!ccc            v = 8.6 * x(1)**0.386 
!ccc         endif 
!ccc         a=EXP((0.03-0.0*wtemp)*v) 
!ccc         resp=t1*EXP(0.0548*wtemp)*a*5.258 
! --- *********back to the old equations for respiration for age-1 and older******** 
!ccc      else   ! (iage .gt. 0) 
!c         IF (wtemp.le.9.0)then 
         IF (wtemp.le.12.0)then 
!C            u=3.9*x(1)**0.13*EXP(0.149*wtemp) 
            u=2.0*x(1)**0.33*EXP(0.149*wtemp) 
         else 
!c            u=15.0*x(1)**0.13 
            u=11.7*x(1)**0.33 
         endif 
            resp=t1*EXP(0.0548*wtemp)*EXP(0.03*u)*5.258 
!ccc      endif 
!C 
!C --- Thornton and Lessem temperature effect 
!C --- age dependent values 
!C --- *******Arrhenius for age-0 he changed te4 from 25 to 23 degrees****** 
!C 
      if ( iage .eq. 0 ) then 
!c         xk1 = 0.1;  xk2 = 0.98;  xk3 = 0.98;  xk4 = 0.01 
!c         te1 = 1.0;  te2 = 15.0;  te3 = 17.0;  te4 = 23.0 
         xk1 = 0.1;  xk2 = 0.98;  xk3 = 0.98;  xk4 = 0.5 
         te1 = 5.0;  te2 = 20.0;  te3 = 26.0;  te4 = 30.0 
      else if ( iage .eq. 1 ) then 
!c         xk1 = 0.1;  xk2 = 0.98;  xk3 = 0.98;  xk4 = 0.01 
!c         te1 = 1.0;  te2 = 15.0;  te3 = 17.0;  te4 = 25.0 
         xk1 = 0.1;  xk2 = 0.98;  xk3 = 0.98;  xk4 = 0.5 
         te1 = 5.0;  te2 = 16.0;  te3 = 20.0;  te4 = 30.0 
      else if( iage .gt. 1 ) then 
!c         xk1 = 0.1;  xk2 = 0.98;  xk3 = 0.98;  xk4 = 0.01 
!c         te1 = 1.0;  te2 = 13.0;  te3 = 15.0;  te4 = 23.0 
         xk1 = 0.1;  xk2 = 0.98;  xk3 = 0.98;  xk4 = 0.5 
         te1 = 5.0;  te2 = 16.0;  te3 = 20.0;  te4 = 30.0 
      endif 
! 
      tt5 = ( 1.0 / ( te2 - te1 ) ) 
      t5  = tt5 * log( xk2 * ( 1.0 - xk1 ) / ( (1.0-xk2) * xk1 ) ) 
      t4  = exp( t5 * ( wtemp - te1 ) ) 
! 
      tt7 = 1.0 /( te4 - te3 ) 
      t7  = tt7 * log( xk3 * ( 1.0 - xk4 ) / ( (1.0-xk3) * xk4 ) ) 
      t6  = exp( t7 * ( te4 - wtemp ) ) 
! 
172
      gcta  = ( xk1 * t4 ) / ( 1.0 + xk1 * ( t4 - 1.0 ) ) 
      gctb  = xk4 * t6 / ( 1.0 + xk4 * ( t6 - 1.0 ) ) 
      gctemp= gcta * gctb 
!c      gcmax = 0.642 * tt1**0.256 * gctemp 
      gcmax = 0.6 * tt1**0.256 * gctemp 
! 
! --- multispecies functional response  
! --- usse either this or adjust little p 
!       
      cnum=zoop1 * vul(1)/k(1) + zoop2*vul(2)/k(2) +zoop3 * vul(3)/k(3) 
      c1=gcmax*zoop1*vul(1)/k(1) 
      c2=gcmax*zoop2*vul(2)/k(2) 
      c3=gcmax*zoop3*vul(3)/k(3) 
      con1=c1/(1.0+cnum) 
      con2=c2/(1.0+cnum) 
      con3=c3/(1.0+cnum) 
      con= con1+con2+con3 
! 
!-----if using constant p rather than functional response, set p here 
! --- to tune to observed size at age data 
!     con=0.425*gcmax 
! 
! --- egestion 
! 
           f=0.16*con 
! 
! --- excretion 
           e=0.1*(con-f) 
! 
! 
! --- Specific Dynamic Action 
! 
!c------   *******Arrhenius age dependent SDA from 17.5% to 15% **** 
           IF ( iage .eq. 0 ) then 
              sda=0.15*(con-f) 
           else 
              sda=0.175*(con-f) 
           end if 
!C 
!C --- use the ratio of calories/g of zoop (2580) to calories/g of fish (5533) 
!C 
!C --- bioenergetics differential equation 
!C 
          xdot(1)=(con-resp-f-e-sda)*x(1)*2580./5533. 
! 
          IF(wtemp.le.1.0)xdot(1)=0.0 
!C 
!C --- Spawning section. Assume loose 20% of bosy weight/day 
!C     t1=float(jjday) 
!      if( mod(JJday,365) .ge. 152.0 .and. mod(JJday,365) .le. 156.0) then 
!          xdot(1)=(con-resp-f-e-sda-0.20)*x(1)*2580./5533. 
173
!          write(*,*) '### Spawning ###' 
!      endif 
! 
!     if (iage .eq. 1 ) then 
!      write(*,*) JJday, wtemp, x(1), xdot(1) 
!      stop 
!      end if 
!      write(*,'(A,I4,3(1PE14.5))') Ctime, JJday, wtemp, x(1), xdot(1) 
! 
!     Time Integration 
! 
      x(1) = x(1) + 3600.0d0 /d2s * xdot(1) 
! 
!     ..... for Check ..... 
     if ( int(TTime/d2s) .ne. int(Tbefore/d2s) ) then 
!!        write(*,'(A,I4,3(1PE14.5))') Ctime, JJday, wtemp, x(1), xdot(1) 
!!         stop 
!!      write(*,*) TZS, zop1(JJday), TZL,zop2(JJday), TZP,zop3(JJday) 
!!      write(*,*) TZP*1.0d6, zop3(JJday) 
        write(20,'(A,11(",", F12.4))') CTime, x(1), wtemp, gcmax 
      end if 
! 
      return 
! 
      stop 
      end 
!************************************************************************************ 
!* Utilities for Date Control  Writtien by Yasuhiro Yamanaka (galapen@ees.hokudai.ac.jp) * 
!************************************************************************************ 
!     exp. 1997/12/31 23:59:59 --> 6.223158719900000E+10 
!     exp. 0000/01/01 00:00:00 --> 0.000000000000000E+00 
!************************************************************************************ 
      real(8) function CD2TT( Cdate ) 
! 
      integer       :: Iyr, Imon, Iday , Ihour, Imin, Isec 
      real(8)       :: ND2TT 
      character(19) :: Cdate 
! 
      if ( len( Cdate ) .ne. 19 ) then 
         write(*,*) '### Length of date is no good ###' 
         stop 
      end if 
      read (Cdate( 1: 4),*)  Iyr 
      read (Cdate( 6: 7),*)  Imon 
      read (Cdate( 9:10),*)  Iday 
      read (Cdate(12:13),*)  Ihour 
      read (Cdate(15:16),*)  Imin 
      read (Cdate(18:19),*)  Isec 
! 
      CD2TT = ND2TT(Iyr, Imon, Iday , Ihour, Imin, Isec) 
! 
174
      return 
      end function 
!*********************************************************************** 
!     exp. 6.223158719900000E+10 --> 1997/12/31 23:59:59 
!*********************************************************************** 
      character(19) function TT2CD(tt) 
! 
      integer :: Iyr, Imon, Iday , Ihour, Imin, Isec 
      real(8) :: tt 
! 
      call TT2ND( Iyr, Imon, Iday, Ihour, Imin, Isec , tt ) 
! 
      write(TT2CD,'(I4.4,5(A,I2.2))') Iyr, '/', Imon, '/', Iday, & 
                               ' ', Ihour, ':', Imin, ':', Isec 
! 
      return 
      end function 
!*********************************************************************** 
!     exp. 1997,12,31,23,59,59 --> 6.223158719900000E+10 
!*********************************************************************** 
      real(8) function ND2TT(Iyr, Imon, Iday, Ihour, Imin, Isec) 
! 
      integer   :: IM2D(12,0:1) = & 
         reshape( (/ 0,31,59,90,120,151,181,212,243,273,304,334,  & 
                     0,31,60,91,121,152,182,213,244,274,305,335  /), (/12,2/) ) 
      integer   :: Iyr, Imon, Iday, Ihour, Imin, Isec 
      integer   :: Iy4, Iy1, Ileap, Im, Itt 
! 
! 
      Iy4 = 1461 * ( Iyr / 4 ) 
      Iy1 = 365 * mod( Iyr, 4 ) 
! 
      if ( mod( Iyr, 4 ) .ne. 0 ) then 
         Ileap = 0 
      else 
         Ileap = 1 
      end if 
      Im = IM2D( Imon, Ileap) 
! 
      Itt = Iy4 + Iy1 + Im + Iday - Ileap 
! 
      ND2TT = Ihour * 3600 + Imin * 60 + Isec 
      ND2TT = ND2TT + Itt * 86400.0D0 
! 
      return 
      end function 
!*********************************************************************** 
!     exp. 6.223158719900000E+10 --> 1997,12,31,23,59,59 
!*********************************************************************** 
      subroutine TT2ND(                                        & 
                 Iyr   , Imon  , Iday   , Ihour, Imin, Isec,   & !O & I 
175
                 tt    ) 
! 
      integer :: Iyr, Imon, Iday , Ihour, Imin, Isec 
      integer :: Itt, Iy, Iy4, Iyd, Iy1, Ileap, Imd, Im, Its 
      integer   :: IM2D(12,0:1) = & 
         reshape( (/ 0,31,59,90,120,151,181,212,243,273,304,334,  & 
                     0,31,60,91,121,152,182,213,244,274,305,335  /), (/12,2/) ) 
      integer :: IY2D(4) = (/0,366,731,1096/) 
      real(8) :: tt, tt0, ND2TT 
! 
! 
!     ..... ITT [day] ..... 
      Itt = 1 + tt / 86400.0D0 
! 
      Iy4   = (Itt-1) / 1461 
      Iyd   = Itt - Iy4 * 1461 
      do IY = 1, 4 
         if ( IY2D(Iy) + 1 .le. Iyd ) then 
            Iy1 = Iy 
         end if 
      end do 
! 
      Iyr   = Iy4 * 4 + Iy1 - 1 
      if ( mod(Iyr,4) .ne. 0 ) then 
         Ileap = 0 
      else 
         Ileap = 1 
      end if 
      IMD = IYD - IY2D(IY1) 
! 
      do IM = 1, 12 
         if ( IM2D(IM,ILEAP)+1 .le. IMD ) then 
            IMON = IM 
         end if 
      end do 
      IDAY = IMD - IM2D(IMON,ILEAP) 
! 
      TT0 = ND2TT(IYR, IMON, IDAY ,0,0,0) 
      ITS = nint(  TT - TT0 ) 
      Ihour = ITS / 3600 
      Imin  = ( ITS - Ihour * 3600 ) / 60 
      Isec  = ITS - Ihour * 3600 - Imin * 60 
! 
      return 
      end subroutine 
! 
 
176
