 
 
 
 
 
 
PICES Scientific Report No. 1 
1993 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART 1.  COASTAL PELAGIC FISHES  
(Report of Working Group 3) 
 
Edited by John R. Hunter and Tokio Wada 
 
PART 2.  SUBARCTIC GYRE  
(Report of Working Group 6) 
 
Edited by Brent Hargreaves and Takashige Sugimoto 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
October 1993 
Secretariat / Publisher 
North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES) 
c/o Institute of Ocean Sciences, P.O. Box 6000, Sidney, B.C., Canada.  V8L 4B2 
 iii
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
Part 1 
COASTAL PELAGIC FISHES 
 
     Page 
FORWARD  vi 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY vii 
 
1.0 INTRODUCTION 1 
 
2.0 DESCRIPTIONS OF STOCKS 3 
  2.1 Eastern Pacific 3 
   2.1.1 California Sardine (Sardinops sagax) 3 
  2.1.2 The Northern Anchovy (Engraulis mordax) 3 
  2.1.3 Pacific Mackerel (Scomber japonicus) 4 
  2.1.4 Pacific herring (Clupea pallasi) of the Northeastern Pacific Ocean 5 
 2.2 Western Pacific 6 
  2.2.1 Japanese Sardine (Sardinops melanostictus) 6 
  2.2.2 Japanese Anchovy (Engraulis japonicus) 7 
  2.2.3 Japanese common Mackerel (Scomber japonicus) 8 
  2.2.4 Pacific saury (Cololabis saira) 8 
  2.2.5 Yellow Sea Herring (Clupea pallasi) 9 
 
3.0 SCIENTIFIC QUESTIONS AND HYPOTHESES 10 
 
4.0 CRITICAL GAPS IN INFORMATION AND KNOWLEDGE 11 
 
5.0 POSSIBLE SCIENTIFIC APPROACHES 12 
 5.1 Assembly of data 12 
 5.2 Expansion of scientific knowledge 12 
  5.2.1 Pan-Pacific comparisons of recruitment 12 
  5.2.2 Life table analysis 13 
  5.2.3 Trophic ecology 13 
  5.2.4 Comparative field and laboratory studies 13 
 5.3 Sharing knowledge and technology 14 
 
6.0 TABLE AND FIGURES 15 
 
7.0 REFERENCES  19 
 
8.0 APPENDICES  23 
 1. Recommendations and action items 23 
 2. Terms of Reference 24 
  3. List of participants 24 
 iv
Part 2 
SUBARCTIC GYRE 
 
Page 
FORWARD  26 
 
1.0 INTRODUCTION 27 
 1.1 Main scientific questions 27 
 
2.0 KEY SCIENTIFIC QUESTIONS FOR THE SUBARCTIC GYRE 29 
 
3.0 REVIEW OF THE PHYSICS OF THE SUBARCTIC GYRE 33 
 3.1 Gross structures and decadal scale variations in the basin-scale climatic 
  and oceanic conditions (T. Sugimoto) 33 
 3.2 Review of processes of interannual variations in the eastern subarctic  
  waters, including meso-scale phenomena and the shelf circulations  
  which may affect the ecosystem (J.D. Schumacher and T. Royer) 35 
 3.3 Oceanographic structure of the upper layer in the western North  
  Pacific subarctic region and its variation (T. Yoshida) 38 
 
4.0 REVIEW OF THE BIOLOGY OF THE SUBARCTIC GYRE 42 
 4.1 Phytoplankton and zooplankton in the western subarctic Gyre  
  (A. Taniguchi) 42 
 4.2 Distributions and seasonal/interannual variations in the phytoplankton  
  and zooplankton biomass and species composition (D. Mackas and  
  B. Frost) 47 
 4.3 Distributions and seasonal/interannual variations in the biomass of  
  dominant species in the higher trophic levels of the Alaskan Gyre and  
  marginal seas (W. Pearcy) 52 
 4.4 Review of the studies of variations in benthic and midwater fish  
  populations (R.D. Brodeur and A.B. Hollowed) 54 
 4.5 How to estimate carrying capacity for nektonic species?  (Y.Ishida,  
  D.W. Welch, and K. Shimazaki) 56 
 
5.0 TABLES AND FIGURES 63 
 
6.0 REFERENCES 99 
 
7.0 APPENDICES 119 
  1. Recommendations 
   General recommendations 
   Specific recommendations for collarborative programs 119 
  2. Terms of Reference 125 
  3. List of participants 126 
 v
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 1 
 
COASTAL PELAGIC FISHES 
 vi
FORWARD 
 
This is a report of PICES Working Group 3 (Coastal Pelagic Fishes) for 1993.  The objective was to develop 
a report for review by the Fishery Science Committee based on the terms of reference (see Appendix 2) 
approved by Council at its 1992 meeting.  The finalization of the report was at a meeting held in Nemuro, 
Hokkaido, Japan in conjunction with a Symposium on Subarctic Circulation, September 19-23, 1993.  The 
secretary-general of the organizing committee was Dr. Makoto Kashiwai. 
 
This report was written by the Working Group 3 members through their diligent efforts during 1993.  The 
Co-Chairmen would like to thank all members (see Appendix 3) for their efforts in developing a good report 
that will provide the Fishery Science Committee with ideas for future consideration. 
 
 
 
        John R. Hunter and Tokio Wada 
        C o - C h a i r m e n 
 vii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
 The goal of the PICES Coastal Pelagic 
Fishes Working Group is to evaluate how long term 
global changes in climate affect the pelagic fishes of 
the North Pacific.  The goal of the committee 
matches the goal of GLOBEC International. 
Consequently, research and related activities of 
PICES Coastal Pelagic Fishes Working Group can 
be considered to be part of the GLOBEC 
International program in any PICES country.  
 
 Pelagic fishes currently considered by the 
Working Group include:  Pacific herring, sardines, 
anchovies, saury, jack mackerel, and Pacific 
mackerel.  The Working Group proposes to use 
comparative methods to determine how long term 
effects of climate may affect the dynamics of these 
North Pacific stocks.   
 
 The working group proposes to carry out 
analysis of the recruitment successes and failures of 
key Pan-Pacific pelagic stocks to determine if a 
pattern exists in population growth or decline.  The 
ultimate goal of this work is to identify Pan-Pacific 
physical forcing functions.  As a first step in this 
process, PICES Coastal Pelagic Fishes Group 
proposes to carry out an inventory of population 
time series for Eastern Pacific and Western Pacific 
stocks.  It is important that Russian and Korean 
information is included in the inventory, although 
these nations were not represented in the workshop.  
After completion of the inventory, the time series 
will be analyzed for patterns and differences in 
recruitment and life table rates.  These will be 
interpreted in terms of physical forcing and density 
dependent processes.  
 
 In the short term, a second style of 
comparative studies are planned.  These include 
application of trophodynamics models to understand 
the production systems of different regions of the 
North Pacific and how they support pelagic fish 
biomass.  Additional comparative approaches, 
which may be used in the future, are described in the 
Report.    
 
 The working group recognized that present 
trans-Pacific  communication of PICES scientists 
was inadequate for successful completion of their 
goal of Pan-Pacific comparative studies.  To 
improve communication, the Group proposed two 
actions:  1) conduct an inventory of PICES 
scientists working on projects relevant to the mission 
of the Coastal Pelagic Fishes Working Group;  and 
2) begin a visiting scientist program. The first will be 
done by working group members, but the second 
will require the support and administration by the 
Secretariat. 
 
 1
1.0 INTRODUCTION 
 
 The objective of the Coastal Pelagic Fishes 
Working Group of PICES (see terms of reference) is 
to determine the characteristics of the environment, 
other than fishing, that affect the dynamics of the 
pelagic fish stocks of the North Pacific.  Long term 
population changes, such as those that may be 
produced by global climate change, are of particular 
interest. Consequently, the research and related 
activities of the Group can be considered to be part 
of the GLOBEC International program of any 
PICES country.  
 
 The pelagic fishes currently considered by 
the Working Group are:  Pacific herring, (Clupea 
pallasi); sardines (Sardinops spp); anchovies 
(Engraulis spp); mackerels (Scomber spp, and 
Trachurus spp); and saury (Colorabis saira).  The 
world catch of these pelagic fishes in 1990 was 25 
million tons.  This catch was 35% of the world 
catch of marine fishes (Table 1).  About 7 million 
tons of small pelagic fishes are taken annually in the 
North Pacific (FAO Statistical Areas 61, 67, and 77), 
with the Japanese sardine accounting for 65% of the 
total.  Only a small portion of the world catch of 
small pelagic fishes are used directly for human 
consumption, most of the catch is reduced to fish 
meal and oil with the meal being an important 
ingredient of animal feeds.  In Japan, where 80-90% 
of sardine and anchovy catch is used for meal, meal 
is used to support a rapidly growing fish aquaculture 
industry. Aquaculture production of fish in Japan, 
which has tripled between 1970 and 1990, could be 
seriously affected by a major decline in the Japanese 
sardine stock.  
 
 The general research approach of the 
Working Group is the comparative method. Our 
terms of reference state we are "to develop a 
program for a comparative study of the population 
dynamics and production of small pelagic fishes in 
the coastal ecosystem along the western and eastern 
continental margins of the North Pacific". 
Comparisons of the dynamics of marine animal 
populations can be used to test a variety of 
hypotheses.  Comparisons of the same or similar 
species in different ecosystems can be used to assess 
effects of population response to different forcing 
variables (Bakun & Parrish, 1982).  Alternatively, 
comparisons can be made of recruitment success of 
different species within the same ecosystem to 
identify specific patterns in the responses to basin-
wide environmental change (Hollowed et al., 1987; 
Koslow, l984).    
 
Variation in abundance 
  
 Great variation in population size is 
characteristic of the major stocks of small pelagic 
fishes (Csirke, 1988).  Considerable variability 
exists between species and regions.  In Japanese 
waters, the catch of the sardine fluctuates over a two 
order of magnitude range while anchovy, mackerel, 
and saury are less variable (Table 2).  In California, 
the same pattern emerges with the sardine population 
being much more variable than either anchovy or 
mackerel.  Considering the differences in the data 
between Japan and California, the variability of the 
three stocks is remarkably similar in the two systems 
with the coefficient of variation for sardine about 
twice that for mackerel and with anchovy being 
roughly a third as variable as sardine.  The most 
striking difference between the two systems is the 
much greater productivity of the Japanese stocks.  
On the average, landings of Japanese sardine, 
anchovy, and mackerel exceed the biomass of the 
equivalent California stocks. 
  
 The processes affecting the recruitment of 
year classes, and therefore population growth, have 
been researched for the last 20 years. This body of 
information on herring, anchovy and sardine, 
indicates that the recruitment success depends upon 
the survival of the early life history stages over the 
first 6 months of life with survivorship in the egg 
and larval stages being the most variable. Starvation 
as well as predation may be an important source of 
mortality during the first few weeks of life but 
thereafter survivorship is a function of larval growth 
and their size specific vulnerability to predators. 
Starvation and growth of early life history stages is 
fairly well documented but few quantitative 
estimates of predation  exist.   
 A succession of strong or weak year classes 
over a decade or more are needed to realize the large 
and long fluctuations in population biomass, 
characteristic of many clupeoid populations.  This 
pattern is also found in the physical oceanographic 
data where decadal periods of ocean climate exist 
 2
(often called regimes) in which recruitment is either 
consistently lower or higher than the mean.  In 
support of this argument authors point out 
correspondences between successions of strong or 
weak year classes and periods of lower or higher 
than average sea surface temperatures.  How such 
temperatures affect recruitment remains obscure, 
however.    
 
 Persistent patterns in the success of year 
classes suggests to others that a positive feedback 
loop regulating population growth might exist, 
instead of the density-dependent negative feedback 
loop usually postulated as a regulatory mechanism. 
A positive feedback loop is possible in Japanese and 
California sardine since growth, migration, feeding 
habitats, and spawning habitats change as their 
populations grow.  In the Japanese sardine energy 
allocation between growth and reproduction, egg 
and larval transport from spawning grounds to 
nursery grounds by the Kuroshio Current, may all be 
linked to population size.  Thus, population 
response to changes in physical forcing variables 
may be modulated by internal population processes. 
Consequently, the long term effect of physical 
forcing variables on populations should be examined 
within the context of possible density dependent 
processes.  
 
 Lastly, it is important to recognize that these 
small pelagic fishes may be more closely linked to 
long term changes in primary and secondary 
production than are most other major stocks because 
they are planktivorous throughout their lives.   
 3
2.0 DESCRIPTIONS OF STOCKS 
 
2.1 Eastern Pacific  
 
2.1.1 California Sardine (Sardinops sagax) 
 
 Three stocks of sardine occur in the north 
eastern Pacific: a Gulf of California stock (Mexico); 
a southern Baja California stock (Mexico) [Punta 
Baja, Mexico to Cabo San Lucas]; and a northern 
stock (Punta Eugenia, Baja California, Mexico to 
Monterey, Alta California, USA).  The northern 
stock, immortalized in Steinbeck's book, Cannery 
Row, has a summer feeding migration where fish 
migrate as far north as British Columbia, Canada.   
  
 In 1979, about 20 years after its near-total 
collapse, the northern stock showed the first signs of 
recovery.  The beginning of the recovery is best 
illustrated by the average number of sardine eggs 
taken in CalCOFI cruises (Fig. 1, upper panel). The 
stock was probably less than 10,000 mt in the early 
1970s.  Currently, the spawning biomass may 
exceed 100,000 mt, which is still a small fraction of 
the maximum historic spawning biomass of 3.5 
million tons.  Some confusion exists regarding the 
timing of the recovery of the northern stock because 
FAO combines the landings for the northern and 
Gulf of California stocks.  A new Mexican fishery 
on the Gulf of California sardine began in the early 
70s, reaching a peak catch of over 300,000 tons by 
1988 and has declined thereafter.  The combined 
FAO landings give the impression that the northern 
stock underwent a striking recovery in the 70s and 
80s coinciding with the striking recovery of the 
Japanese Stock (Kawasaki, 1991).  The recovery of 
the northern sardine stock did not occur at the same 
time as the Japanese sardine;  in fact, the northern 
stock did not exceed 20,000 mt until 1986 (Wolf, et 
al., 1987).  Today (1993) the combined U.S. and 
Mexican catch of the northern sardine stock is about 
60,000 mt.  What was interpreted as a recovery was 
the development of a new Gulf of California fishery 
for sardine.  Ironically, the Gulf of California stock, 
with catches declining since 1989, collapsed in 1993 
with a total catch of less than 20,000 mt.  It should 
be mentioned, however, that genetic analysis 
indicates that these stocks are part of a common 
population, but their dynamics are clearly different. 
 
 The current interpretation of the collapse of 
northern stock is that overfishing exacerbated a 
decline caused by environmental change, a decade of 
persistently cold sea water temperatures which were 
unfavorable to sardine recruitment.  Recent work by 
Jacobson and MacCall (ms.) indicates that when sea 
surface temperatures (as measured at Scripps Pier) 
average 17.3
°
C the maximum sustainable yield 
(MSY) of sardine may be about five times the MSY 
when sea surface temperatures average 16.6
°
C.  At 
this time the mechanisms responsible for the relation 
between sardine recruitment and sea temperature are 
unknown.  
 
 Smith, et al., 1992 estimated rates of 
California sardine population growth and decline 
using the scale deposition data from Baumgartner, et 
al., 1992 changes in standing crop of sardine eggs, 
and virtual population analysis.  Fastest population 
growth was based on egg abundance of the northern 
stock of sardine (1975-1991) where annual growth 
was 70% per year, and fastest declines for the same 
population were 20-30% per year.  Analysis of the 
effects of life stage specific differences in mortality 
and growth using Lefkovitch Matrix models indicate 
that population changes equivalent to those observed 
in sardine can be produced by altering early or late 
larval mortality or growth rates within the range of 
published values (Butler, et al., 1993).  Thus, the 
central question for the California sardine from a 
climate change perspective is:  what are the 
environmental conditions that persist over a decade 
or more, affect survival and growth of sardine larvae, 
and are correlated with three year average sea 
surface temperatures?  
 
2.1.2 The Northern Anchovy (Engraulis 
mordax) 
 
 The northern anchovy population is divided 
into  four stocks, a northern stock that extends from  
British Columbia to San Francisco; a central stock 
which extends from San Francisco to Punta Baja, 
Mexico; and a southern stock that extends south 
from Punta Baja to Cabo San Lucas.  In 1986 a 
recent invasion of northern anchovy into the Gulf of 
California (Mexico) was documented by Hammann 
(1989) indicating the formation of a new Gulf stock 
 4
of anchovy.  Sedimentary scale evidence indicates 
anchovy have not been in the Gulf for over 100 
years (Baumgartner, pers. comm.).  The recent 
invasion is in rough correlation with a decline in the 
Gulf sardine stock.   
 
 The largest and best known stock is the 
Central sub-population.  The biomass of this stock 
was low in the 1950's and 60's (200-500,000 mt) 
grew rapidly in the early 70's, reaching a maximum 
historic biomass of 1.2 million tons in 1973 
(Jacobson and Lo, 1993), and declined thereafter. 
Over the last 5 years the biomass has stabilized in 
the 300-400,000 mt range.  A 60,000-300,000 mt 
reduction fishery existed from 1969 through 1989, 
but landings have been less than 11,000 mt since 
1989.  Declines in biomass in recent years were 
probably due to low recruitment rather than high 
fishing mortalities (Jacobson and Lo, pers. comm.). 
The most striking feature of the 30 year anchovy 
time series was an extra-ordinarily large recruitment 
in 1972, ushering in a decade in which 7 years 
exceeded the mean.  This period of high anchovy 
abundance coincided with the continuing decline of 
the sardine.     
 
 A pair of clupeoids, a sardine and anchovy, 
exist as part of the pelagic fish assemblages in many 
of the worlds oceans.  The decline in one member of 
the pair, usually the sardine, has occurred in rough 
correlation with an increase in the biomass of the 
other (Blaxter and Hunter, 1982).  This has led to 
considerable speculation regarding the potential 
interaction of these two species.  Since their food 
overlap is broad, inter-specific competition for food 
has often been inferred.  The only direct evidence of 
interaction is provided by Butler (1991).  He found 
that mortality rates of sardine larvae (>20d) 
increased between 1951-1967 and the increase was 
positively correlated with the increase in biomass of 
the northern anchovy.  He attributed the correlation 
to predation by anchovy on sardine eggs and larvae. 
  
 Life stage sensitivity analysis for anchovy 
using Lefkovitch Matrix models indicates that the 
most sensitive stages were the early larval (4-10 
mm) where the fastest growth rate or lowest 
mortality rate leads to a 270% increase in population 
size (Butler et al., 1993).       
 
2.1.3 Pacific Mackerel (Scomber japonicus) 
 
 Two major peaks in the biomass of Pacific 
mackerel have occurred over historical times, 1925-
1935 when the stock exceeded 400 thousand mt and 
during the early 80's when the stock reached the 
same level (MacCall, et al., 1985).  The paleo-
sedimentary record of Pacific mackerel scales 
indicates the 1925-35 peak and another one around 
1830.  Thus, three major outbreaks of Pacific 
mackerel have occurred over the last 162 years. The 
1925-35 and 1980s peaks coincided with warm 
water regimes.  Minimum levels of abundance 
occurred in the late 60s reaching less than 10,000 mt 
by 1966, and remaining low until the late 70s.  The 
1976 year class that initiated the recovery of the 
fishery was in the upper 25% of all year classes, but 
it was produced by a spawning biomass of less than 
10,000 tons.  The stock has been declining slowly 
since the peak biomass in 1982; the estimated 1992 
biomass was 124,000 mt.  
 
 Unlike sardine and anchovy, no dependable 
data exists on egg and larval mortality rates nor on 
larval and juvenile growth in the sea.  Accurate 
estimates of larval mortality may never be practical 
because of the highly patchy distribution of the 
spawn.  Preliminary work indicates that some 
mackerel females spawn daily (Dickerson, et al., 
1992) but estimates of stock spawning rates would 
be difficult and costly due to the patchiness in the 
distribution of spawning and non-spawning fish. For 
these reasons either anchovy or sardine may be 
preferable to mackerel as a subject for cooperative 
research on effects of Climate Change on fish 
population dynamics.  
 
2.1.4 Pacific Herring (Clupea pallasi) of the 
Northeastern Pacific Ocean 
 
Distribution & Biology 
 
 In the Northeast Pacific herring are 
distributed along the west coast of North America 
from California to the Chuckchi Sea with some 
small stocks in estuarine arctic waters.  The greatest 
abundance is from British Columbia to the Bering 
Sea.  Stocks in California, Oregon, and Washington 
are small relative to the more northern stocks. Major 
aggregates of stocks are harvested in San Francisco 
 5
Bay, Northern Washington-Southeastern Alaska, 
Prince William Sound, Kodiak Island, Cook Inlet, 
and eastern Bering Sea in North America. 
 
 Pacific herring spawn exclusively in spring, 
in shallow inter- and subtidal waters.  After a 2-3 
week incubation, eggs hatch into pelagic larvae and 
disperse throughout local nearshore coastal waters. 
After a 1-2 month larval stage the young herring 
reside mainly in nearshore waters for a 1-2 year 
juvenile period.  They mature sexually in 2-4 years 
(earlier in south) and spawn once per year for the 
remainder of their lives.  Most herring live for 4-5 
years with a few living to 15 years (Grosse & Hay, 
1988). 
 
 Adults spend summers in a relatively large 
number of small, dispersed schools and feed mainly 
on copepods and euphausiids.  Movement to 
summer feeding grounds for larger stocks may 
require extensive migrations of several hundred 
kilometers or more, to offshore banks, while 
migrations to feeding grounds of smaller stocks may 
be more geographically restricted.  In the winter, 
adult herring form a small number of large 
aggregations in the same overwintering areas each 
year.  In the spring herring move from these areas to 
spawning areas, that also are consistently occupied 
each year. 
 
Stocks and fisheries 
 
 North American herring fisheries started as 
food fisheries in the early 1900s producing salt or 
dried herring.  In the late 1920s industrial herring 
fisheries developed for oil and meal and catches rose 
rapidly in British Columbia to South-central Alaska 
where the largest fisheries occurred. Reduction 
fisheries persisted until the mid-1960s when the 
fishery closed due to economic competition from 
Peruvian anchovy and other cheaper meals, and the 
closure of some fishing areas to preserve herring for 
salmon forage.  In British Columbia a moratorium 
on herring fishing was established, following a 
collapse of the herring stock in the mid-1960s (Fig. 
2), and maintained until stocks recovered in the early 
1970s (Hourston, 1980).  
 
 In the absence of fishing, the British 
Columbia stocks began to increase and in 1972 a 
roe fishery began which grew to a peak harvest of 
80,000 t in 1976-78.  In subsequent years the 
harvest was reduced to about 30-40,000 mt because 
of concern that high harvests could not be sustained. 
 
 Roe herring fisheries also developed in 
Alaska in the early 1970s, and harvests have been 
very conservative with exploitation at 10-20% of 
estimated biomass which has averaged less than 
10,000 t annually.  In the eastern Bering Sea a 
distant water fishery was established in the late 
1950s by Russian and Japanese vessels.  Catches 
rose rapidly to a peak in the early 1970s, and then 
declined, and the off-shore foreign fishery was 
replaced by an inshore roe herring fishery in the late 
1970s. 
 
 Individual stocks of herring in the 
northeastern Pacific Ocean have exhibited wide 
variations in abundance.  Sometimes, exceptionally 
large year classes, such as one in 1977, were 
synchronous over broad geographical ranges (from 
Vancouver Island to central Alaska).  In other years 
there may be large differences in cohort strength 
between reinforcing stocks, such as the Queen 
Charlotte Island and the mainland of British 
Columbia.  Year-class synchrony in the 
northeastern Pacific appears to correspond to 
hydrographic domains with distinctly different 
recruitment patterns between Alaskan and Canadian 
stocks (Zebdi and Collie, ms). 
 In the eastern Bering Sea only about a third 
of the variation in year class strength can be 
accounted for by variation in spawning stock size, 
indicating that environmental factors are important 
determinants of year-class size (Wespestad and 
Gunderson, 1991).  Climatic effects of wind-driven 
transport and temperature describe a portion of the 
residual variation in recruitment, but about 50% of 
the total variation is left unaccounted.  The 
remaining variation may relate to large-scale 
physical processes, or local variation in biological 
processes, for which accurate measures are 
unavailable. 
 
 In the middle part of their range, 
Washington to central Alaska (Prince William 
Sound) herring are the most abundant small coastal 
pelagic fish.  They are consumed as principal or 
secondary prey by many piscivores such as the 
 6
Pacific cod (Gadus macrocephalus), the chinook 
and coho salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha and 
O. kisutch), Pacific hake (Merluccius productus), as 
well as many sea birds and marine mammals (Hay 
et al., 1992).  In this capacity they serve as a 
principal vehicle for energy transfer from lower to 
higher trophic levels.  Predation has been shown to 
be a significant source of mortality and may 
contribute to variation in year-class size (Walters, et 
al., 1986; Ware 1991).  Predation on herring is 
modified by environment in some cases. Ware and 
McFarlane (1989) found that in El Niño years hake 
extended their range into areas occupied by herring 
resulting in increased herring mortality. 
 
2.2 Western Pacific 
 
2.2.1 Japanese Sardine (Sardinops melano-
stictus) 
 
 A major part of this section is based on 
preliminary results of the BICOCOSMOS project, a 
ten year research project on Japanese sardine 
ecology and population dynamics, which began in 
1989;  results from this project will appear in 
journals in the near future. 
 
 Isozyme analysis for genetic divergence 
indicates that several stocks of Japanese sardine 
(Sardinops melanostictus) are a single population.  
The population fluctuated greatly over the last two 
decades;  it began to increase in the mid-70's, 
reached a peak in the mid-80s, and has been 
declining since 1989.  Total catch of the Japanese 
sardine was 20,000 mt in 1970.  It increased to 
2,210,000 mt in 1980 and reached a maximum of 
4,490,000 mt in 1988.  The catch declined after 
1989, falling to about 2,000,000 mt by 1992.   
 
 On the Pacific side of Japan, sardine spawn 
along the Kuroshio Current in February and March.  
Eggs hatch two days after fertilization at 17-18
°
C 
and the larvae start feeding within two days after 
hatching.  Egg and larvae are transported to the east 
by the Kuroshio Current as fast as 2-3 knots 
(1.0-1.5 m/sec) and in a few months when the larvae 
are 20-30 mm, they reach the Kuroshio Extension 
off the Boso Peninsula east of Honshu Island, 
Japan.  Part of the cohort leaves the Kuroshio 
Current and enters the coastal waters along the 
Pacific side of Honshu Island forming shirasu 
fishing ground for sardine larvae.   
 
 While being transported by the Kuroshio 
Extension, the larvae metamorphose into the 
juvenile stage and in early summer they start a 
northward migration through the mixing water 
between the Kuroshio and the Oyashio fronts. They 
use warm streams and warm core rings derived 
from the Kuroshio Extension as migratory paths.  
They cross the Oyashio front and feed on abundant 
zooplankton and phytoplankton in the Oyashio 
water in summer. In autumn they migrate south to 
the waters off Boso Peninsula.  The one year old 
sardines return to Oyashio waters the following 
summer. 
 
 The sardine mature in 2 or 3 years. Short 
day length and a decrease in water temperature in 
autumn induces sexual maturation and southward 
migration to the spawning grounds.  Nutritional 
conditions of females at the beginning of sexual 
maturation have a major effect on the reproductive 
effort during the subsequent spawning season 
(Tsuruta, 1985).  Batch fecundity varies from 
20,000-40,000 eggs depending on nutritional 
condition (fat reserves) of females, but the number 
of batches spawned by females per season is not 
known).  Eggs from fat females are of good quality 
having a larger yolk volume and higher content of 
poly-unsaturated fatty acids than those from thin 
females (Morimoto, 1991).  
 
 Since 1990 the percentage of the number of 
landed sardines older than 4 years has increased 
rapidly (Fig. 3).  The percentage was about 30% or 
less in the years before 1989, but in 1991 and 1992 
it increased to more than 90%. 
 
 The number of 1 year old sardine caught in 
waters east of Hokkaido Island is used as a 
recruitment index in Japan.  From 1986 to 1988 the 
number of recruits ranged from 2,000-5,500 million 
fish, but decreased to 0-600 million in 1989-1992.  
Thus, the population has decreased since 1988 
because of recruitment failure. Average egg 
production in the Pacific side of Japan in 1989-1992 
was 4,600 trillion.  The recruitment failure was 
assumed to be due to low survival rates in the stages 
between the egg to juvenile stage. 
 7
 When the population was in the early 
phases of growth in the mid 1970's, the recruitment 
index (mentioned above) was stable as it ranged 
between, 1,500-2,000 million fish. When the 
population was in the older growth phase, reaching 
a peak biomass 1979-1987, the recruitment index 
was much more variable ranging between 32 
million to 5.9 billion fish with a dominant year class 
occurring every three or four years.  The 
recruitment failed in four successive years after 
1988.  In summary, three patterns in recruitment 
were evident during the rise and current fall of the 
population.  Stable recruitment associated with a 
growing population, fluctuating recruitment 
associated with sustained high biomass, and 
recruitment failure associated with population 
decline.  The population growth and decline of the 
sardine over the last two decades is considered to be 
caused by a variation of recruitment which might be 
due to changes in the mortality of early life stages. 
 
2.2.2 Japanese Anchovy (Engraulis japon-icus) 
 
 The Japanese anchovy population is 
divided into four stocks which occur in the 
following four localities:  northern Pacific, 
southern Pacific including Seto Inland Sea, East 
China Sea, and Japan Sea.  Annual landings were 
high (350-450,000 mt) in 1950s and 1960s when 
the Japanese sardine (Sardinops melanostictus) 
population was very low, but landings decreased 
rapidly after 1975, as the sardine population 
increased.  In the 1980s, the landings remained at a 
low level (150-200,000 mt).  The landings have 
recovered since 1989 as the sardine began to 
decline.  However, the maximum anchovy catch is 
only a tenth of that of the sardine, and the stock 
fluctuations are relatively moderate (see Table 2). 
 
 The north Pacific stock of anchovy is the 
largest and most studied.  The spawning habits and 
demography of the stock change with population 
size, (Funakoshi, 1987). When the stock is small, 
almost all spawn at one year old in coastal waters 
and bays during summer and autumn and die after 
spawning. Their migration range is restricted to the 
spawning ground areas.  On the other hand, when 
the stock is large they mature at one year old and 
spawn in coastal and offshore waters in spring.  A 
large proportion survive after spawning and spawn 
again in next spring.  Their migration range 
extends to the waters off southern Hokkaido. 
 
 Watanabe (1992) mentioned that the stock-
recruitment relationship based on the total number 
of eggs spawned seemed to fluctuate clockwise 
around a certain equilibrium stock level.  
Funakoshi (1990) concluded that anchovy in 
plankton rich coastal waters have a higher 
fecundity, and spawned more frequently, than those 
spawning in offshore areas where food was less 
abundant.  Laboratory experiments indicate that 
when food is reduced, anchovy spawn less 
frequently and the interval between spawning 
increases.  The number of eggs spawned per female 
was reduced at high fish density even when food 
was held constant indicating density dependent 
affects on egg production (Tsuruta and Hirose, 
1989).   
 
 A common belief is that anchovy 
populations vary inversely with sardine populations, 
but the long-term landing data of pelagic fishes in 
Japan seem to indicate a more complex pattern of 
interactions among pelagic species.  These data 
indicate the following sequence:  chub and spotted 
mackerels (Scomber japonicus and Scomber 
tapaeinocephalus, group A) was replaced by the 
sardine (species B);  the sardine was replaced by a 
group of four species (group C), the anchovy 
(Engraulis japonicus), Pacific saury (Cololabis 
saira), and jack mackerels (Trachurus japonica and 
Decapterus muroadsi);  and the four species in 
group C were replaced by the mackerel (Fig. 3).  
Matsuda, et al. (1991, 1992) proposed an inter-
specific competition model for groups A, B, and C 
as a hypothesis for the species replacement.  If 
species A causes a decline in the population of B, B 
causes a decline in C;  and C causes a decline in A, 
the model predicts that the abundance of these three 
groups fluctuate forever and dominate in cyclic 
order.  The kinds of interactions occurring among 
these three groups are not well understood, 
however.  Improved understanding of their 
interactions seems to be an essential prerequisite for 
understanding the dynamics of these populations.   
 8
2.2.3 Japanese Common Mackerel (Scomber 
japonicus) 
 
 Two mackerel species are fished 
commercially around Japan, the common mackerel 
and the spotted mackerel (Scomber japonicus and 
Scomber tapaeinocephalus).  The Japanese 
common mackerel is a widely distributed migratory 
fish, while the spotted mackerel has a much smaller 
range occurring principally in the southern part of 
Japan.  The range for the common mackerel is even 
wider than that of the Japanese sardine. The 
northern limits to their distribution is about the 
same, but unlike the sardine, the common mackerel 
occurs in the East China Sea (recent catch is 
110,000-250,000 mt). 
 
 The range of surface temperature for 
fishing common mackerel falls between 14-18
°
C. 
When the stock is large, common mackerel make 
large scale north-south migrations.  The migration 
to the north is a feeding migration, while the 
southern migration is a wintering and spawning 
migration, similar to the sardine.  The common 
mackerel population around Japan consists of four 
local stocks:  Pacific; South Pacific; East China 
Sea; and Tushima Current (Japan Sea). 
 
 In recent years, the landings of the Pacific 
stock are 60-70% of the total Japanese landings.  
The catch from the Pacific stock increased 
remarkably in the 1970's reaching a peak of 
1,300,000 mt in 1978; recent catches fluctuate 
between 200,000-300,000 mt. 
 
2.2.4 Pacific Saury (Cololabis saira) 
 
 Pacific saury occurs throughout most of the 
northern Pacific.  In the Western Pacific, saury is 
one of the major commercial species taken by 
Japanese, Russian, and Korean fisheries.  No 
estimation of the population size exists because the 
distribution of the larvae, juveniles and adults is 
continuous from the Western to the Eastern Pacific. 
 
 After World War II, a new fishing gear, the 
stitch-held dipnet (bouke-ami), was introduced in 
Japan.  Total catch increased remarkably after the 
introduction and reached a peak during 1955-63 
with a maximum catch of 575,000 mt in 1958.  
Catch decreased in late 60s down to 52,000 mt in 
1969.  Annual fluctuation of the catch was quite 
large in 70s ranging between 87,000 to 427,000 mt.  
In the 80's, the catch stabilized because of landing 
regulations adopted by the saury fishermen 
association.  Abundances of larvae, juveniles, and 
adults indicate that the population in the Western 
Pacific has been increasing since 1988. 
 
 Saury spawns off the northern Honshu 
Islands in autumn and spring, and in the Kuroshio 
area in winter.  Juveniles from different spawning 
seasons start migrating north in early summer to the 
Oyashio area where they feed on abundant 
zooplankton, especially Neocalanus plumchrus and 
euphausiids.  Otolith analyses (Watanabe, 1988), 
rearing experiments (Hotta, 1958, Watanabe and 
Kuji, 1991), and increase in body length of 
northward migrating groups (Fukushima, et al., 
1990), all indicate that the Western Pacific saury 
reaches a length of 30 cm in one year.  Three 
length modes occur in fish caught in fishing season 
from late August to early December.  The large fish 
are assumed to originate from eggs spawned in the 
autumn, the medium sized fish from winter eggs 
and small fish from spring spawnings (Fukushima, 
et al., 1990).  The three groups are not thought to 
be from different stocks because the genetic 
distances of size groups are too close to be regarded 
as separate stocks. 
 
 Size composition of landed sauries differs 
annually, and differences in size composition affect 
price and the total weight of the catch.  The length 
composition of the catch is believed to be related to 
relative recruitment of autumn, winter and spring 
spawning cohorts.  Pre-season forecasts of size 
composition of the catch is of great value to 
fishermen and fish processors. The Tohoku 
National Fisheries Research Institute provides 
forecasts of recruitment based on three parameters:  
larval production at hatching, growth and mortality 
rates in larval and juvenile stages.  Using these 
parameters, they estimate daily production of 50 
mm juvenile for autumn, winter and spring 
spawnings.  Rearing studies indicate that by the 
time saury juveniles reach 50 mm and begin 
schooling, they have passed through the high 
mortality period. 
 
 9
2.2.5 Yellow Sea Herring (Clupea pallasi) 
 
 The Pacific herring in the Yellow Sea, 
which is traditionally called Yellow Sea Herring, 
has a long history of exploitation.  The importance 
of herring is demonstrated by the existence of 
villages and localities named for their association 
with it.  In this century, the commercial fishery has 
experienced two peaks (in about 1900 and 1938) 
followed by a period of little or no catch. In 1967, 
due to the recovery of the stock, a large number of 
1-year old herring began appearing in bottom trawl 
catches.  The catch increased rapidly to a peak of 
200,000 mt in 1972.  The high catches were due to 
the very strong 1970 year class and reached a 
historic maximum abundance estimate of 26.8 X 10
8
 
fish (at age 1). Since 1982, the stock has declined 
apparently due to the occurrence of a series of weak 
year classes.  The catch has declined to below 
1,000 mt in 1989-1990. 
 
 Obviously, Yellow Sea herring have been 
characterized by strong fluctuations in abundance.  
Tang (1981 and 1987) found that there is no strong 
relationship between spawning stock and 
recruitment and that environmental conditions such 
as rainfall, wind, and daylight are the primary 
causes of fluctuations in recruitment.  Long-term 
changes in biomass may be correlated with the 36 
year cycle of dryness/wetness oscillation in eastern 
China.
 10
3.0 SCIENTIFIC QUESTIONS AND HYPOTHESES 
 
 The Working Group discussed the scientific 
questions and hypotheses required for an 
understanding the causes of variability of pelagic 
fish populations.  Four key questions and their 
associated hypotheses are discussed briefly below.   
 
3.1 What differences exist among Pan-
Pacific pelagic stocks in biomass and stage 
specific vital rates?  Implicit in this question, is 
the hypothesis that stage specific vital rates 
determine the variability of fish populations and 
density dependent processes play a subsidiary role.  
Pan-Pacific comparisons of vital rates might help 
answer the questions:  1) why does the western 
Pacific boundary system support a higher biomass 
of small pelagic fishes than does the eastern Pacific 
boundary system? and 2, Why do pelagic fishes 
show different fluctuation patterns in the same 
region?  The group concluded that detailed 
descriptions and comparisons of fish biomass and 
stage specific vital rates, such as growth, mortality 
and fecundity are the first step in understanding the 
mechanisms underlying population fluctuations of 
small pelagic fishes.      
 
3.2 How does physical forcing affect 
population processes?  Implicit in this question is 
the hypothesis that variability in population size is 
determined largely by density-independent factors 
such as changes in regional oceanographic 
conditions.  A further extension of this hypothesis 
is that a Pan-Pacific ocean climate influence on fish 
population dynamics exists and that regional 
comparisons are necessary to identify the details 
and modes of actions. Regional comparisons of 
similar species could lead to identification of the 
similarities in oceanographic conditions that 
correspond to population growth or failure, 
regardless of the validity of the Pan-Pacific 
hypotheses. 
 
3.3 How do biomass specific changes in life 
history traits, such as expansion and retraction 
of spawning habitats or latitudinal extent of 
feeding migrations, affect population variability?  
Implicit in this question is the hypothesis that 
density-dependent processes play a major role in 
population growth.  In coastal pelagic fishes 
important population traits seem to vary with 
population size, including:  growth; age or size at 
maturity; spawning habitat selection; and the 
tendency to migrate.  At high biomass levels, 
populations may have large migrations, slow 
growth, and older age at maturity with the opposite 
pattern at low biomass levels.  A more specific 
hypothesis underlying this question is that density-
dependent habitat selection affects reproductive 
success and population growth through the physical 
properties of the habitats selected.  
 
3.4 How do the interactions between 
populations of small pelagic fishes affect their 
populations?  No doubt exists that coastal 
populations of sardine, anchovy, and mackerel 
interact.  As they all are pelagic planktivorus, their 
diets broadly overlap and they may consume each 
others egg or larval stages.  In addition, large 
mackerel may prey upon adult anchovy and sardine 
as well as their early life stages.  Thus, population 
interactions should affect the productivity and 
growth of pelagic fishes in the coastal ecosystem.  
The tacit assumption underlying this question is that 
species interactions play a role in population 
variability and shifts in dominance among pelagic 
fish. 
 
 
 11
4.0 CRITICAL GAPS IN INFORMATION AND KNOWLEDGE 
 
 A major challenge for marine science in the 
twenty-first century will be to forecast how long-
term changes in ocean climate will affect our natural 
marine resources.  The obvious first step is to 
explain past fluctuations in the abundance of stocks.  
Unfortunately, we lack the information, and the 
basic level of understanding necessary for a 
documented and coherent ecological explanation for 
the history of population growth and decline of 
North Pacific pelagic fishes.  We do not know how 
physical forcing increased the survival of eggs or 
larvae to produce the great year classes of the past, 
nor do we understand the role played by population 
size and pelagic species interactions in the 
formation of those year classes.  No shortage of 
plausible mechanisms exists and some have been 
validated by direct field measurement, but we lack 
the information needed to test these mechanisms 
analytically, and we lack the understanding 
necessary for a synthesis of physical forcing and 
density dependent mechanisms that would explain 
stock histories as we have observed them.  We 
believe that the comparative studies we propose will 
help fill these gaps in understanding.   
 
 Initial requirements for a north Pan-Pacific 
investigation of climate effects on the dynamics of 
fish stocks are that estimates of abundance, 
recruitment, and vital population rates are available 
and that a strong Pan-Pacific communication 
network exists. Neither of these initial requirements 
are presently met.  We lack data on some of the 
vital rates of even the best studied stocks, existing 
data on rates and population statistics are not 
generally available on a Pan-Pacific basis, and no 
adequate communication system exists for the 
development of Pan-Pacific comparative studies.   
 
 12
5.0 POSSIBLE SCIENTIFIC APPROACHES 
 
 The group identified various ways critical 
gaps in data understanding and communication 
might be filled and key scientific questions might 
be resolved.  All approaches considered by the 
group are included.   
 
5.1 Assembly of Data 
 
 The group placed a high priority on the 
assembly of time series of available data on 
annual biomass and recruitment levels, and on 
stage-specific vital rates for the key pelagic 
stocks.  Such information may include: annual 
biomass, recruitment and catch;  sex, first 
maturity and fecundity by length or age; 
spawning habitat characteristics such as 
temperature and season;  egg incubation rates 
and mortality;  and larval and juvenile mortality 
and growth.  
 
 This initial assembly of biological data 
should be followed by an assembly of time series 
of relevant oceanographic data for the areas 
occupied by the stocks.  Relevant oceanographic 
indices could be selected for each area from 
results of detailed process studies, or by using 
forcing functions proposed in the literature. 
Biological data on zooplankton abundance, and 
the food habits of coastal pelagic fishes would 
also be desirable.  
 
 If fishery data, or data on specific vital 
rates, are missing for key populations, these data 
gaps could be filled by a directed program to 
collect and process such data.  
 
5.2 Expansion of Scientific Knowledge  
 
5.2.1 Pan-Pacific Comparisons of Recruit-
ment 
 
 Exploratory comparative time series 
analyses of the biomass and recruitment for key 
coastal  pelagic  stocks need to  be  conducted  
to 
determine common patterns in stock fluctuations 
(using approaches similar to Hollowed et al., 
1987).  These analyses would be most fruitful if 
they focused on East-West (e.g. California sardine 
and Japanese sardine) and North-South (e.g. 
herring) comparisons.  The next step may be to 
couple oceanographic data and models to the 
fishery analyses, to evaluate hypotheses 
concerning physical forcing of coastal pelagic 
stock fluctuations.  For example, do similar 
oceanographic conditions and processes produce 
similar responses among different coastal pelagic 
fishes?  Fish stock distributions and vital rates 
could be examined relative to latitude and 
longitude, seasonal temperature, and current 
patterns.  Analyses of other aspects of the system 
(e.g. primary or secondary productivity) may also 
provide information for estimating upper or lower 
limits of fish production.   
 
 Inclusion of all possible spawning groups 
in Pan-Pacific comparisons, would greatly 
increase the richness of the comparison. Herring, 
sardine, and anchovy form a mosaic of habitat 
specific spawning groups, each with unique 
population dynamics and life table characteristics. 
Pacific herring are particularly prolific in this 
regard, with spawning groups associated with 
specific small intertidal areas, while spawning 
groups of sardine and anchovy are larger and 
more regional in character.  Comparisons 
between these groups are useful because they 
reflect regional habitat differences, even though 
modern genetic studies often fail to find 
differences between them.  For example, 
although genetic studies indicate that the sardine 
population around Japan belongs to one stock, a 
group of sardines spawn west of Kyushu Island 
and migrate into the Sea of Japan where 
oceanographic conditions are considerably 
different from the Pacific side.  One would 
expect spawning and recruitment and vital rates to 
differ between the Japanese Sea and Pacific 
spawning groups. 
 
 Recruitment comparisons should not only 
consider single years of great recruitment success 
or failure, but should also consider successions of 
stronger than average year classes, or periods 
when year classes consistently failed.  It is 
important to consider in such an analysis not only 
 13
the environmental conditions that correlate with 
these periods, but also the affect of such 
successions of strong or weak year classes on 
population growth and stability.  A number of 
strong year classes may stabilize the population 
while a small number of weak year classes may 
make the population more susceptible to 
environmental variability. 
   
5.2.2 Life Table Analysis 
 
 Life stage matrix models, such as the 
Lefkovitch model (Lefkovitch, 1965; Caswell, 
1989), provide a useful way to begin comparative 
work.  First, they require an inventory of life 
table data and thereby identify critical gaps in 
knowledge.  Second, they help assess the quality 
of the information by tests of population stability. 
Third, they permit assessment of the sensitivity of 
the population to changes in rates within each life 
stage.  Lastly, they provide a simple standardized 
way to evaluate effects of physical forcing on 
population growth.  For these reasons, 
completing a Lefkovitch matrix for each species 
to be compared would be a useful first step in the 
development of a PICES comparative study. 
 
 An important and recent refinement of 
life stage matrix models for fishes is to include 
variance as well as mean duration of stage and 
mortality (Lo, et al.; ms.).  This approach adds 
new information, and the costs are low because 
the durations of early life history stages can be 
obtained from daily growth increment analysis of 
juveniles (Butler, 1989 and 1991).  When 
variances are included the modeled population is 
generally less sensitive to changes in vital rates 
than when only the mean is used, and the results 
are probably more realistic.  
 
5.2.3 Trophic Ecology 
 
 To examine the overall functioning of 
Pan-Pacific ecosystems an inter-regional 
comparison of the gross production and biomass 
at several trophic levels (primary and secondary 
levels, and small pelagic fishes) would be useful. 
This would provide a preliminary idea of the 
overall functioning of Pan-Pacific ecosystems and 
might help explain the differences in fish 
production between systems.  A more thorough 
treatment of trophic relations using 
trophodynamics modeling is also strongly 
recommended. Trophodynamics  modeling is 
defined as modeling of the food web linkages that 
support the production of key pelagic fish species.  
By trophodynamics modeling, the response of 
marine production systems to environmental 
changes can be analyzed, based on the flows and 
balance of biomass among the trophic levels.  
This technique will be useful for understanding 
the biological processes which control population 
fluctuations and species interactions.  Model 
construction can also reveal the lack of 
knowledge on relationships among biological 
components and physical forcing functions.  
Once the model can generate the average annual 
cycle of fish production, various hypotheses on 
the relationships between environmental change 
and population fluctuations can be examined.  
This approach becomes more powerful when such 
models are constructed for several different 
regions with ecologically similar species.  
 
5.2.4 Comparative Field and Laboratory 
Studies 
 
 The focus of most of the Working 
Group's discussions were on the analysis of 
existing data because such work is an appropriate 
starting point.  The Group recognized in the long 
term, Pan-Pacific field and laboratory work using 
standardized methods and approaches would have 
great benefits.  One approach might be to focus 
the field work on accurate interannual 
measurements of age specific fecundity and life 
stage specific growth or stage duration and their 
links to physical forcing.  These fish population 
parameters are among the least expensive to 
measure, yet they might reveal substantial 
differences between populations and ecosystems. 
In contrast, mortality is an expensive parameter to 
measure directly by sampling larvae and juveniles 
requiring many more samples and days at sea.  In 
addition, using modern otolith reading systems 
one can digitize long chronologies of daily 
growth records from a single otolith. When such 
data from a number of juveniles are combined, 
estimates of mean growth and variance for many 
life stages can be provided.   
 14
 It also may be useful to collect larvae 
from stocks with different growth rates and rear 
them under identical conditions to determine if 
such growth rates are genetically or 
environmentally determined. 
 
5.3 Sharing Knowledge and Technology 
 
 PICES has the opportunity for leadership 
in the Pan-Pacific exchange of knowledge among 
marine researchers.  Presentations at PICES 
Annual meetings and workshops are important 
ways that PICES has opened the avenue of 
communication by providing a forum for 
exchange of ideas.  In addition to these 
approaches, the working group considered several 
other ways to improve Pan-Pacific 
communication.   
 
 All members believed that informal 
scientific communication and possible 
collaboration would increase if a directory of key 
Pan-Pacific researchers were available.  The 
Working Group proposed to compile a list of key 
researchers who study coastal pelagic fishes of the 
North Pacific within their respective geographic 
regions.  The directory, would include not only 
agency or institution, address 
and FAX, but would include pertinent 
information such as species of interest, key-words 
describing broad topics of interest and areas of 
present research.  This final compilation of 
researchers in all member countries should be 
made available in a paper copy and also 
maintained on a computer data base which should 
be updated annually.   
 
 Another way PICES could foster 
communication and build collaborative efforts is 
through Pan-Pacific exchange of the researchers. 
The Group believes that of all the activities 
sponsored by PICES, few could have as great and 
immediate benefit as a PICES visiting scientist 
program.  The Group recommended that the 
Secretariat develop a PICES visiting scientist 
exchange program.  Such a program might 
provide 2-4 visiting fellowships per year to the 
PICES community with a duration of a month or 
more.  Selection of applicants would be 
competitive based on a short letter of intent, CV, 
and references.  Applicants would include 
agency as well as academic scientists and funding 
would cover only travel and subsistence costs.  If 
PICES does not have sufficient funds to support 
the program, some working Group members 
would be willing to work with the Secretariat to 
find outside funding.  It would be preferable if 
the Secretariat managed the funds to minimize 
indirect costs. 
 
 15
 
 16
 
 17
 
 18
 
 19
7.0 REFERENCES 
 
Bakun, A., and R.H. Parrish.  1982.  Turbulence, transport, and pelagic fish in the California and Peru 
Current Systems.  Calif. Coop. Oceanic Fish. Invest. Rep. 23:99-112. 
 
Baumgartner, T.R., A. Soutar, and V. Ferreira-Bartrina.  1992.  Reconstruction of the history of Pacific 
sardine and northern anchovy populations over the past two millennia from sediments of the Santa 
Barbara Basin, California.  Calif. Coop. Oceanic Fish. Invest. Rep. 33:24-40. 
 
Blaxter, J.H.S., and J.R. Hunter.  1982.  The biology of clupeoid fishes.  Adv. Mar. Biol. 20:1-223. 
 
Butler, J.L.  1989.  Growth during the larval and juvenile stages of the northern anchovy, Engraulis 
mordax, in the California Current during 1980-84.  Fish. Bull., U.S. 87:645-652. 
 
Butler, J.L.  1991.  Mortality and recruitment of Pacific sardine, Sardinops sagax caerulea, larvae in the 
California Current.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 48(9):1713-1723. 
 
Butler, J.L., P.E. Smith, and N.C.H. Lo.  1993.  The effect of natural variability of life-history parameters 
on anchovy and sardine population growth.  Calif. Coop. Oceanic Fish. Invest. Rep. 34:104-111. 
 
Caswell, H.  1989.  Matrix population models:  Construction, analysis, and interpretation.  Sinauer 
Associates, Inc., Massachusetts.  328 p. 
 
Csirke, J.  1988.  Small shoaling pelagic fish stocks, p. 271-302.  In J.A. Gulland [ed.] Fish population 
dynamics (second edition).  John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, G. B.  422 p.  
 
Dickerson, T.L., B.J. Macewicz, and J.R. Hunter.  1992.  Spawning frequency and batch fecundity of chub 
mackerel, Scomber japonicus, during 1985.  Calif. Coop. Oceanic Fish. Invest. Rep. 33:130-140. 
 
Funakoshi, S.  1987.  Reproduction mechanisms of Japanese anchovy (Engraulis japonica) in the Pacific 
coast of central Honshu:  Population control mechanisms within the life history, p. 98-117.  In 
Japan. Soc. Fish. Oceangr. [ed.] Fisheries and fisheries oceanography in the coming century.  
Kouseisha-Kouseikaku, Tokyo.  385 p.  
 
Funakoshi, S.  1990.  Studies on the reproduction mechanisms of Japanese anchovy Engraulis japonica 
(HOUTTUYN) in Enshu Nada, Ise and Mikawa Bays.  Achieve. Aichi  Pref. Fish. Exper. Stn. 
10:1-208.  
 
Fukushima, S., Y. Watanabe, and Y. Ogawa.  1990.  Correspondence of spawned seasons to large, 
medium, and small size Pacific saury exploited in the northwestern Pacific Ocean.  Bull. Tohoku 
Natl. Fish. Res. Inst. 52:17-27.  
 
Grosse, D.J., and D.E. Hay.  1988.  Pacific herring, Clupea harengus pallasi, northeast Pacific and Bering 
Sea.  In Wilimovsky, N.J., L.S. Incze, and S.J. Westerheim [eds.] Species synopsis: life histories of 
selected fish and shellfish in the northeast Pacific and Bering Sea.  University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA. 
Hammann, M.G, and M.A. Cisneros-Mata.  1989.  Range extension and commercial capture of the 
northern anchovy, Engraulis mordax Girard, in the Gulf of California, Mexico.  Calif. Fish & 
Game 75(1):49-53. 
 20
Hay, D.E., M.C. Healey, D.M. Ware, and N.J. Wilimovsky.  1992.  Distribution, abundance and habitat of 
prey fish on the west coast of Vancouver Island.  In K. Vermeer, R.W. Butler and K.H. Morgan 
[eds. ] The ecology, status and conservation of marine and shoreline birds on the west coast of 
Vancouver Island.  Canadian Wildlife Service Occasional Paper No. 75, Ottawa, 1992.  
 
Hollowed, A.B., K.M. Bailey, and W.S. Wooster.  1987.  Patterns in recruitment of marine fishes in the 
Northeast Pacific Ocean.  Biol. Oceanogr. 5:99-131. 
 
Hotta, H.  1958.  On the growth of the young saury, Cololabis saira, in the rearing experiment.  Bull. 
Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 11:47-64.  
 
Hourston, A.S.  1980.  The decline and recovery of Canada's Pacific herring stocks, p. 143-153.  In A. 
Seville [ed.] The assessment and management of pelagic fish stocks.  Rapp.-P.-V.-Reun. Cons. int. 
Explor. Mer. 
 
Jacobson, L.D., and N.C.H. Lo.  1993.  Spawning biomass of the northern anchovy in 1993.  SWFSC 
Admin. Rep., La Jolla, LJ-93-13, 41 p. 
 
Jacobson, L.D., and A.D. MacCall.  Stock-recruitment models for Pacific sardine.  Ms. Southwest Fisheries 
Science Center, La Jolla, Calif., U.S.A., 43 p.  Submitted to Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 
 
Kawasaki, T.  1991.  Long-term variability in the pelagic fish populations, p. 47-60.  In Kawasaki et al. 
[eds.] Long-term variability of pelagic fish populations and their environment.  Proceedings of the 
international symposium, Sendai, Japan, November 14-18, 1989.  Pergamon Press, Tokyo. 
 
Koslow, J.A.  1984.  Recruitment patterns in Northwest Atlantic fish stocks.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 
41:1722-1729. 
 
Lefkovitch, L.P.  1965.  The study of population growth in organisms grouped by stages.  Biometrics 
21:1-18. 
 
Lo, N.C.H., P.E. Smith, and J.L. Butler.  Projection of daily population growth of northern anchovy and 
Pacific sardine related to stage duration using stage-specific matrix models.  Ms. Southwest 
Fisheries Science Center, La Jolla, Calif., U.S.A.  50 p.  Submitted to Ecology. 
 
MacCall, A., R.A. Klingbeil, and R.D. Methot.  1985.  Recent increased abundance and potential 
productivity of Pacific mackerel (Scomber japonicus).  Calif. Coop. Oceanic Fish. Invest. Rep. 
26:119-129. 
 
Matsuda, H., T. Wada, Y. Takeuchi, and Y. Matsumiya.  1991.  Alternative models for species replacement 
of pelagic fishes.  Res. Pop. Ecol. 33:41-56.  
 
Matsuda, H., T. Wada, Y. Takeuchi, and Y. Matsumiya.  1992.  Model analysis of the effect of 
environmental fluctuation on the species replacement pattern of pelagic fishes under interspecific 
competition.  Res. Pop. Ecol. 34:309-319.   
  
Morimoto, H.  1991.  Relationship between reproductive ability and nutritional body condition in Japanese 
sardine.  Cons. int. Explor. Mer. C.M.-ICES 1991/H:19.  
 
 21
Smith, P.E., N.C.H. Lo, and J.L. Butler.  1992.  Life-stage duration and survival parameters as related to 
interdecadal population variability in Pacific sardine.  Calif. Coop. Oceanic Fish. Invest. Rep. 
33:41-49. 
 
Tang, Q.  1981.  A preliminary study on the causes of fluctuations in year class size of Pacific herring in 
the Yellow Sea.  Trans. Oceanol. Limnol. 2:37-45.  
 
Tang, Q.  1987.  Estimation of fishing mortality and abundance of Pacific herring in the Yellow Sea by 
cohort analysis (VPA).  Acta Oceanol. Sin. 6(1):132-141.  
  
Tsuruta, Y.  1985.  Reproductive biology of Japanese sardine and anchovy in relation to their population 
dynamics.  Bull. Japan. Soc. Fish. Oceanogr. 51:51-54.  
  
Tsuruta, Y., and K. Hirose.  1989.  Internal regulation of reproduction in Japanese anchovy (Engraulis 
japonica) as related to population fluctuation.  In R.J. Beamish and G.A. McFarlane [eds.] Effects 
of ocean variability on recruitment and an evaluation of parameters used in stock assessment model.  
Can. Spec. Publ. Fish. Aquatic Sci., 108:359-379. 
 
Walters, C.J., M. Stocker, A.V. Tyler, and S.J. Westerheim. 1986.  Interaction between Pacific cod (Gadus 
macrocephalus) and herring (Clupea harengus pallasi) in the Hecate Strait, British Columbia.  Can. 
J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 43:830-837. 
 
Ware, D.M.  1991.  Climate, predators and prey:  behaviour of a linked oscillating system, p. 279-291.  In 
Kawasaki et al. [eds.] Long-term variability of pelagic fish populations and their environment.  
Proceedings of the international symposium, Sendai, Japan, November 14-18, 1989.  Pergamon 
Press, Tokyo. 
 
Ware, D.M., and G.A. McFarlane.  1989.  Fisheries production domains in the northeast Pacific Ocean.  In 
R.J. Beamish and G.A. McFarlane [eds.]  Effects of ocean variability on recruitment and an 
evaluation of parameters used in stock assessment models.  Can. Spec. Publ. Fish. Aquatic Sci. 
108:359-379. 
 
Watanabe, T.  1992.  Alternation in relative abundance of the pelagic fish populations with large yield 
viewed from the reproduction and recruitment.  Bull. Japan. Soc. Fish. Oceanogr. 56:505-514. 
 
Watanabe, Y.  1988.  Growth of Pacific saury, Cololabis saira, in the northeastern and northwestern 
Pacific Ocean.  Fish. Bull., U.S. 86:489-498. 
 
Watanabe, Y., and Y. Kuji.  1991.  Verification of daily growth increment formation in saury otolith by 
rearing larvae from hatching.  Japan. J. Ichthyol. 38:11-15. 
 
Wespestad, V.G., and D.R. Gunderson.  1991.  Climatic induced variation in eastern Bering Sea herring 
recruitment.  Proceedings of the international herring symposium.  Alaska Sea Grant 
91-01:127-140. 
 
Wolf, P., P.E. Smith, and C.L. Scannell.  1987.  The relative magnitude of the 1986 Pacific sardine 
spawning biomass off California.  Calif. Coop. Oceanic Fish. Invest. Rep. 28:21-26. 
 
 22
Zebdi, A., and J.S. Collie.  Effect of climate on herring population dynamics in the northeast Pacific Ocean.  
In Beamish, R.J. [ed.] 1994.  Proceedings of an international symposium on climate change and 
northern fisheries.  Can. Spec. Publ. Fish. Aquat. Sci.  In press. 
 23
8.0 Appendices 
 
Appendix 1 
 
Recommendations and Actions 
 
Science 
 
* Assemble information on Western and 
Eastern Pacific Coastal pelagic fish 
populations.  Fishery information shall 
include:  stock size, catch, and recruitment 
estimates per year.  Also, life table data 
containing life stage specific rates of 
growth, mortality and reproduction shall be 
required.  PICES Working Group 3 agrees 
to produce a document containing these 
data  for key coastal pelagic species of the 
Eastern and Western Pacific.  The 
document shall be completed in time for 
PICES Working Group meeting in 1994. 
 
* Encourage the inclusion of Russian and 
Korean fish population information data on 
herring and other northern coastal pelagic 
species in the data exchange described in 
item 1. 
 
* Encourage development of relevant 
oceanographic time series to facilitate the 
interpretation of Pan-Pacific patterns in 
recruitment success.    
 
* Apply trophodynamics models in Eastern 
and Western Pacific ecosystems to 
understand how the production systems of 
each region support pelagic fish biomass.  
This work may require inclusion of pollock 
and hake.  
 
* In the annual 1994 PICES meeting 
Working Group 3 shall review the fish 
population document described in item 1 
and establish plans to carry out Pan-Pacific 
comparisons of life table differences and 
recruitment.    
Communication 
 
* Members of Working Group 3 shall make 
an inventory of scientists working on key 
coastal pelagic fishes within their respective 
geographic area.  Working Group 3 will 
compile a list of key persons, addresses and 
topics of study and make it available to all 
interested researchers.  
 
* The PICES COASTAL PELAGIC FISH 
WORKING GROUP requests PICES 
Fishery Committee to seek support of the 
PICES Secretariat in obtaining funds for a 
visiting scientists program. The working 
group feels that working visits of PICES 
scientists to other PICES countries is 
essential.  Recognizing that PICES may 
not have funds to directly support such an 
action, the working group stands ready to 
assist the Secretariat in preparation of 
proposals to foundations and agencies to 
support the visiting PICES scientist 
program.     
 
Administration 
 
* The proposed inventory of fishery time 
series data and life table information along 
with the PICES Nemuro Workshop Reports 
will constitute important working 
documents for PICES.  Such documents 
need to be organized and archived in some 
consistent way.  For that reason, we 
recommend to the Fishery Committee of 
PICES that the Secretariat establish an 
informal administrative report series. The 
minimum requirements for such a series 
are:  each working document is assigned a 
unique administrative report number;  a 
standard cover design is used on each copy 
of the report;  a standard citation for the 
reports be established; report date;  report 
number, and names of editors are clearly 
 24
indicated.  To reduce PICES costs, actual 
production of the report could be assigned 
to chairpersons, with a certain number of 
copies to the Secretariat.  Of  course,  a  
more  formal system could be adopted as 
well. 
* Working Group 3 recommends 
continuation of the Working Group under 
the existing terms of reference but also 
recommends a name change to PICES 
COASTAL PELAGIC FISHES 
WORKING GROUP. 
 
Appendix 2 
 
Terms of Reference 
 
Working Group 3 
Dynamics of Small Pelagics in Coastal Ecosystems (FIS)
 
 - develop a program for a comparative 
study of the population dynamics and 
productivity of small pelagics 
(focusing on herring, sardine, anchovy 
and mackerel) in the coastal 
ecosystems along the western and 
eastern continental margins of the 
North Pacific; 
 
 - review the present state of knowledge, 
identify the key scientific questions 
and hypotheses that could 
 
be tested, including environmental 
effects on fish production and 
ecosystem structure; 
 
 - identify who is working in this field, 
and what data are available for 
retrospective analyses; 
 
 - determine which member countries 
would be willing to participate in a 
coastal ecosystems program.
 
Appendix 3 
 
List of participants 
 
Working Group 3 members: 
 
Canada 
Dr. Douglas E. Hay 
Dr. R. Ian Perry 
 
Japan 
Dr. Ichiro Hara 
Dr. Yasunori Sakurai 
Dr. Tokio Wada (Co-Chairman) 
Dr. Yoshiro Watanabe 
 
Non-member: 
Dr. Hideo Yoshida (Japan) 
 
China 
Prof. Qi-Sheng Tang 
 
 
U.S.A 
Dr. John R. Hunter (Co-Chairman) 
Prof. Brenda L. Norcross 
Dr. Richard H. Parrish 
Dr. Vidar G. Wespestad 
 
 
 
 
 
 25
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part 2 
 
SUBARCTIC GYRE 
 
 26
FORWORD 
 
 This is the first Annual Report of the Subarctic Gyre Working Group (WG-6).  The initial Terms 
of Reference (Appendix 2) were finalized by the PICES Science Board in January 1993.  The Co-
Chairmen were named by Council in February 1993, and each nation subsequently designated additional 
members during March-April, 1993.  No restrictions were placed on the number of members from each 
nation, and all countries were encouraged to include members from academic, industry and government 
sectors. 
  
 In 1993 the Co-Chairmen developed a short list of specific topics to be reviewed, based on the 
general Terms of Reference.  The Co-Chairman asked members to write reviews on specific topics, and 
to propose a list of "Key Scientific Questions" on the Subarctic Gyre for consideration by all members.  
During 19-23 September 1993 the Nemuro Workshop on Western Subarctic Circulation was held in 
Nemuro, Japan.  Japan also offered to host a concurrent workshop for PICES Working Groups. WG-6 
accepted this invitation, and the first draft of this Annual Report was assembled and discussed by 
participants (Appendix 3) at the Workshop.  WG-6 was required to submit this final Annual Report to the 
PICES Secretariat for review by the Science Board at the Second Annual Meeting. The Co-Chairmen 
commend all members for their efforts in 1993, and appreciate their patience and cooperation during this 
"start-up" year of the Subarctic Gyre Working Group. 
  
 On behalf of all members, we gratefully acknowledge the assistance of our many colleagues who 
generously contributed their time, energy, and ideas to WG-6 activities in 1993.  We also appreciate the 
funding and logistic support provided to participants by Japan, the Organizing Committee for the Nemuro 
Workshop, and the citizens of Nemuro City. We thank the PICES Secretariat for assistance with WG-6 
business, publication of this 1993 Annual Report, and for facilitating PICES communications.  We thank 
David Welch for serving as Rapporteur,  and A. Kasai and K. Tadokoro for technical assistance during 
the Nemuro Workshop.   
 
 
 
       Takashige Sugimoto and Brent Hargreaves 
       C o - C h a i r m e n 
 
 27
1.0 INTRODUCTION 
 
 The physical oceanography of the 
Northern North Pacific Ocean is characterized by 
a large-scale cyclonic (anti-clockwise) circulation 
known as the Subarctic Gyre.  This gross 
circulation pattern can be further resolved into at 
least four semi-closed sub-gyres: Alaskan Gyre, 
Bering Sea Gyre, Western Subarctic Gyre, and 
Okhotsk Sea Gyre (Fig. 1).  In the eastern Pacific 
the Subarctic Water Mass includes both the 
Central Subarctic Domain and the Transitional 
Domain (Dodimead et al. 1963).  The Alaskan 
Gyre is a portion of the Central Subarctic Domain.  
The currents associated with the Subarctic Gyre 
are generally weak, with speeds of 5-15 cm · s
-1
.  
However, the current is both baroclinic and 
barotropic with a volume transport of up to be 30 · 
10
6
 · m
3
 · s
-1
.  Generally the southern boundary of 
the Subarctic region is defined in physical 
oceanographic terms by the position of the 
isohaline of 34.0 psu in the upper mixed layer, 
which typically runs east-west along about 40
o
N. 
 
 The biological boundaries of the Subarctic 
Gyre are less precise and therefore more difficult 
to define.  Many of the dominant fishes in the 
Subarctic Gyre are large nektonic species which 
undertake seasonal migrations over vast areas of 
the North Pacific Ocean.  Some species such as 
salmon, salmon shark and some squids are 
typically found within or north of the Transitional 
Domain all year.  These are generally regarded as 
Subarctic species, although seasonal migrations do 
occur into Subarctic waters.  Several species (jack 
and Pacific mackerel, Pacific hake, Pacific sardine, 
pomfret, saury, blue shark, etc.) reside primarily in 
subtropical waters or the Transitional Domain 
during the winter, but migrate northwards to feed 
each summer in Subarctic waters.  The extensive 
north-south migrations of migrant fish species also 
provide the opportunity for important interactions 
with other species not generally considered to be 
Subarctic species.  For example, flying squid and 
albacore typically do not reside for significant 
periods in Subarctic waters, but comprise an 
important component of the ecology of the 
Transitional Domain.  These species also 
frequently overlap in distribution with migrant 
Subarctic species during the winter. 
 The transitional zone is not only the 
region where both Subarctic and subtropical 
species occur, but it is also inhabited by a 
considerable number of endemic species of 
zooplankton and micronekton which have been 
zoogeographically recognized as "transitional 
species".  This region is also a key part of the 
north-south migration route of nekton of 
commercial importance between the subtropical 
and Subarctic zones.  These facts support the 
inclusion of the transitional zone within the PICES 
study area. 
 
 WG-6 activities therefore will focus 
mainly on the Subarctic region of the North 
Pacific, with the boundaries identified by physical 
oceanographic parameters (i.e. southern boundary 
identified by position of the isohaline of 34.0 psu 
in the upper mixed layer) and the transitional area 
between the Subarctic and subtropical areas.  
However, to fully understand processes in the 
Subarctic Gyre the boundaries of WG-6 
investigations will be extended where necessary to 
include all areas and species of the North Pacific 
and marginal seas which currently are known to, 
or potentially could, significantly affect the 
physics, chemistry, or biology of the Subarctic 
Gyre. 
 
1.1 Main Scientific Questions 
 
 In 1993 the WG-6 Co-Chairmen requested 
members to prepare written reviews on several 
specific topics, based on the Terms of Reference 
(see Appendix 2) provided by the PICES Science 
Board.  The Co-Chairman also asked each 
member to propose a list of key scientific 
questions for the Subarctic Gyre for consideration 
by all members.  These lists of Key Questions 
were discussed by participants at the "Nemuro 
Workshop on Western Subarctic Circulation '93" 
held during 18-23 September 1993 in Nemuro, 
Japan.  Additional "Key Questions" were 
developed by members and colleagues who 
attended these meetings (see key questions in 
section 2.0). 
 
 28
 As a result of discussions at the Nemuro 
meetings, three main questions were agreed: 
 
1. How do the various scales of physical 
variability affect biological processes and 
productivity of the Subarctic North Pacific 
Ocean ecosystem?  
 
2. What is the structure of the food web in 
Subarctic waters and what controls its spatial, 
seasonal, and interannual variability? 
3. What physical and biological 
oceanographic processes affect the 
production of salmon and other nekton 
in the Subarctic North Pacific Ocean? 
 
Based on discussion of these questions 
recommendation and action items were formulated 
(Appendix 1). 
 29
2.0 KEY SCIENTIFIC QUESTIONS FOR THE SUBARCTIC GYRE 
 
 In 1993 the Co-chairmen requested each 
member to prepare a list of key scientific questions 
for the Subarctic Gyre.  These lists of Key 
Questions were discussed, modified, and 
additional "Key Questions" were developed by 
members and colleagues who attended the 
meetings at the "Nemuro Workshop on Western 
Subarctic Circulation '93" held during 18-23 
September 1993 in Nemuro, Japan.  These Key 
Questions are the foundation of the science 
activities and collaborative programs currently 
proposed by the Working Group.  These Key 
Questions also represent an important resource for 
future planning and prioritizing of activities.  
Therefore the complete lists of Key Questions 
contributed by each participant in 1993 are 
included below: 
 
T. Sugimoto: 
 
1. What does the ENSO and decadal scale 
variation in the westerly wind system induce on 
the Subarctic ecosystem in each sub-gyre? 
 
2. What physical parameters control vertical flux 
of nutrients, primary/secondary production, and 
population variations of pelagic fish? 
 
3. What are the effects of the western boundary 
warm core ring region on biological production 
and fish migration? 
 
J.D. Schumacher and T. Royer: 
 
1. What is the interannual variability of the 
physical structure of the Subarctic Gyre with 
emphasis on the distribution of temperature and 
nutrients? 
 
2. How do the continental shelves receive the 
required nutrients to support the growth of 
phytoplankton? Do the nutrients come from the 
vast quantities of fresh water entering the system? 
Do they come from upstream sources as might be 
found along the coastal regions of British 
Columbia and Washington? Are they brought into 
the photic zone from the deep ocean, where we 
know that their concentrations are quite high? 
3. What mechanisms cause interannual 
variability in the Alaskan Stream which then alter 
the exchange of water into the Bering Sea? Are 
these mechanisms directly related to fluctuations 
in the westwind drift? What is the impact of 
changes in volume transport and its constituents 
(both chemical and biological) on the ambient 
ecosystem of the southeastern Bering Sea? 
 
T. Yoshida: 
 
1. What are the important oceanographical and 
meteorological processes which affect ecosystems 
in the upper mixed layer?  How important is the 
intermittent mixing by strong wind during the 
heating season for the primary production? 
 
2. How does the Subarctic Gyre respond to 
variations of the climate system over the Pacific 
Ocean?  Does the Subarctic Gyre expand and 
contract? 
 
3. How do the Subarctic and Subtropical gyres 
affect the global air circulation? Do the ocean 
circulations in middle and high latitude affect the 
global air circulation? How much does the 
Subtropical (Subarctic) gyre transport heat to the 
Subarctic (subtropical) sea?  Where does the heat 
go? 
 
A. Taniguchi: 
 
1. Why is the Oyashio region so productive?  
Does deep ocean circulation enrich the Bering 
Basin waters and ultimately the Oyashio waters? 
Or is the confluence of Kamchatka-Kurile-Japan 
Archipelago and the Emperor Seamounts the site 
for upwelling of nutrient rich deep water? 
 
2. Phaeocystis poucheti and Emiliania huxleyi 
rarely dominate the Oyashio and adjacent waters. 
Is it indicative of the difference in the biological 
oceanographical systems between Subarctic 
Pacific and Atlantic and/or between the eastern 
and western Subarctic Pacific? 
 
 30
3. Is there any long-term variation in 
zooplankton standing stock and species 
composition? And what are the causative factors? 
 
4. How important are microzooplankton in the 
Oyashio and adjacent waters? 
 
5. How does the plankton community change in 
time in warm core rings pinched off from the 
warm Kuroshio Current?  How do warm core 
rings affect the plankton community in the 
surrounding water in terms of their life history and 
productivity? 
 
D. Mackas and B. Frost: 
 
1. What controls interannual variability in 
mesozooplankton abundance in surface waters of 
the oceanic Subarctic Pacific?  What are the 
important linkages within the pelagic food web 
and what is the specific effect of interannual 
variability in the physical environment? 
 
2. What physical and biological interactions 
trigger major changes in community structure 
within the Subarctic Gyre? 
 
3. Does the pattern of oceanic plankton dynamics 
established at Ocean Station P in the Gulf of 
Alaska (50°N 145°W) apply generally to the open 
Subarctic Pacific?  In particular, does it apply to 
regions where winter mixed layer depths are 
significantly deeper than at Station P, such as the 
western Subarctic region and the deep basin in the 
Bering Sea?  Do the same underlying mechanisms 
pertain in all regions? 
 
4. Why are there no blooms of large-sized 
phytoplankton cells in oceanic waters of the 
Subarctic Pacific, in contrast to shelf and coastal 
waters?  What controls the abundance of large-
sized phytoplankton species in oceanic waters, and 
in particular does size- or taxa- dependent 
limitation of phytoplankton specific growth rates 
by one or more trace nutrients (e.g., iron) play a 
role? 
 
5. What are the connections between the oceanic 
microbial loop and the larger mesozooplankton 
(dominated by species of Neocalanus) in surface 
waters of the open Subarctic Pacific? 
 
W. Pearcy: 
 
1. How does circulation in the Subarctic Gyre 
vary in time and space? What are the variations on 
a climatic and interannual scale? What are the 
teleconnections between circulation in the eastern 
and western Subarctic Pacific, and with the 
California Current? What are the shapes of the 
frontal boundaries and how do they vary spatially 
from year-to-year? 
 
2. What are the physical processes controlling 
productivity?  What is the relative import of 
winter mixing vs. upwelling in gyre?  How does 
volume transport in the Subarctic Current/North 
Pacific Drift relate to nutrient levels, upwelling 
and productivity?  What are the major factors 
limiting primary productivity (iron limitation, 
microzooplankton)? 
 
3. How do the communities and species respond 
to long-term and interannual variations in the 
ocean environment?  Are there major changes in 
abundances, community structure or migrations? 
 
4. What are the physical and biological features 
that are most important in influencing the 
distribution and abundances of major species? 
 
5. Is the increased production of salmonids in the 
Gulf of Alaska since 1976 due to increased 
secondary production of zooplankton, or to a 
change in zooplankton distribution and 
availability? 
 
6. How important is competition vs. predation in 
determining standing stocks and production?  Is 
there evidence for competition among key species 
and salmonids? 
 
7. What is the carrying capacity in biomass for 
salmonids during the 1980-90s?  What stocks and 
what ocean regions show evidence for density-
dependent growth or survival?  What is the 
optimal number of salmon smolts that hatcheries 
should release in the future? 
 
 31
8. How much of the primary productivity 
eventually passes through salmonids and other top 
carnivores (pomfret, marine mammals, squids, 
sharks, etc.) vs. mesopelagics or fallout to the 
benthos? 
 
R.D. Brodeur and A.B. Hollowed: 
 
1. What is the taxonomic and size composition of 
the zooplankton that are advected onshore or 
through the Alaska Current by way of the 
Subarctic Current and what life stage of the 
dominant fish species present can utilize these 
prey most effectively? What is the taxonomic 
composition of the tertiary level of production in 
oceanic and coastal waters (e.g. small fishes and 
squid, myctophids, large pelagic shrimp and 
euphausiids) and does it fluctuate in phase with the 
secondary production? 
 
2. What is the lag period between increased 
production in oceanic waters and the appearance 
of this production in coastal waters? What is the 
lag period between a change in atmospheric 
conditions and increased zooplankton production? 
 
3. What is the connection between flow into the 
California Current and that into the Alaska 
Current?  Is production out of phase between 
these two systems? 
 
4. Does similar onshelf advection of zooplankton 
occur in the Western North Pacific and do pelagic 
and demersal fish stocks respond in the same way 
to this biomass flux?  Are peak years in 
production in the Western Basin synchronous with 
those in the Eastern North Pacific? 
 
5. Are there any anoxic basins with fish 
sedimentary records in the northern North Pacific 
that can determine whether the observed decadal 
shifts in dominance and biomass have occurred 
during the past millennia? 
 
6. Are there shifts in the distribution of midwater 
and demersal fishes between years or major 
oceanographic regimes?  How does the 
availability of suitable spawning habitat change? 
 
7. How is growth affected by regime shifts on 
both sides of the ocean?  Is the food available 
during any particular year above the amount 
needed to sustain optimal growth?  Do several co-
occurring species show synchronous good growth 
years?  For the same species or species in a 
similar trophic position (e.g. hake and walleye 
pollock), is growth in the California Current out of 
phase with that of the Alaska gyre or is it related 
in any way to growth in the Western North 
Pacific?  Is widespread density-dependent growth 
apparent for years of high fish biomass or low 
zooplankton production? 
 
Y. Ishida, D.W. Welch and K. Shimazaki: 
 
1. What factors are causing changes in the 
salmon production of the North Pacific? 
 
2. What are the biological and physical factors 
controlling the distribution of Pacific salmon in 
the North Pacific? What are the implications of 
climate change on salmonid carrying capacity and 
productivity? 
 
3. How are marine growth rates of salmon 
affected by changes in oceanic productivity? 
 
4. What are the density-dependent interactions 
between salmonid species? What are the 
implications for the salmonid carrying capacity of 
the North Pacific? 
 
B. Hargreaves: 
 
1. What controls mortality of salmon and other 
important nekton species in the Subarctic?  What 
is the location, timing, and variability of 
mortality? 
 
2. Are there large geographic areas that 
consistently show different interannual rates of 
survival and/or growth for salmon?  Are these 
regions consistent for other important nekton 
species? 
 
3. Is there evidence for coherent patterns of 
ecosystem productivity and species/niche 
abundance patterns (trends, species replacement, 
etc. over larger space (e.g. basin-wide) and time 
 32
(e.g. decadal) scales (e.g. changes in average size 
of salmon, sardine abundance in eastern and 
western Pacific, etc.)? 
 
4. What new approaches or technology can be 
used to continuously track the movements, growth, 
and status (e.g. living, dying or dead) of individual 
fish and entire stocks over space and time scales 
that are biologically meaningful (e.g. entire 
Subarctic Pacific Ocean and entire life span for 
salmon, pollock, saury, sardine, etc.) in the ocean? 
 
5. What is the evidence for multiple stable states 
and for "regime" shifts  for important fish species 
(particularly evidence from other than climate and 
harvested stocks)? 
 
6. Is it valid to use historical catch data from 
fisheries (e.g. salmon catches) to estimate species 
abundance? 
 
7. What is the evidence for top-down (natural 
predators and human fishing) versus bottom-up 
(physics/nutrient flux/zooplankton)  control of 
ecosystem structure? 
 
8. What are the effects of interannual and longer-
term variability (e.g. global climate) on ecosystem 
productivity/composition (esp. fisheries)? 
 
K. Kawaguchi: 
 
1. What is the role of fish mesopelagic 
micronektonic animals in the food web of the 
Subarctic Pacific? 
 
2. How much of the primary production is 
transferred to diel vertical migratory mesopelagic 
micronekton? 
 
H. Nakata: 
 
1. What are implications of mesoscale features 
such as oceanic fronts and eddies for biological 
production? 
 
2. What are driving forces of decadal changes in 
community structure of plankton and fish 
populations? 
 
 
 
 33
3.0 REVIEW OF THE PHYSICS OF THE SUBARCTIC GYRE 
 
3.1 Gross Structures And Decadal Scale 
Variations In The Basin-Scale Climatic and 
Oceanic Conditions (T. Sugimoto) 
 
Gross oceanic environment in relation to 
primary production 
 
 Horizontal distribution of monthly mean 
sea surface wind velocity in the North Pacific in 
February and August are shown in Figs.2a and 2b, 
respectively.  In winter, the Aleutian Low 
develops with its center around 45-50
o
N, 
170-180
o
W and southerly wind prevails over the 
Alaskan gyre.  On the other hand, northwest 
winter monsoon prevails around the Japanese 
Islands.  In summer, however, a subtropical high 
develops in the mid-latitudes of the North Pacific 
from east to west and northerly wind prevails off 
the west coast of the North American continent. 
The horizontal distribution of the annual mean sea 
surface wind stress is shown (Fig. 3).  Upper 
ocean circulation in the North Pacific, estimated 
from the sea surface dynamic height anomaly (Fig. 
4). The anticlockwise Subarctic Gyre is observed 
north of 45
o
N, which corresponds to the region of 
cyclonic rotation of the annual mean wind stress.  
Strong western boundary currents, the Kuroshio, 
the Oyashio and their extensions, are seen in mid-
latitudes south and east of Japan.  A wide 
transitional zone with many eddies is formed at 
35-45
o
 N between the subarctic and subtropical 
gyres, as shown in Figs. 17 and 18. 
 
 Figures 5a and 5b show north-south 
sections of water temperature and salinity 
respectively along 180
o
E in winter.  Whereas Fig. 
6a and 6b show those in summer.  In the 
Subtropical Gyre, which extends from 15-35
o
N, 
warm and highly saline water accumulates to 
depths of several hundred meters.  In the 
Subarctic Gyre the water is generally more 
homogeneous.  However, a strong halocline 
prohibits the deepening of the upper mixed layer 
due to winter cooling.  An influx of fresh water 
through the sea surface is one of the specific 
characters of the Subarctic region in the North 
Pacific, and creates less saline upper layer.  The 
vertical structure of the water mass is 
characterized by the sharp halocline at the bottom 
of the upper layer of about 100 m depth. 
 
 In the spring and summer, a sharp shallow 
seasonal thermo-halocline is formed by heating 
and net precipitation from the sea surface.  The 
upward nutrient flux through this seasonal 
thermo-halocline is one of the most important 
processes in the primary production in the 
euphotic zone.  The upward flux of nutrients from 
the deeper layer to the upper layer, due to winter 
mixing and subsequent formation of the shallow 
seasonal thermocline, combined with increasing 
sunlight in spring and summer, are essential 
physical factors for primary production, especially 
in the generation of the spring bloom. 
 
 In the vertical flux process, upward 
Ekman pumping in the Subarctic Gyre during 
winter is also important factor to lift up the deep 
nutrient rich water into the upper part of the 
permanent halocline.  Figure 7 shows the 
horizontal distribution of monthly mean upward 
velocity at the bottom of the Ekman layer in 
February.  This figure indicates that the water at 
the bottom of the Ekman layer in the Subarctic 
Gyre is lifted up by about 10-15 m for three 
months in winter.  Upwelling velocity in the 
coastal upwelling region off the west coast of the 
American continent in summer (not shown here) is 
more than one order larger and much more 
effective to primary production. 
 
El Niño events, meanders and variations in the 
westerly wind, the Kuroshio and the Oyashio 
on decadal scales 
 
 Figures 8a and 8b show monthly mean sea 
surface temperature anomalies in March and June 
in 1993.  In this winter and spring, sea surface 
water in the eastern part and western boundary 
region of the Pacific was warmer by about 1
o
C, 
and the central Pacific in the mid-latitudes was 
colder by about 1
o
C than usual year.  However, in 
this summer the surface water was colder than 
usual by about 1
o
C in the central and western part 
of mid-latitudes.  Cooler summers and calm warm 
winters in the Far East correspond to weak 
 34
southeasterly and northwesterly monsoons in El 
Niño years. Figure 9 shows a time series of 
monthly mean sea surface temperature anomalies 
at the western and eastern parts of the equatorial 
Pacific since 1976.  In recent years, the El Niño 
event which started in 1991 is persisting, although 
there was a short intermission.  Figure 8 also 
shows that the El Niño-like situation has lasted for 
over ten years since 1976.  But El Niño events 
were not dominant in the previous one and a half 
decades of 1960-75.  Figure 10 shows about 50 El 
Niño events which occurred about every 10 years 
during the last 500 years, and that remarkable 
events have occurred once every 50 years. 
Although these long term variations are considered 
to be due to the variations in oceanic thermohaline 
circulation, which has a long response time, and 
variations in solar activity, the mechanisms are not 
yet well understood. 
 
 These events in low latitudes affect the 
oceanic and atmospheric phenomena in mid and 
especially high latitudes.  Figure 11 shows the 
anomaly of the difference of monthly mean 500 
mb height between 40 and 60
o
N. The positive 
values indicate small amplitudes, and the negative 
values indicate large amplitudes of the meandering 
of the westerly wind.  This figure indicates that 
the amplitude of the meander of the westerly was 
large in 1956-65 and 1977-87, but was small in 
1968-76 and in recent years. 
 
 The southward intrusion of the first branch 
of the Oyashio Current, indicated by the isotherm 
of 5
o
C at 100 m, usually occurs in spring. 
However, the interannual variation is also large 
(Fig. 12a).  The southern limit of the first branch 
of the Oyashio extended more southward before 
1966 and in the decade of 1977-86, but retreated 
northward in 1968-75, except during 1974 and 
1988-90.  Whereas the Kuroshio path south of 
Honshu did not show large meanders in the decade 
of 1964-74, it did follow a more meandered path 
in 1956-58, and in the decade of 1975-85 (except 
in 1981) (Fig.12b).  The periods of intense 
southward intrusion of the Oyashio, and the 
meander/non-meander pattern of the Kuroshio 
path correspond well to the state of meandering of 
the westerly wind. 
 
 Figure 13 shows Sverdrup transport of the 
Kuroshio and the Oyashio Currents estimated from 
annually averaged wind stress during 1964-84, and 
the geostrophic transports of the Kuroshio and the 
Oyashio measured in the East China Sea and in the 
east of the Tugaru straits (Figure 14), four times a 
year.  The transports in the decade since mid 
1970s were larger than those before that decade. 
This tendency for decadal scale variation also 
corresponds to those of the meandering of the 
westerly. 
 
Physical environments for early survival rate of 
Japanese sardine 
 
 Pacific sardine live in temperate waters of 
10-20
o
C and are found around the  Japanese 
Islands and off the California coast.  Japanese 
sardine on the Pacific side spawn in the water 
between coastal water and the Kuroshio in winter, 
and migrate toward the northeast, across the 
Kuroshio-Oyashio transitional region, during 
spring and summer.  Hence, the water between 
the Kuroshio and the coastal waters is important as 
the nursery ground.  The Kuroshio-Oyashio 
transitional region and the Oyashio water are also 
an important feeding area for young and adult fish. 
Year to year variation in their biological and 
non-biological environments are considered to be 
important factors in the population variation 
through the recruitment success and failure. 
 
 During the period when a large meander 
of the Kuroshio Current persists, water exchange 
between the Kuroshio and its coastal waters is 
enhanced (Sugimoto and Kobayashi 1987).  The 
water characteristics in the coastal boundary 
region become closer to offshore water than 
during periods when the Kuroshio meanders are 
smaller.  For this reason, the dominant species of 
copepod shifts from coastal types of smaller sizes, 
to offshore larger size types (Nakata et al. 1994).  
This results in decreases in the number of nauplii 
of small copepods, which are the main food of 
sardine larvae, and increased the predation 
pressure by the large zooplankton. 
 
 In winter when the northwest monsoon 
prevails, the wind drift transports fish eggs and 
larvae toward offshore waters.  As vertical mixing 
 35
has already occurred due to winter cooling, strong 
wind mixing is thought to suppress the 
multiplication of phytoplankton and feeding 
condition of larvae, unlike the California coastal 
upwelling area.  Figure 15 shows the computed 
retention rates of particles in coastal waters 20 
days after release at the main spawning ground in 
each year.  In this numerical model, offshoreward 
wind drift current, patterns of the Kuroshio path, 
horizontal diffusivity and spawning sites were 
taken into consideration. The result was compared 
with the survival rate of sardine larvae about 20 
days after spawning in the field.  In the years of 
strong westerlies (1981, 1984), both the retention 
rate and survival rate clearly decreased.  Whereas 
in the years with calm winters (1979, 1980, 1982), 
the survival rate was relatively high. 
 
 Figure 16 shows multi-decadal scale 
variation of the Japanese sardine and two indices 
of the physical environment i.e. patterns of the 
Kuroshio path with/without large meander and the 
remarkable El Niño events which indicate a calm 
winter. In and around the 1972-73 El Niño year, 
the winter monsoon was extraordinarily weak for 
at least a month (Sugimoto et al. 1991). The 
Kuroshio did not meander between 1964-75. 
Under these physical situations in the early 1970s, 
survival rates of sardine larvae were enhanced and 
dominant year classes were formed.  A similar 
situation occurred in the 1957-58 El Niño year, 
although the following years in that decade were 
not favourable. 
 
 In the summer of 1975, a large meander of 
the Kuroshio path started, which might have 
caused an upstream extension of the spawning 
ground toward the coastal water and the Kuroshio 
front south of Kyushu. This situation induced 
extremely large migrations of sardine, and 
increased the stock (Kobayashi and Kuroda, 
1991), similar to that found in the late 1920s. 
 
3.2 Review of processes of interannual 
variations in the eastern subarctic waters, 
including meso-scale phenomena and the shelf 
circulations which may affect the ecosystem 
(J.D. Schumacher and T. Royer). 
 
 The Northeastern Pacific Subarctic Gyre 
experiences some of the largest seasonal variations 
in atmospheric forcing in the world.  The 
atmospheric system is dominated by an intense 
low pressure system in winter, the Aleutian Low. 
In summer the atmospheric circulation is 
influenced primarily by the North Pacific High.  
Coastal topography assists in the containment of 
the winter low pressure systems over the Gulf of 
Alaska.  Seasonally, the oceanic driving changes 
from a strong central upwelling with strong coastal 
downwelling in winter, to a very weak central 
downwelling and coastal upwelling in summer.  
In addition to the wind forcing, the Aleutian Low 
in fall and winter brings high rates of precipitation.  
The precipitation is especially intense in the 
coastal regions, where the moisture laden air 
masses interact with the coastal mountains.  This 
non-uniform distribution of precipitation and 
runoff creates a cross-shelf salinity gradient that 
drives the coastal circulation.  Annual 
precipitation rates of more than 8 m have been 
reported. 
 
 Given the very large seasonal signal in 
atmospheric forcing, it is surprising to discover 
that the seasonal variability in the Subarctic ocean 
circulation is quite small, generally less than 10% 
of the mean.  The most probable explanation is 
that the ocean at these relatively high latitudes 
does not have enough time to respond to the 
atmospheric forcing.  We do see a response of the 
circulation on the Gulf of Alaska shelves to this 
forcing, however, with greatest nearshore flows 
occurring in fall and winter (Schumacher and 
Reed 1980; Royer 1981; Johnson et al. 1988; 
Schumacher et al. 1990). 
 
 Since we know that the biomass 
production on the shelves of the Subarctic Pacific 
are very great, an important question is "How do 
the shelves receive the required nutrients to 
support this growth?".  Do the nutrients come 
from the vast quantities of fresh water entering the 
system?  Do they come from upstream sources as 
might be found along the coastal regions of British  
 36
Columbia and Washington? Are they brought into 
the photic zone from the deep ocean, where we 
know that their concentrations are quite high? 
 
 While some attention over the past two 
decades has been devoted to the measurement of 
physical parameters on the shelves in the Gulf of 
Alaska, little or no resources have been used to 
gather information on the chemistry or biology. 
Fortunately, a WOCE cruise (P17N) recently 
(May-June 1993) obtained nutrient and CFC data 
for the central part of the Gulf of Alaska and 
across the shelves near the Shumagin Islands and 
Sitka.  This was the first time that high precision 
nutrient sampling has been done synoptically for 
the shelf and deep ocean in the Gulf of Alaska. 
While it cannot reveal much about the important 
processes controlling the nutrient distributions, it 
does provide the first "snapshot" of their 
distribution. 
 
 Interannual variability of temperatures in 
the upper layers of the northern Gulf of Alaska 
have been observed and attributed to the 18.6 year 
lunar nodal tide forcing.  This tidal forcing can 
account for about 60% of the variance of the 
halibut biomass in the Gulf of Alaska.  The exact 
mechanism of this influence on the biomass is not 
known, but it is likely that it operates through 
some other method than a direct temperature 
effect.  We need to pursue the question of 
interannual variability of temperature and other 
parameters including nutrients, primary production 
and larval fish.  These investigations should also 
address the shorter period fluctuations due to 
ENSO forcing.  Attempts should be made to map 
the propagation of ENSO events up the west coast 
of North America from the tropics to the Gulf of 
Alaska and possibly into the Bering Sea.  We also 
need to evaluate the role of the Subarctic Gyre in 
any possible global climate change processes and 
the potential impact on the fisheries. 
 
 Recent numerical models and observations 
of Subarctic ocean circulation indicate the 
presence of mesoscale eddies in the Subarctic 
North Pacific (Cummins 1989; Musgrave et al. 
1992).  The eddies are usually formed along the 
eastern boundary of the Gulf of Alaska.  They are 
several hundred kilometers in diameter and are 
analogous to warm core rings. They do not have a 
temperature signal, but instead are relatively fresh, 
giving them a lower density than the surrounding 
water.  They tend to propagate slowly westward 
across the Gulf of Alaska at about 2 cm · s
-1
.  
Ultimately, after several years, they enter the 
Alaska Stream, where they are carried to the 
southwest along the Aleutian Island Arc.  The 
ultimate fate of these eddies is unknown.  Several 
questions arise that are related to these eddies.  
First, do they represent a significant mechanism by 
which the wind stress enters the gyre?  Second, 
are they important for mixing in the subarctic?  
Third, are they important biological habitats?  
The latter question arises since they are so long 
lived. 
 
 Knowledge of the exchange of waters 
between the North Pacific Ocean and the Bering 
Sea is limited because of the lack of reliable 
measurements (Reed 1990).  Since the late 1980s 
however, several research efforts have been 
conducted in support of the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Fisheries 
Oceanography Coordinated Investigations (FOCI; 
Reed et al. 1989, 1992; Schumacher and Kendall 
1992).  Because the focus of this program is to 
understand how the physical environment 
influences survival of early life history stages of 
pollock and their eventual recruitment to various 
stocks, the impact of interannual variations in 
Subarctic waters on the ecosystem is a central 
issue.  In the following review we present results 
which describe flow through Amukta Pass, 
Amchitka Pass and Near Strait (Fig. 17), with 
emphasis on interannual variations, impact on the 
physical environment of the Bering Sea, and 
speculation on processes which cause the observed 
fluctuations. 
 The Bering Sea is partially separated from 
the North Pacific Ocean by the Aleutian Island arc 
(Fig. 17).  Three passes have water depths >700 
m (Amchitka Pass, Near Strait, and Kamchatka 
Strait), and only Kamchatka Strait permits 
exchange of deep (>2000 m) water (Favorite 
1967).  Although topographic features limit 
exchange, clearly the Bering Sea is not an isolated, 
self-contained system (Stabeno and Reed 1992).  
The two major circulation features over the basin, 
the Kamchatka Current in the western Bering Sea 
 37
and the Bering Slope Current (Kinder et al. 1975; 
Schumacher and Reed 1992; Overland et al., in 
press) in the eastern Bering Sea, are extensions of 
the Alaskan Stream. Inflow into the Bering Sea 
(12·10
6
· m
3
· s
-1
) is balanced by outflow through 
Kamchatka Strait, so that flow in the Bering Sea 
basin may be aptly described as a convoluted 
continuation of the North Pacific Subarctic Gyre 
(Stabeno and Reed 1993).  An insignificant 
volume (<1·10
6
· m
3
· s
-1
) flows northward through 
Bering Strait. Furthermore, the interannual 
variability of the sea surface temperature in the 
Bering Sea and Gulf of Alaska tend to fluctuate in 
unison (Royer 1993). 
 
 The Alaskan Stream is the northern 
boundary of the cyclonic Pacific Subarctic Gyre 
(Favorite et al. 1976).  It is a narrow (about 75 
km),  deep  (>2000 m),  swift  (peak  speeds  
75 
cm · s
-1
) flow that extends from the head of the 
Gulf of Alaska to the western Aleutians (Reed 
1984).  The Alaskan Stream transports relatively 
fresh surface water and warm subsurface water 
into the western Pacific Ocean.  If it were absent 
from the Bering Sea for any considerable period, 
there would be a substantial alteration of 
circulation and of water properties in the Bering 
Sea, with potential impacts on the ecosystem 
(Stabeno and Reed 1992). 
 
 The Bering Sea is characterized by a 
temperature-minimum layer (from the surface to 
near 200 db) and by a temperature-maximum layer 
below the minimum, typically cantered at 300 to 
400 db.  The temperature minimum is deepest and 
has the most extreme (lowest) temperatures off the 
coast of Siberia and Kamchatka (Sayles et al. 
1979). Although it is formed by winter convection, 
it persists year-round, and its distribution is altered 
by subsurface advection and diffusion (Reed 
1991). On the other hand, the subsurface 
temperature-maximum layer is mainly affected by 
horizontal advection of water from the North 
Pacific through the Aleutian Island passes (Sayles 
et al. 1979).  Kinder et al. (1975) concluded that 
in the eastern Bering Sea the maximum occurred 
near the sigma-t density surface of 26.80, but Reed 
and Stabeno (1989) observed a maximum (in a 
similar location during spring 1988) that had a 
mean sigma-t density of 26.62.  Thus the depth 
and density of the maximum can vary 
considerably, likely as a result of variations in the 
source waters. 
 
 The magnitude of the temperature 
minimum suggests an aspect of transport into the 
Bering Sea.  During three cruises conducted in the 
southeastern Bering Sea between fall 1989 and fall 
1990, temperatures at sigma-t of approximately 
26.8 were relatively low (generally <3.7°C).  
Conversely, during fall 1986 and spring 1988 
(Reed et al. 1988; Reed and Stabeno 1989) 
temperatures were >4.0°C in places.  The warmer 
temperatures indicate an inflow of warm Alaskan 
Stream water through Amukta Pass.  Relatively 
low temperatures during 1989-1990, during 
August 1972 (Kinder et al. 1975), and during June 
1987 (Reed et al. 1988), however, suggest the 
absence of inflow through Amukta Pass. 
 
 Appreciable variability exists in transport 
through Amukta Pass as well as variability in flow 
and water properties all along the slope 
(Schumacher and Reed 1992).  Recent results 
from a numerical model (Spillane, pers. 
communication) indicate that eddies are formed 
during periods of inflow.  High concentrations of 
pollock larvae have been found to coincide with 
eddies both in the Gulf of Alaska (Schumacher et 
al. 1993) and in the southeastern Bering Sea (Reed 
and Stabeno 1989), and there are suggestions that 
the eddy environment is conducive to survival 
(Schumacher and Kendall 1992).  Furthermore, 
the depth of the temperature maximum is near the 
depth that pollock spawn; the observed 
temperature differences up to 0.5°C would impact 
the time it takes for eggs to hatch.  Since eggs and 
larvae may be separated vertically by more than 
300 m, differential transport would occur.  The 
consequences of such are unknown.  Although 
inflow through Amukta Pass may be important 
regionally, its transport is relatively small (<1·10
6
· 
m
3
· s
-1
). 
 
 Recent results indicate an average of 2-
3·10
6
· m
3
· s
-1
 of Alaskan Stream water flow into 
the Bering Sea through Amchitka Pass (Reed 
1990). While this is only 10-15% of the total 
volume transport of the Alaskan Stream, it 
 38
provides the majority of the flow which flows 
eastward along the north side of the Aleutian arc 
(Stabeno and Reed submitted) and is continuous 
with the Bering Slope Current.  Interannual 
fluctuations in the volume transport through 
Amchitka Pass seem not to be linked to either 
wind stress or wind stress curl.  Reed (1990) 
suggests that fluctuations in the location of the 
Alaskan Stream interact with a spur-like feature in 
the bathymetry upstream from the pass.  The 
curvature resulting from fluctuations in potential 
vorticity would then cause variations in northward 
transport. 
 
 Satellite tracked buoy observations 
(Stabeno and Reed 1992) and water property 
observations (Reed et al., in press) indicated that 
the Alaskan Stream was not flowing through Near 
Strait for more than a year (mid-1990 to fall 1991; 
Stabeno and Reed 1992).  The presence of the 
Alaskan Stream in this region is clearly indicated 
by temperature >4°C to depths in excess of 200 m 
with a mean transport of approximately 5 ·10
6
· m
3
· 
s
-1
.  The anomaly of inflow through Near Strait 
resulted in dramatic changes in the western Bering 
Sea Current System, including a reduction of 
transport in the Kamchatka Current of 
approximately 5 ·10
6
· m
3
· s
-1
 (Verkhunov and 
Tkachenko 1992). The anomaly was thought to 
result from an inertial effect on the Stream rather 
than from wind stress (Stabeno and Reed 1992). 
 
 Clearly, fluctuations in the position of the 
Alaskan Stream have great impacts on transport 
into the Bering Sea.  Further, such variations 
cause significant changes in circulation and water 
properties in the Bering Sea.  The connection 
between such variations in the ecosystem, in 
particular the environment in which pollock spawn 
and live their early life stages are not know but are 
potentially of importance.  To address such 
processes requires an enhanced understanding of 
causes of fluctuations of inflow through Amukta 
and Amchitka Pass for pollock in the southeastern 
Bering Sea, and through Near Strait for pollock 
stocks in the western Bering Sea. 
 
 The important questions revolve around 
understanding what mechanisms impact the 
time/space behaviour of the Alaskan Stream? This 
can be separated into the following questions: 
 
 What mechanisms cause interannual 
variability in the Alaskan Stream which then alter 
the exchange of water into the Bering Sea?  Are 
these mechanisms directly related to fluctuations 
in the westwind drift?  What is the impact of 
changes in volume transport and its constituents 
(both chemical and biological) on the ambient 
ecosystem of the southeastern Bering Sea?  To 
answer these questions requires pragmatic 
knowledge of the physical environment as it 
influences biota.  We stress understanding the 
impact of natural fluctuations in the physical 
environment on biota.  Examination of this impact 
should extend up the food chain to sea birds, 
marine mammals, and commercially important 
fishes.  To answer these questions requires broad, 
long-term collaborative programs.  GLOBEC type 
studies could serve as a guideline. 
 
3.3 Oceanographic structure of the upper 
layer in the western North Pacific subarctic 
region and its variation (T. Yoshida) 
 
Circulation pattern 
 
 The circulation pattern of the upper layer 
in the western North Pacific Subarctic region from 
Ohtani (1970) is shown in Figure 18.  This gives 
more detailed information for the western part of 
the circulation than Ohtani (1991), including 
recent knowledge of the whole North Pacific 
Subarctic circulation.  The Western Subarctic 
Gyre is a triangular cyclonic gyre, which is located 
off southeast of Kamchatka. The Subarctic Current 
flows eastward south of the Western Subarctic 
Gyre, and the West Wind Drift flows eastward 
south of the Subarctic Current.  The southern 
boundary of the West Wind Drift is the Subarctic 
Boundary.  The Subarctic Boundary is usually 
defined by the location of the 34.0 psu isohaline 
which runs almost vertically in the upper layer in 
the north-south vertical sections (Nagata et al. 
1992), but the character is not clear in seas 
adjacent to Japan. The circulation pattern in Figure 
18 is based upon winter observations, but the 
summer pattern is almost the same (Ohtani 1970). 
 
 39
 There are two wide eastward flows in the 
southern part of the Western Subarctic Gyre: the 
Subarctic Current and the West Wind Drift. Ohtani  
(1970)  estimated  their  speeds  were   5 
cm · sec
-1
 or less (Fig. 18).  Ohnishi et al. (1992) 
showed that there were two fast eastward flows at 
45-46
o
N and 40-42
o
N whose speeds were 
calculated at more than 10 cm · sec
-1
 based on their 
baroclinic geostrophic flow distribution along the 
180
o
 meridian.  Because the positions of the two 
fast flows coincide with the temperature fronts 
(see next section), it may be better to replace the 
wide eastward flow pattern in Figure 18 with the 
pattern of two fast flows at the borders of water 
masses. 
 
 The barotropic flow should be taken into 
account to get the real flow pattern, but it is 
difficult to estimate based on conventional 
observational data.  We expect to obtain new 
knowledge on the real flow pattern from the 
altimetry data obtained by satellites and the 
satellite tracked buoy observations. 
 
Division of the regions on the basis of 
oceanographic structure 
 
 Miyake (1989) reviewed the investigations 
on the frontal structure in the central North Pacific 
Subarctic region.  He concluded that "the Polar 
Front by Roden et al. (1982) was the southern 
boundary of the Subarctic water, the Kuroshio 
Front was the northern boundary of the subtropical 
water, and the Subarctic Boundary (or the 
Subarctic Front) existed in the region between the 
Polar Front and the Kuroshio Front".  In the 
temperature sections along 155
o
E and 165
o
E 
meridians (Fig. 19), the Polar Front and the 
Subarctic Front are clearly seen as the temperature 
fronts around 5
o
C and 10
o
C respectively. 
 
 The western North Pacific Subarctic 
region north of the Kuroshio Front is divided by 
these two fronts into three regions.  The first is 
the Subarctic Water Region: north of the Polar 
Front (Roden et al. 1982).  The second is the 
West Wind Drift Region: between the Polar Front 
and the Subarctic Boundary.  The third is the 
Subtropical Water Region: south of the Subarctic 
Boundary. 
Relation between the three regions and the 
regions in the Tohoku Sea Area 
 
 The Oyashio Water Region in the Tohoku 
Sea Area is the western part of the Subarctic Water 
Region.  Because the frontal structures at the 
south boundary of the Subarctic Water Region and 
the Oyashio Front in the Tohoku Sea Area are the 
same, and the Subarctic water characterized by the 
dichothermal structure in warming season 
distributes both in the Oyashio Water Region and 
in the Subarctic Water Region (Kono 1991).  But 
the relation between the other two regions and the 
Perturbed Area (Kawai 1972) and the Kuroshio 
Region in the Tohoku Sea Area is not well known 
(Nagata et al. 1992).  Kawai (1972) said that the 
Subarctic Boundary might be connected with the 
Secondary Kuroshio Front, which was a northern 
branch of the Kuroshio Front.  The path of the 
northern branch of the Kuroshio Extension by 
Mizuno and White (1983) (Fig. 20) supports 
Kawai's (1972) idea because the path coincides 
with the Subarctic Boundary in the region east of 
165
o
E.  Zhang and Hanawa (1991) concluded that 
the Subarctic Front by Roden et al. (1982), which 
coincided with the Subarctic Boundary, was the 
same front with the Secondary Kuroshio Front 
from the water mass analyses. 
 
Variation of the circulation 
 
 Recent investigations of the Oyashio and 
the Subarctic Gyre illustrate that variation of the 
Subarctic Gyre correlates with the wind system 
over the Pacific ocean.  Sekine (1988a) showed 
that the wind stress in the years of the anomalous 
southward intrusion of the Oyashio caused the 
southward expansion of the gyre in the magnitude 
of 300-500 km.  Sekine (1988b) also showed that 
the southward expansion of the Subarctic Gyre 
was a barotropic response to the change of the 
wind stress field caused by the anomalous 
development of the Aleutian Low. From Ogawa 
(1989), the magnitude of the variation of the first 
Oyashio intrusion near Japan coast is estimated to 
be the same magnitude as Sekine (1988a) showed.  
But Yoshida (in press) estimated from the 
movements of the SST fronts that the movements 
of the south boundary of the Subarctic Water 
 40
Region and the Subarctic Boundary were within 
one degree in latitude. 
 
 The variation of the Subarctic Gyre is still 
not well investigated.  Ogawa's (1989) data on the 
southern limit of the first Oyashio intrusion is 
quite useful as the unique index of the Subarctic 
Gyre, and it has contributed much to progress in 
the investigation of the Subarctic Gyre.  In the 
early stage of the investigation (our understanding 
is that the investigation on the Subarctic Gyre is 
just in early stage!), it is useful to transform 
phenomena into numerical indices and analyze 
them.  The usefulness of these indices is easily 
understood from the fact that many indices such as 
zonal index, polar vortex index, SOI and NINO-3 
SST play an important role in the fields of 
meteorology and tropical oceanography even in 
the mature stages of investigation.  We would 
appreciate receiving information concerning any 
new indices which have recently been developed. 
 
Variation of the upper mixed layer 
 
 The Subarctic water is characterized by 
the dichothermal structure in warming season. The 
depth of the upper mixed layer is more than 100 m 
in winter (Fig. 21).  The sharp halocline, which 
has a thickness of 70-100 m below the wintertime 
upper mixed layer, prevents the wintertime mixed 
layer from deepening (Ohtani 1989).  In the 
warming season, the seasonal thermocline grows 
in the upper part of the wintertime mixed layer, 
and a thin upper mixed layer is formed over the 
seasonal thermocline. In cooling season, water 
temperature of the thin upper mixed layer 
decreases and the thickness increases.  Besides 
the formation/ destruction of the seasonal 
thermocline by the warming/cooling from the air, 
intermittent mixing by strong wind in the warming 
season, which causes the temporal destruction of 
the seasonal thermocline and supplies nutrient 
salts from lower layer, is important for primary 
production (Taniguchi 1991). There should be 
interannual variation of the upper mixed layer. It is 
commonly thought that the meteorological 
interannual variation causes some change in the 
upper mixed layer, because the mixed layer is 
mainly affected by the meteorological condition.  
But it is not well investigated. 
 To describe the annual and interannual 
variation, long period monitoring of the 
oceanographical structure and meteorological 
condition is essential.  But we do not have enough 
data obtained over such long periods to describe 
the annual and interannual variation in the 
Subarctic region,  except the SST data (which are 
the same as the temperature data in the upper 
mixed layer).  Long period operation of moored 
buoys which are equipped with oceanographical 
and meteorological observation systems would 
provide us with precious data.  In the following 
sections we describe the variations in SST. 
 
Annual variation in SST 
 
 The monthly mean SST maps for February 
and August, derived from thirty years of data 
(Japan Meteorological Agency 1991), are shown 
in Figure 22.  We can see that in February the 5
o
C 
isotherm almost coincides with the southern 
boundary of the Subarctic Water Region. This 
indicates that the region with wintertime SST less 
than 5
o
C represents the Subarctic Water Region.  
This region extends southwestward along the Kuril 
Islands to the southeast of Hokkaido, where the 
Subarctic water takes its southernmost position. 
The 3
o
C isotherm is almost parallel with the 5
o
C 
isotherm, but it runs northward along the 170
o
E 
meridian from 45
o
N to 52
o
N.  This feature is 
caused by the northward flow of warm water 
transported by the Alaskan Stream along the south 
border of the Aleutian Islands (Ohtani 1970).  
From February to May this feature is seen on the 
SST map, but it is masked by the seasonal 
thermocline and can not be seen in other months.  
The SST along the central Kuril Islands is lower 
than that of the neighbouring area in August (Fig. 
22). The low SST is thought to be caused by the 
continuous tidal mixing in the channels of the 
central Kuril Islands (Ohtani 1989). 
 
 The mean annual SST cycles are shown in 
Figure 23 for the four areas: A, the Western 
Subarctic Gyre; B, the Oyashio Region; C, the 
West Wind Drift Region; and D, the south of the 
Subarctic Boundary (calculated from the SST data 
by the Japan Meteorological Agency 1991). The 
SST is lowest in March and highest in August or 
 41
September in all the areas.  The amplitude of the 
cycles is around 10
o
C. 
 
 SSTs in areas A and B (both in the 
Subarctic Water Region) are the same in winter. 
But the SST difference is more than 3
o
C in 
summer. The SST difference is thought to be 
brought about by the latitudinal difference in 
heating. The wintertime SST in areas B and C (in 
the West Wind Drift Region) is different by more 
than 3
o
C.  But the two areas located at almost the 
same latitude, and therefore the difference of the 
SSTs between the two areas decrease in summer. 
The shape of the annual cycle curve in area D 
resembles that of area C.  The difference between 
the SST in areas D and C is about 6
o
C all year 
long. 
 
Interannual variation of SST 
 
 The SST anomaly map in July 1993 
(Japan Meteorological Agency 1993) in Figure 23 
shows that an area of negative anomaly less 
than -2
o
C extends broadly east of Japan from 30
o
N 
to 45
o
N. Besides the annual variation, which 
dominates the SST variation as mentioned in the 
above section, strong SST anomalies sometimes 
appear over large areas (Fig. 24). 
 The time series of monthly mean SST 
anomalies in the areas defined in Figure 23 are 
shown in Figure 25.  The anomalies are around 
1
o
C or less in ordinary years.  They are about 
10% of the amplitude of the mean annual cycle. 
But anomalies more than 2
o
C sometimes appear in 
areas B, C and D. 
 
 The results of correlation analyses (Table 
1) show that the SST anomalies in these four areas 
are correlated with each other.  It is estimated that 
a variation with large scale affect the four areas.  
Atmospheric variability is probably the cause of 
such large scale variations in the SST anomalies.  
The relation between SST variation in the western 
North Pacific and the atmospheric variation is well 
investigated (Iwasaka et al. 1987, 1988; Hanawa et 
al. 1988, and Hanawa 1989a, b), and it is noted 
that the global scale atmospheric phenomena (e.g., 
ENSO events) affect SST variations.  Because the 
upper mixed layer has direct contact with the 
atmosphere, weather conditions connected with 
the global scale atmospheric phenomena give a 
direct effect to a certain extent. 
 
 Besides the direct effect from the 
atmospheric variation, the variation of the heat 
transport by the Subarctic and subtropical gyre and 
the expansion/contraction of the gyre can cause 
the SST variation.  These are the themes to be 
investigated in the near future. 
 42
4.0 REVIEW OF THE BIOLOGY OF THE SUBARCTIC GYRE 
 
4.1 Phytoplankton And zooplankton in the 
western Subarctic Gyre (A. Taniguchi) 
 
Introduction 
 
 The Subarctic Pacific is one of the most 
productive areas in the world oceans (Figs. 26 and 
27). However, the most characteristic feature of 
plankton dynamics in this area is the large 
amplitude of seasonal variation in productivity 
which occurs every year. Fishes distributed in this 
area should incorporate this seasonal variability of 
food conditions into their life history strategy 
(Taniguchi 1981, 1991, 1993). This aspect is 
particularly important for the planktivorous fishes 
like Jack mackerel, Pacific saury, sardine, etc. 
which migrate between the Subarctic area in the 
north and the Subtropical seas in the south (Fig. 
28). These species can build huge populations and 
support massive harvests. In other words, the 
plankton dynamics in this area governs the life 
history strategy and productivity of migratory 
Subtropical fish as well as endemic Subarctic fish. 
 
 In the western North Pacific east of 
northern Japan, a transition zone is recognized 
which extends from about 37
o
N to 42
o
W in 
average summer and is bordered by the Oyashio 
front in the north and the Kuroshio front in the 
south. Hydrographic features within this zone are 
very complicated because of the presence and 
mixing of four different water masses: Subarctic 
Oyashio, subtropical Kuroshio, Tsugaru Warm 
water from the Sea of Japan and coastal water 
around Hokkaido and Northeast Honshu. There 
usually are many warm and cold core rings of 
different sizes and ages (Fig. 29) (Kawai 1991; 
Nagata et al. 1992). This area is within the 
migratory routes of the pelagic fishes mentioned 
above. Therefore, this area, though located at the 
margin of the Subarctic Gyre, should be included 
in this review. 
 
 I am grateful to Mr. H. Saito (Hokkaido 
National Fisheries Research Institute), Dr. N. 
Shiga (Hokkaido University) and Dr. S. Taguchi 
(HNFRI) for their guidance to the relating 
literature.  Kind permission given by Dr. S. 
Taguchi and his colleagues at HNFRI to cite their 
unpublished data is also appreciated.  In addition, 
I would like to thank Drs. W.G. Pearcy (Oregon 
State University) and N.B. Hargreaves (Pacific 
Biological Station) for their kind correction of 
English of this manuscript. 
 
Primary productivity in the western Subarctic 
Pacific 
 
 The main area included in this brief 
review is the western Subarctic region around 
northern Japan, including the Oyashio Current and 
its adjacent regions. The Oyashio Current, 
including its predecessor the East Kamchatka 
Current, is one of the most productive currents of 
the world ocean because of an ample supply of 
nutrients from the surrounding Bering and 
Okhotsk Seas, which in turn are enriched by 
winter convection of water. It is reported that 
nutrients in the surface layer are never depleted 
during (Kawarada and Sano 1972) or after 
(Taniguchi and Kawamura 1972) vigorous spring 
blooms of diatoms (Taguchi et al. 1992 and 
unpublished data). 
 
 In the western Bering Basin region 
upwelling of deep water can occur.  This deep 
water contains high concentrations of nutrients 
accumulated during the long journey of the deep 
ocean circulation (Nagata et al. 1992). This may 
enrich the Bering Basin water and ultimately the 
Chukchi Sea and Oyashio waters. Furthermore, 
since the Kamchatka-Kurile-Japan Archipelago in 
the west, and Emperor Seamounts in the east, form 
a wedge-shaped basin opening toward the upper 
stream of the deep current flowing from the south 
(Stommel 1958). Therefore, the deep water may 
ascend at the vortex (located just southeast of 
Kamchatka) where the Oyashio Current flows 
through. 
 
Phytoplankton Community 
 
 It is well known that the dominant primary 
producers in the Oyashio region, and the Bering 
and Okhotsk Seas as well, are chain-forming 
diatoms such as Nitzschia (Fragilariopsis), 
 43
Odontella, Thalassiosira in spring, and 
Chaetoceros ( Hyarochaete and Phaeoceros), 
Denticulopsis, and Rhizosolenia in warm seasons.  
Several dinoflagellate species of the genera 
Ceratium and Protoperidinium are also dominant 
in summer/fall.  The general range of numerical 
abundance of these primary producers is from 10
2
 
cells · l
-1
 or less in winter, to 10
5
 cells · l
-1
 or more 
in spring, with intermediate values around 10
3
 
cells · l
-1
 in summer/fall (e.g. Aikawa 1949;  
Ohwada 1957; Zenkevitch 1963;  Karohji 1972;  
Kawarada and Sano 1972;  Sambrotto et al. 
1986). 
 
 Phytoplankton density sometimes reaches 
10
8
 cells · l
-1
, particularly in the seasonally 
ice-covered area of the Bering and Chukchi Seas, 
suggesting the sea ice fosters and then releases 
dense phytoplankton populations into the water 
column below (Saito and Taniguchi 1978).  It is 
also reported that local wind-driven upwelling, 
generated particularly at the ice edge, plays an 
important role in the enrichment of the upper 
water column in the northern Bering Sea 
(Niebauer et al. 1981; Niebauer and Alexander 
1985). Investigation is needed to determine if the 
same condition exists in the Okhotsk Sea. 
 The composition of the ice-algal 
community in the Okhotsk Sea is different from 
the Bering Sea, because the mechanism of sea ice 
formation is different in these two seas. Pennate 
diatoms are dominant and build dense populations 
in the Bering Sea ice community (Horner 1980).  
On the other hand, many centric diatoms and 
pennates were found but these rarely formed dense 
populations in the Okhotsk Sea drift ice 
community (Tamura 1951).  The role of sea ice in 
phytoplankton dynamics may be a matter worthy 
of consideration in future PICES programs (cf. 
Horner 1976, 1982).  Because the area of shallow 
shelf water is limited in the Okhotsk Sea, any 
algae released as dense clumps would sink directly 
down to the deep-sea ecosystem. 
 
 The likely great importance of nano- and 
pico-phytoplankton in the Subarctic Pacific during 
warm seasons was recently reported (Furuya and 
Marumo 1983;  Taguchi et al. unpublished).  
However, quantitative data are not yet sufficient to 
fully assess the significance of this production. 
 Most of the diatoms listed above are 
reported  to  form  resting  spores  (cysts). 
However, this phenomenon seems paradoxical 
because cysts work effectively only in shallow sea 
areas (cf. Smayda 1958), whereas the Oyashio and 
adjacent regions are relatively deep. There may be 
a regular supply of diatom seed populations from 
the shallow shelf waters in the northern Bering Sea 
and along Kamchatka-Kurile coast, where cysts 
would work effectively.  Some particular 
hydrodynamic conditions perhaps also exist which 
keep the cysts suspended within the upper water 
column.  Upwelling and convection of water, or a 
sharp pycnocline at the bottom of the upper mixed 
layer, may act as such agents. 
 
 Among the phytoplankters which have 
been reported to bloom in the discoloured water in 
the Subarctic Atlantic (e.g. Fraser 1962; Lancelot 
et al. 1987;  Ackelson et al. 1988) and the eastern 
Bering Sea (Sambrotto et al. 1986), 
prymnesiophytes Phaeocystis poucheti and 
Emiliania huxleyi rarely dominate in the Oyashio 
and adjacent regions.  This fact indicates that their 
bloom may be controlled by some factor(s) other 
than macronutrients like nitrate and phosphate, 
which are more abundant in the Oyashio region.  
To define these factors, it is helpful to understand 
the basic difference between the biological 
oceanographic systems in the Subarctic Pacific 
and Atlantic, and/or the difference between the 
eastern and western Subarctic Pacific. 
 
Primary Productivity 
 
 Recent knowledge about primary 
productivity in the Bering Sea and adjacent region 
has accumulated mainly due to activities of the 
Universities of Alaska and Washington.  It is now 
known that horizontal transport of nutrients from 
the highly eutrophic shelf break water and/or basin 
water is essential to maintain higher productivity 
during warm seasons in the inner shelf region of 
the Bering Sea and the Chukuchi Sea (cf. Hood 
and Calder 1981; McRoy 1993). 
 
 On the other hand, few attempts have been 
made to directly measure the primary productivity 
in the Oyashio region since the early 1970s, when 
new laws were introduced in Japan which strictly 
 44
regulates the field use of radioactive isotopes.  
Data obtained before these strict regulations show 
that the daily productivity in the Oyashio and 
adjacent regions was fairly high (1-2 g · C · m
-2
 ⋅ 
day
-1
) in the vernal blooming season in April-May, 
but lower (0.3-0.5 g · C · m
-2
 ⋅ day
-1
) in 
summer/fall (Fig. 30) (Saijo and Ichimura 1960;  
Saijo et al. 1972; Taniguchi and Kawamura 1972).  
No fall bloom has been observed in this region 
(Figs. 31 and 32) (Taguchi et al. unpublished).  
Although no data on mid-winter production is 
available, it must be negligibly low due to the 
combined effects of reduced phytoplankton 
biomass and unsuitable environmental conditions 
such as limited flux of solar energy and deepened 
convection of water (cf. Sverdrup 1953).  The 
available data at HNFRI indicate that the 
chlorophyll-a crop in winter is about 1/20 of the 
spring crop in the Oyashio region. 
 
 Annual production in this region, 
calculated from the data cited above, is high, being 
about 156 g · C · m
-2
 ⋅ yr
-1
 (Taniguchi 1972).  
Annual production in the Bering Sea has been 
estimated as 89 g · C · m
-2
 ⋅ yr
-1
 for most of the 
basin region (Taniguchi loc. cit.), and 162-166 g · 
C · m
-2
 ⋅ yr
-1
 for the shelf region (Walsh and 
McRoy 1986). 
 
 In conclusion, primary productivity in the 
western Subarctic Pacific, as represented by the 
Oyashio region, is very high in an annually 
integrated value.  It varies very widely with the 
seasons, from negligibly low values in winter to 
high values reaching 2 g · C · m
-2
 ⋅ day
-1
 in spring, 
and intermediate values of 0.5 g · C · m
-2
 ⋅ day
-1
 in 
summer.  The amplitude of this seasonal variation 
therefore typically exceeds a factor of 20 
(Taniguchi 1981, 1991). 
 
 Such highly productive and highly 
variable productivity also occurs in the coastal 
upwelling systems in the eastern Pacific (e.g., off 
California, Peru, etc.), where the amplitude is 
about 10-20 (cf. Raymont 1980; Valiela 1984). 
Community structure of the primary and 
secondary producers, mainly chain-forming 
diatoms and large-sized copepods, is also similar 
in both the Subarctic and upwelling regions. 
However, because the effects of ENSO events are 
not as prominent in the Oyashio region (unlike the 
eastern Pacific, e.g. off Peru), the Oyashio region 
may be an ideal area to determine the intrinsic 
long-term trend of the biological elements, 
eliminating much of the highly significant "noise" 
of ENSO events in other regions. 
 
Secondary productivity in the western 
Subarctic Pacific 
 
Zooplankton community 
 
 The principal secondary producers or 
zooplankters grazing the primary producers in the 
Subarctic Pacific are calanoid copepods. Among 
them three calanoids Eucalanus bungii bungii, 
Neocalanus cristatus and N. plumchrus are the 
predominant species. In addition to these three, 
other calanoids such as Acartia clausi, 
Clausocalanus arcuicornis, Metridia lucens, 
Paracalanus parvus, Pleuromamma scutullata, 
Pseudocalanus minutus and Scolecithricella minor 
are also dominant in the Oyashio region. In the 
northern Subarctic region, Acartia longiremis and 
Calanus marshallae must be added to this list 
instead of A. clausi and P. parvus.  
 
 Cyclopoid copepods Oithona plumifera 
and O. similis and some amphipod Parathemisto 
spp., euphausiid Euphausia and Thysanoessa spp., 
pteropod Clione and Limacina spp., and 
planktonic prochordates Oikopleura and Salpa 
spp. are also important occasionally (e.g. Minoda 
1971; Morioka 1972; Takeuchi 1972; Motoda and 
Minoda 1974; Cooney and Coyle 1982: Smith and 
Vidal 1984; Hattori 1985, 1991; Vidal and Smith 
1986; Kawamura 1988; Shiga 1990; Brodeur and 
Ware 1992; Odate 1993). The general size range 
of these herbivorous zooplankters at later growth 
stages are 1-8 mm for copepods and 1-3 cm for the 
other taxa. 
 
 All the reports listed above demonstrate 
that zooplankton biomass in the Subarctic Pacific 
is very large in summer (Fig. 27). For instance, 
Motoda and Minoda (1974) report that the 
biomass in the upper 80 m water column in the 
Bering Sea, and down to near bottom in the shelf 
water  region  shallower  than  80 m,  was  
22-67 
 45
g · m
-2
 wet wt.  A few exceptionally small values 
of 13-15 g · m
-2
 were observed in some areas (e.g., 
Alaskan coastal waters).  These were average 
values for 15 summers from 1956 to 1970.  The 
biomass in the southern Aleutian Chain (14-20 g · 
m
-2
) was generally lower than in the north, but 
values may be larger in the Oyashio region (Fig. 
33).  This regional variation was roughly opposite 
to that of phytoplankton, indicating the so-called 
top-down control of the primary production in this 
area. They also reported interannual fluctuations 
with a period of 2-3 years in the zooplankton 
biomass (Fig. 34). 
 
 Brodeur and Ware (1992) report the 
summer zooplankton biomass in the upper 150 m 
water column of the Gulf of Alaska. The mean 
biomass was 80-102 g · 1000m
-3
 wet wt for 
1956-1962 and 230 g · 1000m
-3
 wet wt for 
1980-1989.  This is converted into 12-15 g · m
-2
 
wet wt and 35 g · m
-2
 wet wt, respectively. 
Although the biomass was low near the southern 
Aleutians during 1956-1962 (Motoda and Minoda 
1974), it increased significantly during 1980-1989.  
A clear trend of long-term increase at Ocean 
Station P was also detected (see also cf. Frost 
1983). If this also occurred in the Bering Sea, the 
biomass would have doubled after the period 
reported by Motoda and Minoda (1974). It is 
important to determine this kind of long-term 
variability, particularly for future estimation of the 
carrying capacity of the entire Subarctic Pacific. 
 
 Odate (1993) reported a long-term trend in 
zooplankton biomass between 1952 and 1990 in 
the top 150 m in the sea east of North Japan. This 
area could be divided into three subareas, based on 
temperature at 100 m depth: Oyashio Region 
(<5
o
C), Mixed Water Region (5-15
o
C) and 
Kuroshio Region (>15
o
C) (cf. Fig. 29).  In 
addition to regular and wide seasonal variation, 
long-term fluctuations were observed rather than a 
constant increase, particularly in the Oyashio 
Region (Fig. 35).  When only summer (May-July) 
values (or the seasonal maxima) were extracted, 
this long-term fluctuation is evident in the Oyashio 
Region.  In the other two regions, and especially 
the Kuroshio Region, a more regular increase is 
more likely the case (Fig. 36). The mean summer 
biomass over this period was 33, 13 and 7 g · m
-2
 
wet wt, respectively, for these three regions (from 
north to south) (Fig. 36).  The values in the 
Oyashio Region were comparable to those in the 
Bering Sea, and in the Mixed Water Region south 
of the Aleutian Is., during 1956-1970, and in the 
Gulf of Alaska before 1980. 
 
 Many authors have reported that 
zooplankton biomass in the surface layer decreases 
to low levels in winter. However, winter biomass 
in the subsurface layer (150-300 m) is as large as 
22-176 g · m
-2
 wet wt in the Bering Basin region 
(Kitani and Komaki 1984), which is significantly 
larger than the summer biomass in the surface 
layer (cf. Fig. 33). Ontogenetic vertical migration 
of the annually breeding dominant zooplankton 
represented by Neocalanus spp. (Fulton 1973) is 
the reason for this phenomenon. Since their 
ontogeny is mostly synchronized with the seasons, 
the adult individuals which have attained their 
maximum body weight descend simultaneously to 
the subsurface layer in late summer and stay there 
during fall and winter (but cf. Miller et al. 1984). 
 On the other hand, small-sized copepods 
(Acartia, Pseudocalanus, etc.) typically reproduce 
several times a year (Ikeda and Motoda 1978b), so 
that the synchronized winter descent is not always 
the case, and they may be distributed in the surface 
layer throughout the year. 
 
 These facts suggest that both the average 
body size and total biomass of the zooplankton 
community in the surface layer are large in 
summer but small in winter. Therefore, the nature 
of the zooplankton communities is quite different 
between summer and winter. 
 
Secondary Productivity 
 
 Although there is no ideal method to 
directly measure the production of natural 
zooplankton communities, several indirect 
methods for calculating production are available 
(Omori and Ikeda 1984). Because there is a 
balance between feeding and metabolism when the 
food supply is sufficient, their production can be 
calculated from the easily measurable rates of 
respiration or feeding by a simple proportional 
equation (e.g. Winberg 1956; Ikeda and Motoda 
 46
1978a; and also cf. Schmidt-Nielsen 1972; Peters 
1983). 
 
 Metabolic rate or respiration rate of 
marine zooplankton is a function of body weight 
and ambient temperature (Ikeda 1974). Therefore, 
secondary production is indicated by the 
respiration rates, which can be calculated by using 
appropriate formulae which relate temperature and 
biomass and size composition of the herbivorous 
zooplankton community. The mean production in 
the Bering Basin region calculated in this way was 
13.3 g · C · m
-2
 ⋅ yr
-1
 (Ikeda and Motoda 1978b). 
Another estimate based on data for feeding rates 
yielded a value of 19.6 g · C · m
-2
 ⋅ yr
-1
 for 
zooplankton in the same region (Cooney 1981, 
cited in Springer 1992), which is comparable to 
the value estimated by Ikeda and Motoda (1978b). 
 
 These values can be converted, using a 
carbon/wet weight ratio of 0.045 (Omori and Ikeda   
1984),   into   values   of   295.5 - 435.5 
g · m
-2
 ⋅ yr
-1
 wet wt.  Numerically, the latter 
values are roughly ten times larger than the 
summer biomass (cf. Fig. 33). The secondary 
production in the Oyashio region may be similar in 
the Bering Basin region, while that in the 
Subarctic water south of the Aleutian Chain is 
50% lower (Ikeda and Motoda 1978a,b). 
 
Microzooplankton community 
 
 The main deficiency in the above 
estimates is microzooplankton, which are too 
small to collect by conventional zooplankton nets 
(330-350 µm mesh). Recent knowledge about 
microzooplankton in the Subarctic Pacific is 
reviewed by Taniguchi (1989) and Zeitzschel 
(1990). 
 Microzooplankton, defined as zoo-
plankton less than 200 µm in body size, form an 
important food item (together with phytoplankton) 
of the net (i.e. larger) zooplankton listed above. 
First feeding fish larvae also feed on 
microzooplankton. On the other hand, the feeding 
habits of microzooplankton are not necessarily 
clear. Although it has been confirmed that many 
microzooplankton graze on smaller phytoplankters 
in culture experiments, it is not clear if they 
actively feed on bacteria or bacterivorous 
pico-/nano flagellates. The possibility of direct 
uptake of dissolved organic matter by 
microzooplankton also has not yet been precisely 
examined. 
 
 One of the major components of the 
microzooplankton community is ciliated Protozoa, 
which spend their entire life as microzooplankton. 
The other is Copepoda nauplius stages, which later 
grow into net zooplanktonic copepodite stages. 
The former are the holo-microzooplankton and the 
latter are the meso-microzooplankton. Since the 
functional roles of these two groups are different 
in marine food webs, both should be separately 
counted. Abundance of holo-microzooplanktonic 
ciliates may be rather constant throughout the 
warm seasons. On the other hand, the abundance 
of mero-microzooplanktonic copepod nauplii 
varies temporarily in the Subarctic Pacific, being 
large in spring but decreasing in summer/fall. 
 
 The relative biomass of micro-
zooplankton to net zooplankton in the Subarctic 
Pacific in summer is not large (about 15%) (cf. 
Figs. 37, 38). The relative biomass in the 
Subtropical seas (about 27%) is also small, though 
still significantly larger than in the Subarctic 
(Taniguchi 1989). However, the physiological rate 
per unit biomass is significantly higher in the 
microzooplankton than in the net zooplankton, so 
that the relative importance of microzooplankton 
in total metabolism should be high. 
 
 A few data on productivity of 
microzooplankton in nature have been reported for 
the coastal assemblages. Annual feeding rates of 
holo-microzooplanktonic ciliates are equivalent to 
26-27 % of total phytoplankton production. The 
ratio becomes 52% when only nanophytoplankton 
smaller than 10 mm, which are the potential food 
of microzooplankton, is taken into account 
(Capriulo and Carpenter 1983; Verity 1985). The 
latter value undoubtedly is meaningful. From the 
values reported by the last authors, the annual 
ecological efficiency (the ratio of annual ciliate 
production to annual phytoplankton production) 
can be calculated as 7% for total phytoplankton 
production and 16% for nanophytoplankton. 
 
 47
 Based on the data obtained by laboratory 
experiments done under abundant supply of 
favourable food at 17
o
C, the following values are 
calculated for the holo-microzooplanktonic 
ciliates: 19-60 % for the gross growth efficiency 
(k1) or ratio of growth to ingestion, and 1.9-19.2% 
h
-1
 (45.6-460% day
-1
) for the minimum and 
maximum values of hourly (or daily) weight 
specific growth rate of growing populations. These 
maximum and minimum values are applicable to 
populations at the climax and last stages of the 
logarithmic growth phase, respectively. Values 
applicable to normal growth of natural populations 
are probably somewhere in between (Taniguchi 
1989). 
 
 All of the values cited above indicate that 
the growth efficiency and productivity of 
microzooplankton are substantially higher than 
those of net zooplankton. However, because 
temperature is the dominant factor affecting 
metabolic rates of zooplankton (e.g. Ikeda and 
Motoda 1978a, b), much lower values should be 
expected in the Subarctic Pacific. The 
physiological rates of Subarctic micro-
zooplankton in situ are virtually unknown at this 
time. 
 
Succession of Plankton Communities in Warm 
Core Rings 
 
 The longevity of warm core rings (WCR) 
in the sea east of North Japan is often longer than 
one year, commonly reaching two or three years. 
This longer duration favours the monitoring of 
temporal change of a particular plankton 
community within an isolated water parcel. This 
kind of monitoring is valuable in two aspects: (1) 
dynamics of the community composed of greater 
varieties of species and niches, and (2) time-course 
of vertical mixing/stratification of the 
phytoplankton standing crops. The ecological, and 
probably also evolutionary, meaning of the former 
aspect is obvious. The latter will be very important 
in future analyses of satellite imagery.  Once we 
know the time-series of relationships between 
surface and subsurface phenomena, it may be 
possible to determine the subsurface features from 
the surface information which appear in satellite 
imagery. 
 This kind of monitoring is not easy, 
because it requires a well organized mobile fleet of 
research vessels which can frequently visit the 
same WCR, which may be moving in an 
unforeseen way. A floating ocean laboratory or 
robot buoy which followed the same WCR would 
be a powerful tool. This has not been done in the 
past but is recommended as a future activity in 
PICES programs. 
 
4.2 Distributions and seasonal/ interannual 
variations in the phytoplankton and 
zooplankton biomass and species composition. 
(D. Mackas and B. Frost) 
 
Present information base 
 
 Over the past thirty-five years, several 
major multi-cruise oceanographic research 
programs have examined the biological 
oceanography of the eastern and central Subarctic 
Pacific, and are the basis for most of our present 
understanding. These include the U.S.-Canada 
NORPAC spatial surveys 1956-62 (LeBrasseur 
1965); the 1957-1980 Canadian Ocean Weather 
Station P time series (McAllister 1969; Fulton 
1983; Frost 1983; Parsons and Lalli 1988); spatial 
surveys mounted by Hokkaido University 1980-89 
(Kawamura 1988); and detailed within-season 
time series obtained by the 1984-88 U.S.-Canada 
Subarctic Pacific Ecosystem Research program 
(Project SUPER; Miller et al. 1988, 1991a-b; 
Miller 1993a).  There have also been important 
added insights provided by individual research 
cruises and ship-of-opportunity sampling of the 
Alaska gyre and the cental Subarctic region (e.g. 
Anderson et al. 1969; Larrance 1971; Anderson 
and Munson 1972; Booth et al. 1982; Taylor and 
Waters 1982), and by research programs in more 
westerly and northerly regions of the Subarctic 
Pacific (e.g. Heinrich 1962; Smith and Vidal 1986; 
Cooney 1988). 
 
Seasonal Cycles of phytoplankton biomass and 
species composition 
 
 In contrast to coastal waters, where intense 
phytoplankton blooms occur, oceanic waters in the 
Alaska gyre exhibit remarkably little seasonal 
variation in phytoplankton biomass. Average 
 48
mixed layer chlorophyll concentrations are near 
0.3 mg · m
-3
 throughout the year; typical variations 
are about three-fold and the total observed range 
of variation is only about a factor of ten (see 
reviews and interpretation by Sambrotto and 
Lorenzen 1986; Parsons and Lalli 1988; and 
Miller et al. 1988, 1991a-b). Frost (1991) notes 
that variations observed at time scales less than a 
week and space scales of tens of kilometers are 
roughly comparable to the amplitude of the 
seasonal signal, and also  summarizes evidence 
that this constancy of primary producer biomass 
occurs despite significant seasonal variation of 
surface irradiance, mixed layer depth, primary 
production rate, grazer biomass and upper layer 
macronutrient concentration (although the latter 
probably never reach levels that would strongly 
limit phytoplankton growth rate). 
 
 The mechanism responsible for preventing 
seasonal phytoplankton blooms in the oceanic 
Subarctic Pacific has been a long-standing 
scientific issue. The original explanation was that 
the unusual life-cycle of the dominant copepod 
taxa allowed them to maintain a continuous 
balance between phytoplankton growth and "major 
grazer" removal rate (Heinrich 1962; Parsons and 
Lalli 1988). But phytoplankton biomass in the 
Alaska gyre is dominated by small cells from 
taxonomic groups other than diatoms (Booth et al. 
1982, 1993; Taylor and Waters 1982). Nearly all 
of the biomass consists of particles <10 µm 
diameter, and most consists of naked flagellates <5 
µm and cyanobacteria <2µm (Booth 1988). 
Results from SUPER and a few earlier studies 
have now shown conclusively that the original 
"major grazer" explanation cannot be correct. 
Because of their small size, the dominant 
Subarctic Gyre phytoplankton cannot be grazed 
effectively or directly by the resident copepods 
(Dagg and Walser 1987;  Landry and Lehner-
Fournier 1988;  Frost 1991;  Dagg 1993). At 
most, the copepods may control the relatively 
small component of phytoplankton standing stock 
that consists of large diatoms and dinoflagellates. 
 
 Two replacement hypotheses have 
recently been advanced for the year-round control 
of total phytoplankton standing stock: a) limitation 
of phytoplankton growth by atmosphere- or land-
derived micronutrients such as iron, either directly 
or through possible resulting effects on nitrate 
utilization (e.g. Martin and Gordon 1988; Martin 
1991;  Morel et al. 1991), and b) direct 
micrograzer control by heterotrophic flagellates 
and ciliates (Banse 1982; Miller et al. 1991 a-b;  
Frost 1991, 1993). 
 
 The relative merit of these two hypotheses 
is at present hotly debated, in part because of their 
differing implications for potential human 
manipulation of the rate of CO
2
 removal from the 
atmosphere by the oceanic "biological pump". 
Based on present evidence, it appears that both of 
these new mechanisms may be important causes of 
the observed phytoplankton time variability. But it 
is unclear which, or both, consistently dominates. 
 
Seasonal Cycles of larger zooplankton biomass 
and species composition 
 
 The species composition of the net (1 mm 
to 5 cm body size) zooplankton of the Alaska gyre 
is very similar to that found in the rest of the 
oceanic Subarctic Pacific. Total biomass is 
strongly dominated (especially in spring and early 
summer) by five large-bodied copepod species: 
Neocalanus plumchrus, Neocalanus flemingeri, 
Neocalanus cristatus, Eucalanus bungii, and 
Metridia pacifica. Euphausiids (Euphausia 
pacifica), pteropods (Limacina and Clione), 
chaetognaths (Eukrohnia hamata and Sagitta 
elegans) and salps (Salpa fusiformis and 
Cyclosalpa bakeri) are also common and can be 
major contributors to net zooplankton biomass at 
some times and locations. 
 
 The seasonal cycle of total zooplankton is 
set by the seasonal cycle of the four major 
copepods. Most transfer of food energy to higher 
trophic levels probably also passes through these 
species. In contrast to the relative seasonal 
uniformity of phytoplankton biomass, there is 
about a twenty-fold seasonal variation in net 
zooplankton biomass (February minimum about 5-
20 mg · m
-3
 wet weight, May-June maximum 
about 100-500 mg · m
-3
; Frost 1983). The annual 
peak coincides with when late copepodites of 
Neocalanus spp. are most abundant in the upper 
100 m. The three Neocalanus species and E. 
 49
bungii are "interzonal migrators" (Vinogradov 
1968) with a shared pattern of extensive seasonal 
ontogenetic vertical migration. They complete 
most or all of their feeding and somatic growth 
above the permanent pycnocline (i.e. 0-100 m) in 
spring and early summer, and then descend from 
the upper layer to spend the late summer, autumn 
and early winter at depths below about 400 m. The 
Neocalanus species all appear to have a purely 
annual life cycle in the Alaska gyre. They migrate 
downward from the surface layer as fattened fifth 
copepodites sometime in the summer, then molt to 
adults, mate and spawn at depth in early winter 
using metabolic reserves laid down in the 
preceding spring and summer. Their annual supply 
of early juveniles is therefore decoupled from 
current year phytoplankton supply and the 
abundance and biomass of young-of-the-year 
copepods increases roughly in phase with the 
spring increase in phytoplankton productivity. 
This was the rationale behind the original "major 
grazer" hypothesis for the lack of spring 
phytoplankton blooms in the region. The timing of 
spawning and development varies by a few weeks 
between species, and within species over their 
zoogeographic range (Fulton 1973, Miller and 
Clemons 1988, Miller and Terazaki 1989, Miller 
1993b). Life cycles in the southern part of the 
Alaska gyre (Station P, 50
o
N, 145
o
W) have been 
described in detail by Miller and Clemons (1988) 
and Miller (1993b). There, N. flemingeri is the 
earliest to complete it's upper ocean growth, 
reaching fifth stage copepodite and starting it's 
downward migration in May to early June. N. 
plumchrus lags N. flemingeri by about 25 days. 
The departure of N. flemingeri and N. plumchrus 
from the upper layer is completed within a few 
weeks. Developmental timing of the  very large 
copepod N. cristatus is similar to N. plumchrus. 
However, some late copepodites of N. cristatus 
persist considerably longer in the upper water 
column (to mid-August at Station P).  The 
developmental sequence of E. bungii is more 
complex and probably involves some mixture of 
annual and biennial life cycle (Miller et al. 1984).  
In contrast to the three Neocalanus species, E. 
bungii adults migrate back to the upper layer in 
spring, and feed prior to spawning. 
 What do these copepods eat to fuel their 
annual population growth?  A major conclusion 
from Project SUPER, based on several 
independent methods and lines of evidence, was 
that direct ingestion of phytoplankton plays only a 
small role in their diet in the Alaska gyre (Dagg 
and Walser 1987;  Landry and Lehner-Fournier 
1988;  Miller et al. 1991a-b, Dagg 1993).  This is 
in strong contrast to the dependence of 
Neocalanus and Eucalanus spp. on phytoplankton 
in more nearshore regions, and perhaps also in the 
oceanic western Subarctic Pacific.  The most 
important food source for N. flemingeri and N. 
plumchrus is probably microzooplankton (Gifford 
and Dagg 1991; Dagg 1991;  Gifford 1993), 
while N. cristatus may feed on large sinking 
detrital particles (Dagg in press). 
 
Seasonal cycles of microzooplankton biomass 
and species composition 
 
 Microzooplankton are abundant in the 
Alaska gyre, both as 5-10 µm heterotrophic 
flagellates and as >35 µm ciliates (LeBrasseur and 
Kennedy 1972;  Taniguchi 1984; Booth 1987;  
Booth et al. 1993;  Strom 1993).  Another major 
conclusion from Project SUPER, again based on 
several independent sets of measurements, was 
that the growth and feeding rates of 
microzooplankton make them the most plausible 
grazers on the small-celled phytoplankton that are 
dominant in the Alaska gyre (Miller et al. 1991b;  
Strom and Welschmeyer 1991;  Landry et al. 
1993). 
 
 How are microzooplankton in the 
Subarctic Pacific able to maintain through the 
winter sufficient standing stocks to limit the spring 
increase of phytoplankton? The present 
understanding is based on a small amount of data, 
plus inferences from the numerical models of 
Evans and Parslow (1985) and Frost (1991, 1993).  
Because the water column in the Subarctic Pacific 
is capped year-round by a ca. 100 m low-salinity 
upper layer, it does not experience the deep 
(>>200 m) winter mixing that is characteristic of 
the North Atlantic at similar latitudes.  Integrated 
over the mixed-layer, winter light limitation of 
primary production is therefore less severe in the 
North Pacific, and winter phytoplankton 
production and standing stock are greater.  
Microzooplankton in the Subarctic Pacific 
 50
therefore experience the three-fold benefits of 
higher winter food concentration, faster winter 
food production, and reduced downward mixing 
away from their food supply.  LeBrasseur and 
Kennedy (1972) also note that the ontogenetic 
seasonal migration of the dominant copepod 
species result in relatively low autumn and winter 
predation pressure on the microzooplankton.  
However, there is a clear need to test these ideas 
by extending to the autumn and winter seasons the 
range of detailed rate measurements carried out in 
spring and summer by Project SUPER. 
 
Vertical distributions 
 
 Vertical distributions of phytoplankton, 
microzooplankton, and net zooplankton are all 
closely tied to physical structure of the water 
column.  The average seasonal progression of 
water column structure at Station P is well known 
from the 30 year weathership time series (Tabata 
1961, Tully and Giovando 1963).  The following 
summary of their conclusions is taken from 
Mackas et al. (1993): 
 
 The depth of winter mixing in the 
Subarctic Pacific is much less than in the Subarctic 
Atlantic. Salinity stratification of the layer above 
the permanent pycnocline is weak throughout the 
year, and stability of the upper water column is 
controlled mostly by the temperature profile.  
Breakdown of the thermal stratification from the 
summer season lags the solar calendar by several 
months and is cumulative from early autumn to 
early spring. By March-April of each year, the 
water column is isothermal and isohaline from the 
surface down to the top of the permanent 
halocline.  In mid- to late-spring, seasonal 
increases of insolation plus (slightly) moderating 
winds start a new cycle of thermal stratification of 
the upper water column. But the physical 
stratification process is not steady.  Rather, it is 
episodically interrupted by storms in April-June 
that re-establish a surface mixed layer and, by 
downward mixing of warmed surface water and 
erosion of the underlying layer, produce transient 
and relatively weak, step-like subsurface thermal 
gradients at depths ranging from near-surface 
down to the permanent halocline (Tully and 
Giovando 1963, Denman and Gargett 1988).  
Spring-season storms can be violent and the 
resultant mixing of salt and nutrients across the 
permanent pycnocline very strong compared to 
any other season. 
 
 Detailed sampling by Booth (1988) and 
Booth et al. (1993) showed that phytoplankton at 
Station P extend broadly from the surface down to 
about 80-100 m. In spring, biomass is highest in 
the upper mixed layer. In late summer it is usually 
highest between the seasonal thermocline and the 
permanent pycnocline. But vertical gradients in  
phytoplankton biomass and species composition 
are not particularly strong (roughly factor of two 
range around the upper water column average). 
Vertical variations in physiologic state and rates 
are stronger. Denman and Gargett used vertical 
variation in fluorescence yield to interpret the rate 
and depth penetration of upper layer mixing. They 
concluded that weak upper layer stratification 
(about 0.25
o
C over about 5-10 m) is sufficient to 
inhibit vertical transfer of mixing energy 
downward from the surface layer. Booth et al. 
(1988, 1993), Forbes et al. (1988) and 
Welschmeyer et al. (1991) showed that carbon 
fixation and net phytoplankton growth rate are 
highest in the upper 20 m, and near-zero below 
about 40 m. Vertical differences reflect gradients 
in light rather than macro-nutrient availability. 
 
 Booth et al. (1993) reported on vertical 
distribution of microzooplankton biomass, 
including heterotrophic flagellates, dino-
flagellates, and ciliates, at Station P. Total 
microzooplankton were broadly distributed in the 
upper 100 m, but were often most abundant in the 
mixed layer and upper portion of the seasonal 
thermocline. Concentrations were 10-60 µg-C · l
-1
 
in near-surface maxima and usually <1 µg-C · l
-1
 
below 80 m. Strom (1993) examined vertical 
distributions of the larger ciliate microzooplankton 
in greater detail. She found maximum ciliate 
biomass (about 4 µg-C · l
-1
) in the mixed layer and 
<1 µg-C · l
-1
 at depths well below the upper 
(seasonal) thermocline. Some, but not all, profiles 
had a weak subsurface maximum near this 
temperature step. The general pattern of mixed 
layer or upper thermocline maximum, and low 
ciliate biomass below the thermocline was present 
in both spring and late summer profiles. 
 51
 Net zooplankton biomass is strongly 
concentrated above 100 m during the spring-
summer growing season of the dominant 
copepods. The most detailed vertical distributions 
are reported by Marlowe and Miller (1975), 
Forbes et al. (1988) and Mackas et al. (1993). Of 
the dominant taxa, only a few show detectable diel 
vertical migration. Metridia pacifica, Euphausia 
pacifica, Sagitta elegans, and Cyclosalpa bakeri 
migrate consistently from near surface (night) to 
>100 m (day). Diel migration over several tens of 
meters by Neocalanus cristatus and/or Eucalanus 
bungii was observed on a few occasions but was 
absent on many others; there may be a seasonal 
component with diel migration by N. cristatus and 
Eucalanus more likely in mid-summer than in 
spring or early summer (compare Marlowe and 
Miller 1975 with Mackas et al. 1993). 
 
 A striking feature of the copepod profiles 
is the vertical partitioning of the upper 100 m by 
the biomass dominants Neocalanus plumchrus, N. 
flemingeri, N. cristatus, and Eucalanus bungii. In 
spring and early summer, there is consistently a 
near-surface pair (N. plumchrus and N. flemingeri) 
distributed between the sea-surface and about 25-
40 m depth, and a subsurface pair (N. cristatus and 
E. bungii) extending from the lower limit of the 
surface pair down to about 150 m. The exact depth 
of the boundary between these groups shifted 
vertically depending on sampling date and 
location, but was sharply defined and was very 
often coincident with the weak and transient 
thermocline (25-40 m depth) defining the base of 
the upper mixed layer. Mackas et al. (1993) 
present evidence that the cause for this vertical 
stratification of copepod species is direct and 
differing behavioral response to the local intensity 
of turbulence. 
Horizontal distributions 
 
 Horizontal spatial pattern at gyre scales of 
1000s of km is controlled by the large-scale 
patterns of upper layer circulation and nutrient 
input (McGowan 1971).  Zooplankton species 
composition remains relatively uniform to the 
continental margins along the east, north, and west 
margins of the Alaska gyre, but changes rapidly 
near the continental shelf breaks (to a more coastal 
fauna) and along the southern margin of the gyre 
(to an oceanic Transition Zone fauna).  The 
phytoplankton community becomes more 
seasonally variable and dominated by larger cells 
with decreasing distance from the coast 
(Sambrotto and Lorenzen 1986). 
 
 Three- to ten-fold biomass gradients due 
to small-scale (1-50 km) patchiness are normal in 
both zooplankton and phytoplankton distributions 
(Kawamura and Hirano 1985;  Frost 1991; 
Mackas et al. 1993).  We do not yet have a good 
theoretical understanding of how these patches 
form and evolve in the Alaska gyre, but several 
studies (e.g. Mackas and Louttit 1988, Hamner 
and Schneider 1986) indicate interaction between 
plankton swimming behaviour and small-scale 
flow-field perturbations such as convergences and 
fronts.  There is evidence of the presence of 
mesoscale, long-lived (>2 yr) eddies (Cummins 
1989, Musgrave et al. 1992) that might have 
significant influences on plankton distributions in 
the Gulf of Alaska. 
 
Interannual variability 
 
 This is clearly a question of major 
practical significance for PICES, because of its 
relevance to fisheries and climate-change issues. 
To date, we know almost nothing about the 
intensity and cause of interannual variability of the 
Subarctic Pacific phytoplankton community. 
Several studies have examined low-frequency 
variability of zooplankton biomass (Wickett 1967;  
Longhurst et al. 1972;  Fulton 1983; Frost 1983;  
Fulton and LeBrasseur 1985;  and Brodeur and 
Ware 1992) and body size (Miller, Fulton and 
Frost 1992) in the Alaska gyre.  All conclude that 
there is substantial variability at time scales 
between interannual and decadal. Unfortunately, 
much of our interpretation is based on the Station 
P time series.  Because Station P is located very 
near the southern margin of the Alaska gyre, it is 
difficult to interpret how much of the observed 
variability represents changes in the entire gyre, 
and how much is caused by small (or large) north-
south shifts in the Subarctic Boundary (Fulton and 
LeBrasseur 1985).  Brodeur and Ware (1992) 
include spatially-distributed data, so their 
conclusions may be the most broadly applicable. 
They find an approximate doubling of 
 52
zooplankton biomass over the three decade time 
span from 1959-1962 to 1980-1989, and a positive 
correlation between the intensity of winter winds 
and zooplankton biomass in the following 
summer. 
 
 What causes these variations?  Year-to-
year body-size fluctuations of two of the dominant 
copepods, N. plumchrus and N. flemingeri (Miller 
et al. 1992) are particularly provocative.  These 
species do not appear to be well-nourished in the 
open Subarctic Pacific, where their body size is 
very much smaller than in more productive 
environments such as the Bering Sea.  The 
smaller year-to-year body size variations at Station 
P are correlated between the two copepod species, 
despite about a month's offset in their seasonal 
developmental cycles.  So we might expect their 
mutual size variation to reflect rather broad and 
persistent year-to-year differences in primary 
productivity.  But the size variations are NOT 
correlated with total zooplankton biomass 
fluctuations, nor with upper layer temperature, 
salinity, and Ekman transport anomalies.  They 
are correlated, but negatively, with estimates of 
annual new production based on oxygen 
concentration. 
 
 There is increasing evidence for coupling 
between decadal-scale anomalies in large-scale 
winter atmospheric pressure patterns over the 
North Pacific, and upper ocean circulation and 
water properties.  Project SUPER observed large 
between-year differences in upper layer nitrate that 
were attributable to the presence or absence of 
strong storms in early spring (Wheeler and 
Kokkinakis 1990;  Miller et al. 1991b). Improved 
process studies are needed to sort out the real 
linkages, including possible interannual variations 
in the input of limiting trace nutrients. 
 
4.3 Distributions and seasonal/interannual 
variations in the biomass of dominant species in 
the higher trophic levels of the Alaskan Gyre 
and marginal seas. (W. Pearcy) 
 
 The Subarctic Pacific ecosystem is simple 
and productive.  It is characterized by a large 
biomass but a low diversity of nektonic animals, 
such as fishes and squids, compared to tropical or 
subtropical waters. Much of what is known about 
the nekton of the Subarctic Gyre has been obtained 
from the catches of gill nets and purse seines that 
sample near-surface waters.  Most of these 
collections are from summer months, so our 
knowledge is limited seasonally. 
 
Seasonal Variations 
 
 According to Dodimead et al. (1963), the 
Subarctic Pacific Water Mass in the eastern Pacific 
includes both the Central Subarctic Domain and 
the Transitional Domain.  The Alaska Gyre is a 
portion of the Central Subarctic Domain.  Many 
of the common species of nektonic animals that 
are found in the Transitional Domain, or even 
subtropical waters during the winter, undertake 
feeding migrations into gyre waters during the 
summer.  These transient species are important 
constituents of structure and dynamics of the gyre 
region during the season of peak production. 
 
 Some species, such as salmonids, salmon 
shark and some gonatid squids are usually found 
north of the Transitional Domain all year, although 
seasonal north-south migrations occur within 
Subarctic water.  Other common species, e.g. 
Pacific pomfret, Pacific saury, and blue shark 
migrate into the Subarctic Gyre during the summer 
and retreat to warmer waters of the Transitional 
Domain or the subtropics during the winter.  
Other species, e.g. flying squid and albacore may 
overlap in distribution with migrant species, 
especially during the winter, but usually do not 
penetrate into central Subarctic waters and are 
considered transitional species.  Because of these 
extensive migrations, species inhabiting central 
gyres may interact, directly or indirectly, with 
species found far to the south during the winter.  
These north-south movements of common species 
are correlated with seasonal warming and cooling 
events. 
 
 53
Interannual variations 
 
 Year-to-year variations in the catches of 
salmonids and other species in gill nets have been 
documented in this region.  These are due to 
variations in actual abundances as well as 
variations in catchability and availability.  The 
distribution of salmonids is known to be 
influenced by oceanographic factors, such as 
temperature, resulting in interannual fluctuations 
in the southern and northern boundaries of catches. 
 
 Long-term variations in the carrying 
capacity of the North Pacific and abundances of 
salmonids have been pronounced in the Subarctic 
Gyre in recent years.  Commercial salmon harvest 
of Alaska increased dramatically after 1976 and 
has remained high through much of the 1980s and 
1990s, exceeding the historic high catches in the 
1930s.  Changes in atmospheric circulation 
associated with a  deep Aleutian Low displaced to 
the east, and changes in ocean circulation 
associated with increased advection from the 
Subarctic Current into the Alaskan Current and 
intensification of gyral circulation are correlated 
with this regime change in salmon production.  
Apparently these physical changes have resulted in 
warmer oceanic temperatures and increased 
production or availability of zooplankton, leading 
to increased salmon production.  These changes 
appear to be out-of-phase with those in the 
California Current, where weak upwelling and 
warm temperatures have resulted in poor ocean 
conditions for stocks of coho and chinook salmon 
since 1976. 
 
 Ranching of pink and chum salmon 
around the Pacific Rim has contributed to the 
record returns of salmon in Subarctic waters since 
1976.  In recent years, the average size of fish 
returning to some hatcheries has decreased. This 
raises the question of the carrying capacity of the 
Subarctic Pacific and its ability to produce even 
more salmon.  Density-dependent growth and 
mortality may become a serious concern, 
especially if the carrying capacity declines to a 
lower, pre-1976 level. 
 
 The gillnet fishery for flying squid in the 
North Pacific resulted in the death of over a billion 
Pacific pomfret during some years.  Since pomfret 
and salmon often feed on the same prey during the 
summer, a reduced pomfret population may have 
benefited salmon stocks.  Also, reduced 
population of fur seals and northern sea lions may 
have positive effects on salmonids. Such changes 
may influence the growth and survival of 
salmonids and other key species in the ecosystem. 
 
 Some of the main problems and questions 
that need to be solved include: 
 
1. How is the trophic/species structure of the 
Alaskan Gyre affected by climatic regime 
changes?  A review of our knowledge of the 
numbers, biomass and production of the 
nektonic species in the gyre during the 
summer is needed along with better 
information on the food web, estimates on the 
amount of primary and secondary production 
consumed directly or indirectly by common 
species, and estimates of the degree of dietary 
overlap among species.  Such a review should 
help to us to model changes in trophic 
structure and production after major regimes 
shifts. 
 
2. Is the increased salmon production in the 
Alaskan Gyre caused by increased primary 
and secondary productivity?  Studies are 
needed to describe the physical and biological 
causes of the increased carrying capacity for 
salmonids.  How much of the increased 
production can be ascribed to intensification 
of the gyre and Ekman pumping of nutrients 
into the euphotic zone? Since major nutrients 
are not thought to limit plant production in the 
Gulf of Alaska, what factors are responsible 
for higher production levels.  Is it availability 
of iron?  Or has advection of zooplankton into 
coastal regions by intensification of gyral 
circulation caused increased survival of 
juvenile salmon in their coastal migration 
corridors independent of oceanic productivity? 
 
 PICES should review existing 
oceanographic research in regions of interest 
and consider collaborative, long-term 
programs to effectively monitor productivity 
 54
and climate change in the Subarctic Pacific 
Ocean during the next decade. 
 
3. We need to examine the evidence for 
density-dependent growth and survival of 
salmon to learn what species and stocks are 
affected.  When in their life history is density 
dependence most obvious - during juvenile 
stages in coastal seas or in oceanic phases? 
Does the recent phenomenal increase in 
production apply to stocks feeding in both the 
eastern and western gyres, or to mainly to the 
Alaskan Gyre and only a few stocks?  Is it 
reflected in larger sizes for a given age of fish?  
What stocks have been negatively affected?  
Such a study will help to detect critical stages 
in the life history of salmon, and areas where 
competition for food may be acute. 
 
 Since pomfret populations have been 
intensively fished, and pomfret and salmon 
potentially compete for food during the 
summer, a reliable method of aging pomfret is 
needed to enable a study of density-dependent 
growth of this important species. Have their 
growth rates increased concomitant with 
increased salmon production, or with 
intensified mortality of their stocks? 
 
4. If present trends of salmon ranching and 
enhancement continue, and the carrying 
capacity of the ocean is exceeded, adults 
salmon may return at increasingly smaller 
sizes in the future.  To avoid a "tragedy of the 
commons" scenario, PICES should study the 
effects of releasing optimal numbers of 
juvenile salmon from hatcheries to maximize 
economic benefits. 
 
4.4 Review of the studies of variations in 
Benthic and Midwater fish populations (R.D. 
Brodeur and A.B. Hollowed) 
 
 Evidence is accumulating that coastal fish 
populations in the northeast Pacific Ocean undergo 
major shifts in abundance level that appear to be 
related to large-scale oceanographic conditions 
(Hollowed et al. 1987; Hollowed and Wooster 
1991; Beamish 1993).  Large-scale changes in the 
physical environment (Hanawa 1991) and pelagic 
fish production (Terazaki 1989; Kawasaki 1991) 
have been noted in the western North Pacific, but 
few data exist to confirm similar long-term 
changes in demersal fish populations in this 
region.  Numerous studies have found significant 
relationships between indices of year class 
strength of individual stocks of marine fish and 
large-scale factors (see Table 2 for examples from 
the Eastern North Pacific).  Many hypotheses 
have been advanced to explain these relationships 
(Wooster and Bailey 1989). One hypothesis is that 
the large-scale oceanic circulation influences 
secondary production available to coastal fish 
stocks. A link between atmospheric conditions and 
plankton production in the Subarctic Gyre has 
been established (Brodeur and Ware 1992) and 
this relationship has been extended to the 
production of a coastal fish species (McFarlane 
and Beamish 1992). 
 
 This increased secondary production may 
translate into increased production of coastal 
fishes in several ways.  First, the increase in food 
available may increase survival of the larval and 
pelagic juvenile stages of many species leading to 
higher numbers recruiting to the fishery.  Second, 
increased food for adult fishes increases growth 
and allows fish to reach a larger size for a given 
age increasing yield.  Finally, larger fish show 
greater fecundity and produce more offspring, thus 
potentially increasing production yet further in 
cases where a strong relationship exists between 
spawners and recruits. 
 
 The main distribution of many of the 
dominant demersal stocks is within the Coastal 
Downwelling Domain (Ware and McFarlane 
1989) so that, unlike many of the pelagic fisheries 
which are dependent on production occurring from 
local upwelling (e.g., Nickelson 1986; Hollowed 
and Bailey 1989; Ware and Thomson 1991), these 
species appear to rely on production cycles forced 
from outside their distribution range.  Cooney 
(1984) has calculated that coastal production along 
the Northern Gulf of Alaska is not sufficient to 
sustain the large numbers of juvenile salmon 
which migrate through the area each summer and 
that offshore copepods advected onto the shelf 
supplement the food resources at that time.  This 
onshore advection of production may result in part 
 55
from increased the spin of the gyre.  Brodeur and 
Ware (1992) found the highest biomass of 
zooplankton around the edge of the gyre during 
the 1980s, a period of high wind stress. 
 
 Another source of oceanic production may 
come from advection through the Subarctic 
Current and its divergence into the Alaska and 
California Current.  A band of increase primary 
production is evident in satellite images in the area 
of the Subarctic front and a similar band is seen in 
maps of zooplankton biomass distribution. The 
mechanism generating this enhanced productivity 
is unknown but if this oceanic production is 
advected to coastal regions, then the area 
downstream from it may benefit greatly.  Chelton 
(1984) has hypothesized that the flow into the 
Alaska Gyre and California Current fluctuate out 
of phase suggesting that the divergence flow may 
not be equal between the two systems. Hollowed 
and Wooster (1992) have found that different 
oceanic and production regimes may be associated 
with each condition. It is not known whether these 
changes in fish production are mediated through 
changes in temperature or food production, or 
both. 
 
Proposed research 
 
 A concerted effort on the part of all PICES 
member states and many laboratories will be 
needed over several years in order to answer some 
of the questions posed.  We propose the following 
research to address each of the topics listed above. 
 
1. A large-scale physical and biological 
oceanographic program will be needed to 
monitor a series of key transects around the 
North Pacific rim at least through the spring 
and summer months but preferably once a 
month for a whole year.  These transects 
would extend out a sufficient distance to 
encompass the major currents in coastal waters 
with an additional 1-2 transects in oceanic 
waters across the Kurushio 
Extension/Subarctic Current. 
 
 Some likely transects are given in Table 3 
along with some possible institu-
tions/countries that might be able to conduct 
the sampling (given sufficient funding).  We 
propose that the following suite of 
measurements and samples be made along 
these transects: 1) current speed and direction, 
2) temperature and salinity profiles, 3) 
nutrients, 4) chlorophyll, 5) zooplankton 
collections, and 6) micronekton collections.  
A high degree of consistency in sampling 
techniques among laboratories would be a 
necessity. 
 
2. We will need to construct long time series 
of spawner biomass and recruitment for as 
many stocks of pelagic and demersal fishes as 
possible from the western North Pacific to see 
if there are any synchronous strong year 
classes and if so, how do these years match 
with those in the Eastern North Pacific and 
Atlantic Oceans.  These time series may be 
constructed from stock surveys or data 
available from the fisheries (cohort analysis) 
but should include data from all nations 
involved. 
 
3. We need to locate all possible sites with 
anoxic basins throughout the Pacific rim 
similar to those found off Southern California 
and take representative core samples from 
each.  Analysis of the sedimentary record 
could be done by a team of paleobiologists 
from several nations working together at one 
laboratory. 
 
4. We will need to examine historical 
groundfish and pelagic surveys to examine 
how species distributions change through 
time, particularly at the transitional periods 
between environmental regimes.  Adult 
spawner or early pelagic egg distributions 
could be examined to determine changes in 
spawning habitat. 
 
5. The available otolith data from all 
laboratories needs to be inventoried and 
comparisons then made of yearly growth 
patterns among several species which occur 
over a wide distributional range.  We might 
expect to find major changes in growth 
patterns associated with regime shifts or 
 56
dramatic changes in the abundance of that 
species or some trophically-similar species. 
 
4.5 How To Estimate Carrying Capacity 
For Nektonic Species?  (Y.Ishida, D.W. Welch, 
and K. Shimazaki) 
 
Introduction 
 
 Recent production of Pacific salmon has 
reached more than 300 million fish, or about 
800,000 metric tons.  This is similar to or exceeds 
the peak historical catches made in the 1930s 
(Pearcy 1992;  Welch 1992;  Ishida 1992). This 
increase in salmon production in the North Pacific 
raises several scientific questions which need to be 
clarified for both scientific and economic reasons.  
One of these questions concerns whether the 
carrying capacity of the North Pacific ocean can 
be quantified  for fish in general, and salmonids 
in particular. 
 
 This paper summarizes information 
relevant to assessing the salmonid carrying 
capacity of the North Pacific, and the potential 
response to climate change in the North Pacific 
Ocean. 
 
Dominant Fish Species 
 
 Based on FAO catch statistics from 1986 
to 1990, the major fish species in the Northeast 
(40N° - 65°N, 175°W - 125°W; Area Code 67) 
and Northwest (20N° - 65°N, 115°E - 175°W; 
Area Code 61) Pacific Ocean are six species of 
Pacific salmon (sockeye, Oncorhynchus nerka; 
chum, O. keta; pink, O. gorbuscha; coho, O. 
kisutch; chinook, O. tshawytscha; and steelhead, 
O. mykiss), flatfishes (Pleuronectiformes). Pacific 
halibut (Hippoglossus stenolepis), yellowfin sole 
(Limansa aspera), rock sole (Lepidopsetta 
bilineata), Pacific cod (Gadus macrocephalus), 
walleye pollock (Theragra chalcogramma), North 
Pacific hake (Merluccius productus), Pacific ocean 
perch (Sebastes alutus), scorpionfishes 
(Scorpaenidae), Arabesque greenling 
(Pleurogrammus azonus), sablefish (Anoplopoma 
fimbria), Pacific herring (Clupea pallasii), Pacific 
saury (Cololabis saira), Japanese sardine 
(Sardinops melanostictus), and Japanese anchovy 
(Engraulis japonicus) . 
 
 Ware and McFarlane (1989) estimated that 
average catch/biomass (C/B) ratio in the Central 
Subarctic Domain in the northeast Pacific, which 
is dominated by sockeye, chum and pink salmon, 
is 0.33.  If we apply this ratio to all the FAO catch 
statistics, the biomass of the major salmon species 
in the North Pacific Ocean would be about 3 times 
the FAO average catches. 
 
 In addition to these species, Japanese 
research vessel data show that pomfret (Brama 
japonica), flying squid (Ommastrephes bartrami), 
boreal clubhook squid (Onychoteuthis 
borealijaponica), blue shark (Prionace glauca), 
and salmon shark (Lamma ditropis) are dominant 
species in the subarctic North Pacific Ocean 
(Shimazaki 1986; Brodeur 1988).  Also marine 
mammals such as sperm whale (Physeter 
catodon), Dall's porpoise (Phocoenoides dalli), 
Stellar sea lions (Eumetopias jubatus), and 
northern fur seal (Callorhinus ursinus) are 
significant components of the subarctic North 
Pacific ecosystem (Laevastu and Larkins 1981; 
Springer 1992). 
 
 Among these species, salmon are 
economically important to Canada, Japan, the 
United States, and Russia, and probably to China 
and Korea in the future. 
 
Identifying Density-Dependent Interactions 
(Carrying Capacity) 
 
 Enhancement programs for salmon are 
based on the assumption that the ocean has 
adequate productive capacity to support more 
salmon. This assumption is supported by 
theoretical calculations of food chain efficiencies 
based on plankton production data for the North 
Pacific Ocean suggest that salmon use only a small 
fraction of the food production available to them 
(Sanger 1972). 
 
 In essence, a practical limit to the carrying 
capacity of the North Pacific (or some sub-
regions) will occur when oceanic production is 
insufficient to support the stock and species 
 57
aggregates that are present, each of which will 
have its own freshwater stock-recruitment 
relationship.  Identification of individual stock-
recruitment relationships for specific stocks in 
freshwater does not preclude the potential for 
ocean carrying capacity limitations to also 
significantly limit salmon production. 
 
 Sanger (1972) reviewed the pertinent 
literature on the primary production and fishery 
potential of the Subarctic Pacific Region.  He 
estimated the annual primary production of the 
Subarctic Pacific Region, which is defined as the 
portion of the North Pacific Ocean north of 40°N 
including the Bering Sea, the Sea of Okhotsk, and  
the  Sea  of Japan, was estimated at  1.28·10
9
 
t ⋅ C · yr
-1
 in the early 1970s.  Assuming a 
simplified food chain relation for biological 
production, the potential fish production of the 
Region was estimated at 26-78 million t · yr
-1
. 
Taking as a rough estimate that 50% is potentially 
harvestable, average landings (6.6 million t · yr
-1
 
in recent years) would have to have increased 
four-fold to equal this potential. Landings for the 
Region were formerly stable at about 0.4 million t 
· yr
-1
.  An assumed total salmon production (catch 
+ escape + mortality) of 1.2 million t · yr
-1
 equals 
about 1.5% of the estimated total fishery potential. 
 
 Based on Sanger's (1972) analysis, salmon 
would appear to play a small role in the ecology of 
the North Pacific, and there would appear to be 
little likelihood that the oceanic production of 
salmon would be impacted by density-dependent 
(carrying capacity) effects except possibly for 
certain times and places. However, as Mackas and 
Frost (this report) note, much of the primary 
production is now recognized as flowing into the 
micro-zooplankton community, which is a highly 
inefficient link in the food chain.  Earlier food 
chain calculations, which did not recognize the 
existence of this link and suggested that there must 
be an over-abundance of the forage base relative to 
the abundance of salmon, are therefore in error. 
Furthermore, as we review below, this prediction 
of an overabundance of food relative to salmon 
densities does not agree with observations that 
oceanic salmon production (as measured by 
somatic growth rates) is in fact affected by 
salmon density in many regions of the subarctic 
Pacific. 
 
Empirical Evidence for a Finite Ocean 
Carrying Capacity 
 
 Despite Sanger's theoretical calculations, 
density-dependent growth and survival process 
occur in the ocean within and among stocks and 
species of Pacific salmon and other fishes.  These 
density-dependent processes can generate lower 
benefits than expected from the increases in 
abundance that result from extensive enhancement 
projects (Peterman 1991).  For example, the size 
of adult Japanese chum salmon has decreased by 
roughly 25% since 1970.  The size of Russian 
chum salmon has also fallen in recent years (Ishida 
et al. 1993; Kaeriyama 1989).  In both cases the 
cause of these changes is unknown,  but the 
potential effect of efforts to enhance salmon 
populations that are currently occurring around the 
Pacific Rim needs to be considered carefully. 
 
 Evidence for large  scale density-
dependent interactions on the high seas comes 
primarily from studies demonstrating inverse 
relationships between the terminal size at capture 
of various salmon species.  These studies indicate 
that growth rates must be depressed at some point 
or points during the marine life history phase.  
The available evidence points to this density-
dependent reduction in growth occurring primarily 
during the specific year of life on the high seas 
(Ishida et al. 1993) 
 
 Data exist to demonstrate apparent 
between-species trophic competition with pink 
salmon in the western North Pacific for coho 
(Ogura et al. 1990 a and b), and sockeye (Krogius 
1960; Bugaev et al. MS).  In both species growth 
rates were lower in years of large pink salmon 
populations in the western North Pacific.  There is 
also good evidence for intra-specific trophic 
competition occurring for the abundant salmon 
species, with growth rates inversely related to 
stock size for pink (IPSFC 1984; Peterman 1987), 
sockeye (Peterman 1984), and chum salmon 
(Kaeriyama in press; Ishida et al. 1993).  In 
contrast, we have found no reports of chum 
salmon abundance influencing the growth rates of 
 58
other salmon species, although evidence for self-
depression of chum salmon growth by chum 
abundance is well documented. 
 
 Empirical evidence also indicates that the 
mean weight of stomach contents changes much 
less for chum salmon than for sockeye in years 
when pink salmon populations are high in the 
western North Pacific (Sano 1963; Ito 1964; 
Tadokoro, pers. comm.).  This suggests that the 
unusual diet of chum salmon may help to buffer 
their populations, by reducing direct trophic 
competition with other salmon (Welch et al, in 
press). 
 
 The key point from these studies is that 
although theoretical calculations based on typical 
food chain considerations suggest that the ocean 
should not be limiting salmon production, marine 
rates of growth and feeding clearly do indicate that 
such limits do exist.  As net production can be 
defined as the product of survival x growth, these 
limts can directly impact rates of salmon 
production by Pacific Rim states.  What is unclear 
is the extent to which these interactions occur 
between species, and the degree to which different 
salmon stocks will be impacted. 
 
Methods for Estimating Salmon Carrying 
Capacity 
 
Limitations to Statistical Analysis 
 
 There are six species of Pacific salmon, of 
which three (sockeye, pink, and chum) are 
abundant and form the majority of the salmonid 
biomass production in the North Pacific Ocean. 
There are also, however, four countries whose 
salmon production is of significance, and who may 
consider large scale increases in salmon 
production in the future.  However, each 
countries' salmon occupy different parts of the 
North Pacific, and the degrees of overlap are not 
symmetrical. 
 
 At a minimum, a complete description of 
the salmonid carrying capacity of the North 
Pacific Ocean would require estimating 12 
interaction coefficients per species and country, in 
order to describe the impact of further production 
increases on other species and other countries.  
This calculation includes self inhibition of growth 
or survival.  As a result, a total of 12
2
, or 144 
interaction coefficients would have to be estimated 
simply to take into account the most abundant 
species. 
 
 Such estimations go far beyond what the 
available data can support.  Alternative 
approaches to estimating the impacts of different 
stocks on each other must therefore be used, in 
order to reduce the number of possible interactions 
that need to be considered.  For example, species 
of salmon that feed higher up the food chain are 
unlikely to be trophic competitors with species 
that feed farther down the food chain.  As a result, 
species feeding higher up the food chain are 
unlikely to have a major impact on the growth and 
somatic production of species feeding lower down, 
whereas the reverse may be true. 
 
 In general, the greater the trophic 
separation the lower the probability of 
competition.  Sockeye tend to feed higher up the 
food chain than pink salmon (Azuma 1992; Pearcy 
et al. 1988), thus enhanced production of pink 
salmon is more likely to impact sockeye 
production than vice versa.  In contrast, chum 
salmon feed at an indeterminate position, because 
their diet includes a large, but currently poorly 
quantified, amount of gelatinous zooplankton 
(Black and Low 1983). 
 
 As the trophic role of gelatinous 
zooplankton is not well understood, it is unclear 
just how important feeding on these organisms is 
for the production dynamics of chum salmon. 
However, Japan produces primarily chum salmon.  
If chum salmon feed higher up the food chain than  
pink salmon, and primarily on a branch of the food 
chain not exploited by other salmon species, then 
it is reasonable to expect that further production of 
chum salmon might not impact the production of 
other salmon species to the extent that it might 
otherwise have (Welch and Parsons 1993).  This 
conjecture needs to be tested and further 
evaluated. 
 
 59
Bottom up estimation 
 
 A schematic presentation of a 
conventional food web model is given in Figure 
39 (from Fig. 7 of Laevastu and Larkins 1981).  
Although there are some weaknesses in this 
approach, the following is an example of its 
application in coastal and open waters. 
 
 Simenstad and Salo (1982) estimated the 
carrying capacity of juvenile chum salmon in 
Hood Canal, Washington, U.S.A.  Juveniles 
entering the Canal early in the outmigration period 
(February and March) encounter relatively meagre 
prey resources in shallow sublittoral and neritic  
habitats.   Rapid  migration  rates  (7 - 14 
km · d
-1
) during this period suggest a behavioral 
response to low prey availability might be 
immediate migration into regions with more prey.  
In spring, epibenthic and neritic zoo-plankton 
increase, and migration rates decline (3 - 5 km · d
-
1
) as the juvenile salmon spend more time foraging 
in estuarine and nearshore habitats, but upon 
growing to 45 - 55 mm FL, move into neritic 
habitats and start eating pelagic and nektonic 
organisms such as calanoid copepods, hyperiid 
amphipods, and larvacians.  This transition is 
theorized to be the result of prey resource 
depression and growth of the fish to the point that 
they can feed upon larger neritic organisms and 
avoid predators.  Assuming the size-dependent 
daily rations between 15 and 25 percent of the 
total body weight per day, the estimated carrying 
capacity of juvenile chum salmon in Hood Canal 
for two week periods ranged from 0.03 - 0.65 fish 
· m
-2
 in shallow sublittoral habitats and from 0.01 - 
0.07 fish · m
-2
 in neritic habitats based on the total 
biweekly prey production. 
 
 Theoretically, using this type of approach 
it is possible to estimate the salmonid carrying 
capacity of the North Pacific Ocean, but detailed 
estimation of the total prey production is not 
feasible, owing to the vast area of salmon 
distribution in the North Pacific Ocean. However, 
satellite monitoring of primary production might 
provide a useful index for matching with the 
changes in salmon production. 
 
Top down estimation 
 The principles of trophodynamic 
computations are schematically shown in Figure 
40 (from Fig. 5 of Laevastu and Larkins 1981). 
These computations permit determination of who 
eats what and how much and, consequently, how 
much of each (consumed) species must be present 
in order to produce the eaten amounts, using 
empirically determined growth coefficients 
(Laevastu and Larkins 1981). 
 
 Favorite and Laevastu (1979) developed a 
transpacific, numerical, salmon ecosystem 
simulation model (NOPASA) and they concluded 
that the forage base of the North Pacific is far from 
being reached by Pacific salmon and that salmon 
production can be increased significantly above 
present levels.  However, predation on salmon 
(e.g. by mammals) may seriously limit salmon 
production. 
 
Estimation based on historical peak catches 
 
 Salo (1991) estimated that the total 
biomass of immature and mature chum salmon 
(standing stock in the North Pacific would have 
weighed between 860,000 and 1,300,000 mt based 
on peak historical catches in 1936, using a 
catch:escapement ratio of 2:1, and the estimated 
age composition for the catch in the 1930s. 
 
 However, the assumptions used are not 
necessarily valid because changes in ocean 
productivity, changes in relative abundance of 
food species, competitors, and predators, and 
"fishing-up" effects reflected in the peak historical 
catches (Peterman 1991) will all tend to distort 
these estimates. 
 
 Several papers have also shown that the 
abundance of marine mammal predators, such as 
the northern fur seal (Callorhinus ursinus) and 
Stellar sea lions (Eumatopias jubatus) has declined 
during the past 15-20 years.  These species 
consumed salmon as one of their food resources, 
although they utilized other species such as 
walleye pollock (Springer 1992; Kajimura and 
Loughlin 1988).  Their decline may improve the 
marine productivity of salmon stocks.  
 
 60
Changes in North Pacific Salmon Productivity: 
 
 The subarctic Pacific is the feeding and 
nursery grounds for the majority of salmon 
production.  Some two-thirds or more of the life 
history of Pacific salmon is normally spent in the 
pelagic environment of the open Pacific Ocean. 
During this time most somatic growth is 
completed (Ricker 1962, 1976), and a significant 
fraction of total cohort mortality also occurs 
(Parker 1962; Ricker 1962, 1976).  However, 
despite the length of this period in the life cycle, 
relatively little is known about the biological 
dynamics underlying the pelagic period of the life 
history, and their influence on the production 
dynamics of Pacific salmon. 
 
(i) Changes in productivity per unit area 
 
 Unlike the North Atlantic, phytoplankton 
biomass in the North Pacific remains quite 
constant throughout the year, including the spring 
bloom (Mackas and Frost, this report).  However, 
analysis of Secchi disk data also suggests that 
phytoplankton productivity has remained 
essentially unchanged in the North Pacific this 
century (Falowski and Wilson 1993). 
 
 Several lines of evidence point to a change 
in North Pacific productivity at higher trophic 
levels.  The amount of chlorophyll in the central 
North Pacific gyre doubled between 1965 and 
1985 (Venrich et al. 1987), and a similar doubling 
in zooplankton biomass in the Gulf of Alaska also 
occurred between the 1950s and 1980s (Brodeur 
and Ware 1992).  A similar trend in zooplankton 
abundance is apparent in the western North Pacific 
(Odate 1986) - although perhaps not in the central 
North Pacific (Kawamura 1988).  The 
productivity of many fish populations in the NE 
Pacific has also shown sharp increases, beginning 
in the late 1970s (Beamish 1993).  Taken 
together, this evidence suggests that the North 
Pacific is a tightly coupled system, where the 
effects of physical changes in upper ocean 
dynamics can be quickly passed up the food chain 
to influence fish production.  Salmon, as the 
dominant high level predators within this system, 
may therefore provide an excellent focus for 
studies of the effects of the ocean environment on 
fish production. 
 
 Similar changes in a wide range of 
physical oceanographic variables have also 
occurred in the eastern Pacific (Kerr 1992). These 
changes may be associated with the intensification 
of the Aleutian Low (Trenberth 1990), a major 
meteorological system which dominates the 
weather of the North Pacific region. 
 
 The detailed reasons for these increases in 
productivity at higher trophic levels are currently 
unknown.  They could involve increased levels of 
wind-driven mixing of sub-surface nutrients 
through the thermocline, shifts in phytoplankton 
community structure towards more intrinsically 
productive species, increased insolation or, at least 
in costal regions, shifts in food web structure 
(Brodeur and Pearcy 1992).   However, the net 
result is that in tightly coupled systems such as the 
North Pacific, there have been striking changes in 
biological productivity at higher trophic levels, the 
mechanisms for which have not yet been fully 
explained.  These changes should influence the 
dynamics of Pacific salmon, and need to be better 
understood. 
 
(ii) Changes in the Productive Area of the North 
Pacific for Salmon 
 
 In addition to changes in the productivity 
per unit area of the north Pacific, changes in the 
amount of ocean habitat available to Pacific 
salmon may have also occurred.  Although 
salmon are widely distributed in the North Pacific 
Ocean, the southern limit of their distribution is 
sharply limited by temperature (Welch, 
Chigirinsky and Ishida,  submitted; Welch, Ishida 
and Nagasawa, in prep.).  Figures 41 and 42 
demonstrate the sharp thermal limits found in the 
spring that define the southern boundary to the 
oceanic distribution of Pacific salmon, while 
Figure 43 shows the sharp changes in salmon 
abundance by species that result when these 
thermal limits are applied to the spring 1990 sea 
surface temperature field for the Gulf of Alaska.  
The subarctic boundary, traditionally defined as 
the southern boundary to the salmon distribution, 
occurs at about 39°N, or at the southern edge of 
 61
this plot.  The sharp southern edge to the salmon 
distribution clearly lies well to the north of this 
position.  As a result, the area of the subarctic 
north Pacific lying within the thermal limits of 
Pacific salmon, or their thermal habitat, is only a 
fraction of the total area of the subarctic North 
Pacific in at least some seasons. 
 
 Climate change, on any time scale, could 
influence the productivity of salmon populations 
by restricting the area of the north Pacific 
available to salmon.  This could happen if the 
oceanic forage base of salmon is already limiting, 
and salmon were prevented from foraging in some 
parts of their former range.  Alternatively, if the 
distribution of Pacific salmon should change so 
that greater numbers of salmon were restricted to 
specific parts of their former range, then localized 
overabundance relative to their food supply could 
still occur. 
 
 Analysis of AVHRR satellite imagery for 
the Gulf of Alaska shows that very large 
interannual changes in the position and area of 
thermal habitat available to salmon have occurred 
since 1982 (Welch, Thomson, LeBlond, and 
Jardine, in prep. and Fig. 44).  For example, in the 
El Niño years 1982-3 the amount of warming that 
occurred reduced the amount of thermal habitat 
lying within the range found in recent field 
experiments by Welch, Ishida, and Nagasawa (in 
prep.) to zero (Fig. 44).  Under such conditions, 
which are similar to those predicted to occur as 
average conditions under global warming for the 
region, salmon must have violated the sharp 
thermal boundaries found in recent surveys.  This 
restriction of thermally available habitat seems to 
have had a large negative impact on the growth of 
pink salmon (Welch and Morris in prep. and Fig. 
45), and on the survival of sockeye salmon 
(Rogers 1984). 
 
Changes in Marine Growth Rates: 
 
 The scales of Pacific salmon contain an 
annual record of growth rate variations that reflect 
the combined effects of changes in oceanic 
production and density-dependent interactions. As 
we have reviewed above, although the density of 
salmon on the high seas seems to be too low for 
interactions to occur, there is considerable 
evidence for such interactions, reflected in both 
changes in the amount of stomach contents present 
when competitors are in abundance, and in the 
terminal sizes of adult salmon on both sides of the 
Pacific (Fig. 45). 
 
 The changes in the terminal sizes of 
Pacific salmon that are shown in Fig. 45 provide a 
natural index of oceanic productivity, and one 
which integrates those oceanographic conditions 
that are specifically relevant to their production 
biology over their entire marine life.  It is 
interesting that all of these salmon species show 
substantial differences, both between years and 
between populations. There is therefore quite a 
large and varied signal which might provide 
sufficient data to permit some of the rigorous 
statistical analysis of growth interactions in the 
open ocean that we earlier indicated is currently 
infeasible.  In addition, early marine survival of 
salmon seems to be related to their growth in at 
least some times and places (cf. Henderson and 
Cass 1991; Henderson 1992).  The effects of 
changes in oceanic productivity on growth in 
subsequent years should also be measurable and, 
unlike changes in marine survival rates, can be 
readily measured and identified with the period in 
which they occurred (Ishida et al. 1993). 
Considerable insight might therefore be obtained 
from a coordinated study of scale-based growth 
patterns from salmon populations around the 
Pacific rim.  
 
Recommendations 
 
• Factors causing changes in the 
productivity of the North Pacific should 
be monitored and the causes of the 
doubling of primary, secondary, and 
tertiary (fish) production between the 
1950s and 1980s should be identified. 
 
The salmon fishing industry in the north 
Pacific and their markets are cantered on a 
salmon resource that is currently highly 
productive.  If  the factors that caused the 
doubling of productivity in the 1970s were to 
revert to their pre-1970 levels, severe 
economic dislocations would ensue.  Satellite 
 62
monitoring of SST and primary production 
levels (i.e. chlorophyll-a measurements) might 
provide some lead time for industry, as well as 
providing important scientific understanding 
of the factors causing the shift in fish 
production. 
 
• Further analysis of the factors 
controlling the distribution of Pacific 
salmon in the North Pacific is necessary, 
from both biological and physical 
viewpoints. 
 
Joint Japanese-Canadian work to date has 
shown very sharp thermal limits to the 
southern distribution of Pacific salmon.  The 
sharp decline in abundance with temperature, 
and the remarkably low temperatures at which 
the response occurs, suggests that thermal 
barriers form an effective limit to the offshore 
distribution of salmon, and can limit the 
distribution of Pacific salmon to a much 
smaller area of the subarctic Pacific than 
previously believed 
 
The strength of this response is presumably 
the direct result of strong evolutionary 
selection, and should therefore have a direct 
impact on the production biology of Pacific 
salmon.  Global climate models predict 
increases in ocean temperatures that could 
prevent salmon from occupying almost all of 
the North Pacific Ocean.  Future temperature 
changes in the North Pacific could therefore 
have a direct impact on the production 
dynamics of Pacific salmon, both by 
restricting the area of the north Pacific that is 
available to forage within, and by increasing 
the density of salmon. 
 
In order to identify a critical season for salmon 
production, improved monitoring of salmon 
distributions, food availability, and prey 
densities is required in the winter, spring, and 
fall, where our data bases are currently 
weakest. 
 
• Studies of marine growth rates using 
salmon scales provide a cost-effective 
and detailed method of assessing 
changes in oceanic productivity in the 
regions salmon inhabit. 
 
Scale studies have not been done as often as 
they should; they provide useful data for 
multiple-year comparisons with those 
oceanographic variables directly relevant to 
salmonid production biology, and for 
identifying the stocks and ages of salmon 
where density-dependent interactions occur. 
When initiated on a Pacific-Rim wide basis, 
they have the potential for synoptic studies 
that could provide considerable insight into 
the degree to which changes in salmon 
production are shared between countries. 
 
• The relative trophic positioning of 
different salmon species must be 
quantitatively assessed in order to 
determine the potential for density-
dependent interactions (i.e. a carrying 
capacity effect). 
 
Empirical evidence indicates that the mean 
weight of stomach contents changes much less 
for chum salmon than for sockeye in years 
when pink salmon populations are high in the 
western North Pacific.  This suggests that the 
unusual diet of chum salmon may help to 
buffer their populations, by reducing direct 
trophic competition with other salmon. Further 
work is also needed to assess the magnitude of 
trophic overlap between species, and the 
direction of any interactions. 
 
 63
5.0 TABLES AND FIGURES 
 
Table 1. Correlations between monthly mean SST anomalies in the four areas in Figure 6. 
 
 A B C D 
A (in the Western Subarctic Gyre) - 0.51 0.53 0.28 
B (in the Oyashio Region) 0.51 - 0.58 0.50 
C (in the West Wind Drift Region) 0.53 0.58 - 0.69 
D (south of the Subarctic Boundary) 0.28 0.50 0.69 - 
 
 
 
Table 2. Summary of studies of oceanic influences on recruitment of commercially exploited 
fish and shellfish stocks in the northeast Pacific Ocean. 
 
Species Reference Proposed Mechanism Variable 
    
Bluefin tuna Mysak 1986 Alteration of migration routes El Niño-Southern Oscillation 
    
Coho salmon Nickelson 1986 Reduced predation offshore, increased 
prey availability and thus faster growth 
Upwelling during spring & 
summer 
    
Dover sole Hayman and Tyler 1980 Prey concentrations, location of settling Upwelling 
    
Dungeness crab Johnson et al. 1986 
Jamieson et al. 1989 
Transport of zoea 
Transport 
Wind stress 
Current patterns 
    
English sole Kruse and Tyler 1983 
 
Hayman & Tyler 1980 
 
Botsford et al. 1989 
Forrester 1977 
Ketchen 1956 
Alteration of spawning period, 
rates of gonadal development 
Prey concentrations 
 
Prey concentrations 
Egg viability 
Pelagic stage duration & transport 
Temperature 
 
High storm frequency, low mean 
wind speed 
Productivity 
Temperature 
Temperature 
    
Jack mackerel Zwiefel & Lasker 1976 
Theilacker 1986 
Hewitt et al. 1985 
Incubation period, larval growth 
Starvation, predation 
Starvation, predation 
Temperature 
Productivity 
Productivity 
    
Northern anchovy Lasker 1975, 1981 
Peterman & Bradford 1987 
Husby & Nelson 1982 
 
Power 1986 
Fiedler 1984 
Zweifel & Lasker 1976 
Methot 1986 
Prey concentration 
Prey concentration 
Transport & prey concentrations 
 
Larval transport 
Extension of spawning range 
Incubation period, larval growth 
Maturity schedule 
Wind driven turbulence 
Wind driven turbulence 
Turbulence, upwelling, 
strength of thermocline 
Upwelling 
El Niño-Southern Oscillation 
Temperature 
Temperature 
    
Pacific cod Tyler & Westrheim 1986 Larval transport, survival of eggs 
& larvae 
Transport & temperature 
  
 
 
 
 
  
Pacific hake Bailey 1981 Larval transport Upwelling, temperature 
 64
Species Reference Proposed Mechanism Variable 
    
Zwiefel & Lasker 1976 
Bailey & Francis 1985 
Hollowed & Bailey 1989 
Incubation period, larval growth 
Larval transport, growth, spawning location 
Larval transport, growth, prey 
concentration 
Temperature 
Upwelling, temperature 
Upwelling, spring transition 
    
Pacific halibut Parker 1989 Larval transport Wind 
    
Pacific herring Pearcy 1983, Mysak 1986 
Alerdice & Hourston 1985 
Stocker et al. 1985 
Schweigert & Noakes 1991 
Tanasichuk & Ware 1987 
Wide range of factors 
Embryonic & larval survival 
Physiological effec, prey production 
Transport 
Ovary weight & fecundity 
El Niño-Southern Oscillation 
Temperature, salinity 
Temperature, river discharge 
Ekman transport, upwelling 
Temperature 
    
Pacific mackerel Sinclair et al. 1985 
 
Parrich & Mac Call 1978 
Reduced southward transport 
 
Prey concentrations, vulnerability to 
predation, change in distribution 
El Niño-Southern Oscillation, 
temperature 
Temperature, upwelling, wind 
stress 
    
Pacific sardine Zweifel & Lasker 1976 
Bakun & Parrish 1980 
Incubation period 
Prey conditions and circulation 
Temperature 
Annual upwelling 39°N 
February - June upwelling and 
stress curl 
Petrale sole Alderdice & Forrester 1971 
Forrester 1977 
Incubation, hatching success 
Pelagic stage duration, settling time, 
prey concentrations 
Temperature & salintiy 
Temperature 
    
Rock sole Fargo & McKinnell 1989 
Forrester 1977 
No proposed mechanism 
Egg development, larval retention 
Temperature 
Temperature (Feb. - Apr.). 
transport 
    
Sablefish McFarlane & Beamish 1986 Prey concentrations Transport & temperature 
    
Sockeye salmon Mysak 1986 
Thomson et al. 1992 
Alteration of migration routes 
Alteration of migration routes 
El Niño-Souther Oscillation 
Wind driven current 
    
Walleye pollock Ingraham et al. 1991 
Kim 1989 
Hinckley et al. 1991 
Schumacher & Kendall 1991 
Egg transport, spawning location 
Depth distribution of eggs & larvae 
Larval transport 
Larval transport, larval retention 
Large scale atmospheric forcing 
Density 
Advection 
Advection, storm frequency 
    
Widow Rockfish Norton 1987 Larval transport Advection, atmospheric 
circulation 
 
 
 65
Table 3. List of geographic locations of possible transects to sample biological and 
oceanographic parameters.  The institutions or countries listed after each reflect 
those which either have a historical time series along these transects or a general 
scientific interest in these areas and do not represent a commitment to do them. 
 
Transect 
Number 
Location Institution/Country 
1 San Francisco PFEG and NMFS Tiburon/USA 
   
2 Newport, OR Oregon State University/USA 
   
3 Vancouver Island Institution of Ocean Sciences/Canada 
   
4 Southeast Alaska NMFS Auke Bay/USA 
   
5 Seward, AK University of Alaska/USA 
   
6 Alaska Peninsula PMEL and NMFS Seattle/USA 
   
7 Aleutian Islands Hokkaido Univeristy/Japan 
   
8 Kamchatka Pen. TINRO/Russia 
   
9 Kurile Islands TINRO/Russia 
   
10 Hokkaido Island Hokkaido University/Japah 
   
11 Honshu Island Ocean Research Institute/Japan 
   
12 Kyushu Island Japan and China 
   
13 Kuroshio Extension Far Seas Fisheries Institute Shimuzu/Japan 
   
14 Subarctic Current NMFS Honolulu/USA or PBS Nanaimo/Canada 
 
 
 66
 
 67
 
 68
 
 69
 
 70
 
 71
 
 72
 
 73
 
 74
 
 75
 
 76
 
 77
 
 78
 
 79
 
 80
 
 81
 
 82
 
 83
 84
 85
 86
 
 87
 
 88
 
 89
 
 90
 
 91
 
 92
 
 93
 
 94
 
 95
 
 96
 
 97
 
 98
 
 99
6.0 REFERENCES 
 
Ackleson, S., W.M. Balch, and P.M. Holligan.  1988.  White waters of the Gulf of Maine.  
Oceanography 1:18-22. 
 
Aikawa, H.  1949.  On the plankton associations in the Bering Sea and the Okhotsk Sea.  
Kaiyo-Gyogyo  5:20-31.  (In Japanese) 
 
Alderdice, D.F., and C.R. Forrester.  1971.  Effects of salinity and temperature on embryonic 
development of petrale sole (Eopsetta jordani).  J. Fish. Res. Bd. Canada 28:727-744. 
 
Alderdice, D.F., and A.S. Hourston.  1985.  Factors influencing development and survival of Pacific 
herring (Clupea harengus pallasi) eggs and larvae to beginning of exogenous feeding.  Can. J. 
Fish. Aquat. Sci. 42 (Suppl. 1):56-68. 
 
Anderson, G.C., and R.E. Munson.  1972.  Primary productivity studies using merchant vessels in the 
North Pacific Ocean, p. 245-251.  In A.Y. Takenouti [ed.] Biological oceanography of the 
northern North Pacific Ocean.  Idemitsu Shoten, Tokyo. 
 
Anderson, G.C., T.R. Parsons, and K. Stephens.  1969.  Nitrate distribution in the Subarctic northeast 
Pacific Ocean.  Deep-Sea Res. 16:329-334. 
 
Azuma, T.  1992.  Diel feeding habits of sockeye and chum salmon in the Bering Sea during summer.  
Nippon Suisan Gakkaishi  58:2019-2025. 
 
Bailey, K.M.  1981.  Larval transport and recruitment of Pacific hake Merluccius productus.  Mar. 
Ecol. Prog. Ser. 6:1-9. 
 
Bailey, K.M., and R.C. Francis.  1985.  Recruitment of Pacific whiting, Merluccius productus, and the 
ocean environment.  Mar. Fish. Rev. 47(2):8-15. 
 
Bakun, A., and R.H. Parrish.  1980.  Environmental inputs to fishery population models for eastern 
boundary current  regions.  In B.D. Sharp [ed.] Workshop on the effects of environmental 
variation on the survival of larval pelagic  fishes.  UNESCO, Paris, Intergovernmental 
Oceanographic Comm. 1980 Workshop Rept. 28:67-104. 
 
Banse, K.  1982.  Cell volumes, maximal growth rates of unicellular algae and ciliates, and the role of 
ciliates in the marine pelagial.  Limnol. Oceanogr. 27:1059-1071. 
 
Beamish, R.J.  1993.  Climate and exceptional fish production off the west coast of North America.  
Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 50:2270-2291. 
 
Beamish, R.J.  Climate change and exceptional fish production off the west coast of North America.  
Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci.  In press. 
 
Black, E.A., and C.J. Low.  1983.  Ctenophores in salmon diets.  Trans. Am. Fish. Soc. 112:728. 
 
Booth, B.C.  1987.  The use of autofluorescence for analyzing oceanic phytoplankton communities.  
Botanica Mar. 30:101-108. 
 
 100
Booth, B.C.  1988.  Size classes and major taxonomic groups of phytoplankton at two locations in the 
Subarctic Pacific Ocean in May and August, 1984.  Mar. Biol. 97:275-286. 
 
Booth, B.C., J. Lewin, and C.J. Lorenzen.  1988.  Spring and summer growth rates of Subarctic Pacific 
phytoplankton assemblages determined from carbon uptake and cell volumes estimated using 
epifluorescence microscopy.  Mar. Biol. 98:287-298. 
 
Booth, B.C., J. Lewin, and R.E. Norris.  1982.  Nanoplankton species predominant in the Subarctic 
Pacific in May and June 1978.  Deep Sea Res. 29:185-200. 
 
Booth, B.C., J. Lewin, and J.R. Postel.  1993.  Abundance and variability of autotrophs and 
microheterotrophs in the Subarctic Pacific:  Project SUPER.  Prog. in Oceanogr., 32. 
 
Botsford, L. W., D. W. Armstrong, and J. M. Shenker.  1989.  Oceanographic influences on the 
dynamics of commercially fished populations, p511-565.  In M. R. Landry and B. M. Hickey 
[ed.] Coastal Oceanography of Washington and Oregon, Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam. 
 
Brodeur, R.D.  1988.  Zoogeography and trophic ecology of the dominant epipelagic fishes in the 
northern North Pacific.  Bulletin of the Ocean Research Institute, University of Tokyo No. 26 
(Part II):1-27. 
 
Brodeur, R.D., and W.G. Pearcy.  1992.  Effects of environmental variability on trophic interactions and 
food web structure in a pelagic upwelling ecosystem.  Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 84:101-119. 
 
Brodeur, R.D., and D.M. Ware.  1992.  Long-term variability in zooplankton biomass in the Subarctic 
Pacific Ocean. Fish. Oceanogr. 1:32-38. 
 
Bugaev, V.F., M.M. Selifonov, and L.E. Grachev. Influence of pink (Oncorhynchus gorbuscha) and 
sockeye (Oncorhynchus nerka) abundance in the marine period of life on length-weight 
characteristics of mature sockeye from Ozernaya River.  Manuscript. 
 
Capriulo, G.M., and E.J. Carpenter.  1983.  Abundance, species composition and feeding impact of 
tininnid micro-zooplankton in central Long Island Sound.  Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 10:277-288. 
 
Chelton, D.B.  1984.  Short-term climatic variability in the northeast Pacific Ocean, p. 87-99.  In W.G. 
Pearcy [ed.] The influence of ocean conditions on the production of salmonids in the North 
Pacific Ocean.  Oregon State University Press. 
 
Cooney, R.T.  1984.  Some thoughts on the Alaska Coastal Current as a feeding habitat for juvenile 
salmonids, p. 256-268.  In W.G. Pearcy [ed.] The influence of ocean conditions on the 
production of salmonids in the North Pacific Ocean.  Oregon State University Press. 
 
Cooney, R.T.  1988.  Distribution and ecology of zooplankton in the Gulf of Alaska: a synopsis.  Bull. 
Ocean Res. Inst., Univ. of Tokyo 26:27-41. 
 
Cooney, R.T., and K.O.Coyle.  1982.  Trophic implications of cross-shelf copepod distributions in the 
southeastern Bering Sea.  Mar. Biol. 70:187-196. 
 
Cummins, P.F.  1989.  A quasi-geostrophic circulation model of the Northeast Pacific.  Part II.  Effects 
of topography and seasonal forcing.  J. Phys. Oceanogr. 19:1649-1668. 
 101
Dagg, M.  1993.  Grazing on the phytoplankton by the copepod community of the Subarctic Pacific 
Ocean. Prog. in Oceanogr. 32. 
 
Dagg, M.  Sinking particles as a possible source of nutrition for the calanoid copepod Neocalanus 
cristatus in the Subarctic Pacific Ocean.  Deep-Sea Res.  In press. 
 
Dagg, M.J.  1991.  Neocalanus plumchrus (Marukawa):  Life in the nutritionally dilute subarctic Pacific 
Ocean and the phytoplankton-rich Bering Sea.  Proc. Fourth Intern. Conf. on Copepoda;  Bull. 
Plankton Soc. Japan, Spec. Vol., 217-225. 
 
Dagg, M.J., and E.W. Walser, Jr.  1987.  Ingestion, gut passage, and egestion by the copepod 
Neocalanus plumchrus in the laboratory and in the Subarctic Pacific Ocean.  Limnol. Oceanogr. 
32:178-188. 
 
Denman, K.L., and A.E. Gargett.  1988.  Multiple thermoclines are barriers to vertical exchange in the 
Subarctic Pacific during SUPER, May 1984.  J. Mar. Res. 46:77-103. 
 
Dodimead, A;J., F. Favorite, and T. Hirano.  1963.  Salmon of the North Pacific Ocean - Part II.  
Review of oceanography of the subarctic Pacific region.  Int. N. Pac. Fis. Comm. Bull. 13, 195 p. 
 
El Niño Monitoring Center Japan Meteorological Agency.  1993.  Monthly Ocean Report, March and 
July, 1-24. 
 
Enfield, D.B.  1989.  El Niño, Past and Present.  Rev. Geophys. 27:159-187. 
 
Evans, G.T., and J.S. Parslow.  1985.  A model of annual plankton cycles.  Biol. Oceanogr. 3:327-347. 
 
Falkowski, P.G., and C. Wilson.  1992.  Phytoplankton productivity in the North Pacific Ocean since 
1900 and implications for absorbtion of anthropogenic CO
2
.  Nature 358:741-743. 
 
Falkowski, P.G., and C. Wilson.  1993.  Reply to Welch.  Nature 362:796. 
 
Fargo, J. and S. Mckinnell.  1989.  Effects of temperature and stock size on year-class production for 
rock sole (Lepidopsetta bilineata)  in northern Hecate Strait, British Columbia.  In R. J. Beamish 
and G. A. McFarlane [ed.] Effects of ocean variability on recruitment and an evaluation of 
parameters used in stock assessment models.  Can. Spec. Publ. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 108:327-333. 
 
Favorite, F.  1967.  The Alaskan Stream, Int. N. Pac. Fish. Comm. Bull. 21, 20pp. 
 
Favorite, F., A.J. Dodimead, and K. Nasu.  1976.  Oceanography of the subarctic Pacific region, 1960-
71. Int. N. Pac. Fish. Comm. Bull. No. 33, 197p. 
 
Favorite, F., and T. Laevastu.  1979.  A study of the ocean migrations of sockeye salmon and estimation 
of the carrying-capacity of the North Pacific Ocean using a dynamical salmon ecosystem model 
(NOPASA).  NWAFC Processed Report 79-16, 47p. 
 
Forbes, J.R., K.L. Denman, D.L. Mackas, and R.M. Brown.  1988.  Ocean Ecology data report: 
Subarctic Pacific Ocean, May 1984 (Project SUPER).  Can. Data Rept. Hydrogr. Ocean Sci., 64, 
147 p. 
 
 102
Forrester, C.R.  1977.  Effects of temperatures on survival of some marine fish eggs in the laboratory 
and on survival and distribution of some marine species in nature.  Int. N. Pac. Fish., Hokkaido 
Univ., Spec. Vol., 69-121. 
 
Fraser, J.  1962. Nature Adrift.  The Story of Marine Plankton, G.T. Foulis and Co.Ltd., London, 178 p. 
 
Frost, B.W.  1983.  Interannual variation of zooplankton standing stock in the open Gulf of Alaska, p. 
146-157.  In W.S. Wooster, [ed.] From year to year: interannual variability of the environment 
and fisheries of the Gulf of Alaska and eastern Bering Sea.  Washington Sea Grant Publ., Univ. 
of Washington. 
 
Frost, B.W.  1991.  The role of grazing in nutrient-rich areas of the open sea.  Limnol. Oceanogr., 
36:1616-1630. 
 
Frost, B.W.  1993.  A modelling study of processes regulating plankton standing stock and production in 
the open Subarctic Pacific Ocean.  Prog. in Oceanogr., 32. 
 
Fulton, J.D.  1973.  Some aspects of the life history of Calanus plumchrus in the Strait of Georgia. J. 
Fish. Res. Bd. of Can. 30:811-815. 
 
Fulton, J.D.  1983.  Seasonal and annual variations of net zooplankton at Ocean Station "P", 1956-1980.  
Can. Data Rept. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 374, 65 p. 
 
Fulton, J.D., and R.J. LeBrasseur.  1985.  Interannual shifting of the subarctic boundary and some of the 
biotic effects on juvenile salmonids.  In W. Wooster and D. Fluharty [ed.] El Niño north:  Niño 
effects in the Eastern Subarctic Pacific Ocean. 
 
Furuya, K., and R. Marumo.  1983.  The structure of the phytoplankton community in the subsurface 
chlorophyll maxima in the western North Pacific Ocean.  J. Plankton Res., 5:393-406. 
 
Gifford, D.J.  1993.  Protozoa in the diets of Neocalanus spp. in the oceanic Subarctic Pacific Ocean. 
Prog. in Oceanogr., 32. 
 
Gifford, D.J., and M. J. Dagg.  1991.  The microzooplankton-mesozooplankton link: consumption of 
planktonic protozoa by the cal 8. Fish. Bull., 69:595-613. 
 
Gulland, J.A.  1970.  Summary, p. 307-319.  In Gulland, J.A. [ed.] The Fish Resources of the Ocean.  
FAO Fish. Techn. Pap. 97, FAO, Rome. 
 
Hamner, W.M., and D. Schneider.  1986.  Regularly spaced rows of medusae in the Bering Sea:  role of 
Langmuir circulation.  Limnol. Oceanogr. 31:171-177. 
 
Hanawa, K.  1991.  Long-term variations in the physical environments in the Pacific Ocean, p. 19-28.  
In T. Kawaski, S. Tanaka, Y. Toba, and A. Taniguchi [ed.] Long-term variability of pelagic fish 
populations and their environment.  Pergamon Press. 
 
Hanawa, K.  1993.  Long-term variation of the oceanic condition and its relation to the atmospheric 
general circulation.  Umi To Sora 68:167-180.  (In Japanese). 
 
 103
Hanawa, K., T. Watanabe, N. Iwasaka, T. Suga, and Y. Toba.  1988.  Surface thermal condition in the 
western North Pacific during ENSO events.  J. Met. Soc. Japan 66(3):445-456. 
 
Hanawa, K., Y. Yoshikawa, and T. Watanabe.  1989a.  Composite analyses of wintertime wind stress 
vector fields with respect to SST anomalies in the western North Pacific and ENSO events.  Part 
I. SST composite.  J. Met. Soc. Japan 67(3):385-400. 
 
Hanawa, K., Y. Yoshikawa, and T. Watanabe.  1989b.  Composite analyses of wintertime wind stress 
vector fields with respect to SST anomalies in the western North Pacific and ENSO events.  Part 
II.  ENSO composite.  J. Met. Soc. Japan 67(5):835-845. 
 
Hattori, H.  1985.  Seibu Kitataiheiyo Akantaikaiiki ni okeru Tokyakurui no Enchoku-Bisaibunpu to 
sono Nisshuhenka no Kenkyu (Studies on small-scale vertical distribution of copepods and its 
daily variability in the western Subarctic Pacific).  Ph. D. Thesis, Tohoku Univ., Sendai, 146 p.  
(In Japanese). 
 
Hattori, H.  1991.  Vertical distribution of zooplankton in the warm core off Sanriku (86B) and adjacent 
Oyashio water, with special reference to copepod record.  Bull. Hokkaido Nat. Fish. Res. Inst. 
55:59-77.  (In Japanese with English abstract). 
 
Hayman, R. A., and A. V. Tyler.  1980.  Environment and cohort strength of dover sole and English 
sole. Trans. Am. Fish. Soc. 109:54-70. 
 
Heinrich, A.K.  1962.  The life history of plankton animals and seasonal cycles of plankton communities 
in the oceans.  J. Cons. Intern. Explor. Mer. 27:15-24. 
 
Henderson, M.A.  1992.  The future of Canadian research activities on the coastal biology of juvenile 
Pacific salmon (Oncorhynchus spp.), p. 31-35.  In Y. Ishida, K. Nagasawa, D.W. Welch, K.W. 
Myers, and A.P. Shershnev [ed.] Proceedings of the International Workshop on Future Salmon 
Research in the North Pacific Ocean.  Nat. Res. Inst. of Far Seas Fish., Shimizu, Japan. 
 
Henderson, M.A., and A.J. Cass.  1991.  Effect of smolt size on smolt-to-adult survival for Lake 
sockeye salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka) to the fertilization of British Columbia coastal lakes.  
Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 48:988-994. 
 
Hewitt, R. P., G. H. Theilacker, and N.C.H. Lo.  1985.  Causes of mortality in young jack mackerel.  
Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 26:1-10. 
 
Hinckley, S., K.M. Bailey, S.J. Picquelle, J.D. Schumacher, and P.J. Stabeno.  1991.  Transport, 
distribution, and abundance of larval and juvenile walleye pollock (Theragra chalcogramma) in 
the western Gulf of Alaska.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 48(1):91-98. 
 
Hollowed, A. B., and K.M. Bailey.  1989.  New perspectives on the relationship between recruitment of 
Pacific hake (Merluccius productus) and the ocean environment.  In R.J. Beamish and G.A. 
McFarlane [ed.] Effects of ocean variability on recruitment and an evaluation of parameters used 
in stock assessment models.  Can. Spec. Pub. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 108: 207-220. 
 
Hollowed, A.B., and W.S. Wooster.  1992.  Variability of winter ocean conditions and strong year 
classes of Northeast Pacific groundfish.  ICES Mar. Sci. Symp. 195:433-444. 
 
 104
Hollowed, A.B., K.M. Bailey, and W.S. Wooster.  1987.  Patterns of recruitment of marine fishes in the 
northeast Pacific Ocean. Biol. Ocean. 5:99-131. 
 
Hood, D.W., and J.A. Calder [ed.] 1981  The Eastern Bering Sea Shelf: Oceanography and Resources, 
Vols. 1 and 2.  NOAA/Office of Marine Pollution Assessment, 625 p. and 715 p. 
 
Horner, R.A.  1976.  Sea ice organisms.  Oceanogr. Mar. Biol. Ann. Rev., 14:167-182. 
 
Horner, R.A.  1980.  Ecology and productivity of Arctic sea ice diatoms.  6th Diatom Symp., 359-369. 
 
Horner, R.A.  1982.  Do ice algae produce the spring phytoplankton bloom in seasonally ice-covered 
waters ?  7th Diatom Symp., 401-409. 
 
Husby, D. M., and C.S. Nelson.  1982.  Turbulence and vertical stability in the California current.  
Calif. Coop. Oceanic Fish. Invest. 23:113-129. 
 
Ikeda, T.  1974.  Nutritional ecology of marine zooplankton.  Mem. Fac. Fish. Hokkaido Univ., 
22:1-97. 
 
Ikeda, T., and S. Motoda.  1978a.  Estimated zooplankton production and their ammonia excretion in the 
Kuroshio and adjacent seas.  Fish. Bull. 76:357-367. 
 
Ikeda, T. and S. Motoda.  1978b.  Zooplankton production in the Bering Sea calculated from 1956-1970 
Oshoro Maru data. Mar. Sci. Commun. 4:329-346. 
 
Ingraham, W.J., Jr., R.K. Reed, J.D. Schumacher, and S.A. Macklin.  1991.  Circulation variability in 
the Gulf of Alaska.  Eos, Trans. Am. Geophys. Union 72(24):257-264. 
 
IPSFC, Annual Report for 1982.  International Pacific Salmon Fisheries Commission.  New 
Westminster, B.C., 60 p. 
 
Ishida, Y.  1992.  Salmon research and carrying capacity in the North Pacific.  Suisan no Kenkyu 
(11):48-55.  (In Japanese). 
 
Ishida, Y., S. Ito, M. Kaeriyama, S.M. McKinnell, and K. Nagasawa.  1993.  Recent changes in age and 
size of chum salmon (Oncorhynchus keta) in the North Pacific Ocean and possible causes.  Can. 
J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 50:290-295. 
 
Ito, J.  1964.  Food and feeding habit of Pacific salmon (Genus Oncorhynchus) in their oceanic life.  
Bull. Hokk. Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 29:85-97. 
 
Iwasaka, N., K. Hanawa, and Y. Toba.  1987.  Analysis of SST anomalies in the North Pacific and their 
relation to 500mb height anomaly over the north hemisphere during 1969-1979.  J. Met. Soc. 
Japan 65(1):103-114. 
 
Iwasaka, N., K. Hanawa, and Y. Toba.  1988.  Partition of the North Pacific ocean based on similarity in 
the SST anomaly variation.  J. Met. Soc. Japan 66(3):433-443. 
 
Jamieson, G. S., A.C. Phillips, and W.S. Huggett.  1989.  Effects of ocean variability on the abundance 
of Dungeness crab (Cancer magister) megalopae.  In R.J. Beamish and G.A. McFarlane [ed.] 
 105
Effects of ocean variability on recruitment and an evaluation of parameters used in stock 
assessment models.  Can. Spec. Publ. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 108:305-325. 
 
Japan Meteorological Agency.  1989.  89 report on abnormal climate, 433 p.  (In Japanese). 
 
Japan Meteorological Agency.  1991.  Climatic chart of sea surface temperatures of the western North 
Pacific and the global ocean. 
 
Japan Meteorological Agency.  1993.  Monthly Ocean Report 7. 
 
Japan Weather Association.  1993.  Report on development of wind wave prediction model and 
information service system, 155 p.  (In Japanese). 
 
Johnson, D.F., L.W. Botsford, R.D. Methot, Jr., and T.C. Wainwright.  1986.  Wind stress and cycles in 
Dungeness crab (Cancer magister) catch off California, Oregon, and Washington.  Can. J. Fish. 
Aquat. Sci. 43(4):838-845. 
 
Johnson, W.R., T.C. Royer, and J.L. Luick.  1988.  On the seasonal variability of the Alaska Coastal 
Current.  J. Geop. Res. 93(C10):12,423-12,437. 
 
Kaeriyama, M.  1989.  Aspects of salmon ranching in Japan.  Physiol. Ecol. Japan, Spec. Vol. 1:625-
638. 
 
Kaeriyama, M.  Production trends of salmon enhancement in Japan.  In Riddell, B.E. and C.C. Wood 
[ed.] Int. Symp. on Biol. Interactions of Enhanced and Wild Salmonids.  Can. Spec. Pub. Fish. 
Aquat. Sci.  In press. 
 
Kajimura, H., and T.R. Loughlin.  1988.  Marine mammals in the oceanic food web of the eastern 
subarctic Pacific.  Bull. of the Ocean Res. Inst., Univ. of Tokyo No. 26 (Part I):187-223. 
 
Kawai, H.  1972.  Hydrography of the Kuroshio and the Oyashio, p.129-320.  In Physical 
Oceanography II. Kaiyokagaku Kiso Koza.  Tokai Univ. Press, Tokyo.  (In Japanese). 
 
Kawai, H.  1991.  On the terminology of Oyashio Intrusion associated with its current features.  Bull. 
Hokkaido Nat. Fish. Res. Inst. 55:47-58.  (In Japanese with English abstract). 
 
Kawamura, A.  1988.  Characteristics of the zooplankton biomass distribution in the standard Norpac 
net catches in the North Pacific region.  Bull. Plankton Soc. Japan. 35(2):175-177. 
 
Kawamura, A., and K. Hirano.  1985.  The spatial scale of surface swarms of Calanus plumchrus 
Marukawa observed from consecutive plankton net catches in the northwestern North Pacific.  
Bull. Mar. Sci. 37:626-633. 
 
Kawarada, Y., and A. Sano.  1972.  Distributions of chlorophyll a and phaeopigments in the 
northwestern North Pacific in relation to the hydrographic conditions, p. 123-138.  In Takenouti, 
A.Y. et al. [ed.] Biological Oceanography of the Northern North Pacific Ocean.  Idemitsu 
Shoten, Tokyo. 
 
 106
Kawasaki, T.  1991.  Long-term variability in pelagic fish populations, p. 47-60.  In T. Kawaski, S. 
Tanaka, Y. Toba, and A. Taniguchi [ed.] Long-term variability of pelagic fish populations and 
their environment.  Pergamon Press. 
 
Kerr, R.A.  1992.  Unmasking a shifty climate system.  Science 255:1508-1510. 
 
Ketchen, K.S.  1956.  Factor influencing the survival of the lemon sole (Parophrys vetulus) in Hecate 
Strait, British Columbia.  J. Fish. Res. Board Can. 13:647-694. 
 
Kim, S.  1989.  Early life history of walleye pollock, Theragra Theragra chalcogramma, in the Gulf of 
Alaska.  In Proceedings of the International symposium on the biology and management of 
walleye pollock.  Lowell Wakefield Fisheries Symposium, 1988, Alaska Sea Grant Rept. 89-
1:117-140. 
 
Kinder, T.H., L.K. Coachman, and J.A. Galt.  1975.  The Bering Slope Current system.  J. Phys. 
Oceanogr. 5:231-244. 
 
Kitani, K., and Y. Komaki.  1984.  Vertical distribution of the zooplankton in the Bering Sea Basin area 
in winter.  Bull. Plankton Soc. Japan 31:77-79.  (In Japanese with English abstract). 
 
Kobayashi, M.,and K. Kuroda.  1991.  Estimation of main spawning grounds of the Japanese sardine 
from a view point of transport condition of its eggs and larvae, p.109-116.  In Kawasaki et al. 
[ed.] Long Term Variability Of Pelagic Fish Populations And Their Environment.  Pergamon 
Press. 
 
Kono, T.  1991.  Water masses and water systems in the North Pacific western Subarctic region.  Bull. 
Hokkaido Nat. Fish. Res. Inst. 55:1-108.  (In Japanese). 
 
Krogius, F.V.  1960.  The rate of growth and age groupings of salmon in the sea.  Vopr. Ikhtiol.  
16:67-88. (Translated by the Can. Dept. of Fish. and Oceans, Trans. Ser. No. 413). 
 
Kruse, G.H., and A.V. Tyler.  1983.  Simulation of temperature and upwelling effects on the English 
sole (Parophrys vetulus) spawning season.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 40:230-237. 
 
Kutsuwada, K., and T. Teramoto.  1987.  Monthly maps of surface wind stress field over the North 
Pacific during 1961-1984.  Bull. Ocean Res. Inst., Univ. of Tokyo, 24:1-100. 
 
Laevastu, T., and H.A. Larkins.  1981.  Marine fisheries ecosystem.  Fishing News Books Ltd., 
England.  162 p. 
 
Lancelot, C., G. Billen, A. Sournia, T. Weisse, F. Colijn, M.J.W. Veldhuis, A. Davies, and P. Wassman. 
1987.  Phaeocystis blooms and nutrient enrichment in the continental coastal zones of the North 
Sea.  Ambio 16: 38-46. 
 
Landry, M.R., and J.M. Lehner-Fournier.  1988.  Grazing rates and behaviours of Neocalanus 
plumchrus: Implications for phytoplankton control in the Subarctic Pacific.  Hydrobiologia 
167/168:9-19. 
 
Landry, M.R., B.C. Monger, and K.E. Selph.  1993.  Time-dependency of microzooplankton grazing 
and phytoplankton growth in the Subarctic Pacific.  Prog. in Oceanogr., 32. 
 107
Larrance, J.D.  1971.  Primary production in the mid-Subarctic Pacific region, 1966-1968.  Fish. Bull. 
69:595-613. 
 
Lasker, R.  1975.  Field criteria for survival of anchovy larvae: the relation between inshore chlorophyll 
maximum layers and successful first feeding.  Fish. Bull., U.S. 73:453-462. 
 
Lasker, R.  1981.  Factors contributing to variable recruitment of the northern anchovy (Engraulis 
mordax) in the California current: contrasting years, 1975-1978.  Rapp. P.-v. Reun. Cons. Int. 
Explor. Mer 178:375-388. 
 
LeBrasseur, R.J.  1965.  Biomass atlas of net zooplankton in the Northeastern Pacific Ocean, 1956-
1964.  Man. Rept. Ser., Oceanogr. and Limnol. Fish. Res. Bd. of Can., No. 201:14p + Figs. and 
Tables. 
 
LeBrasseur, R.J. and O.D. Kennedy.  1972.  Microzooplankton in coastal and oceanic areas of the 
Pacific Subarctic water mass: a preliminary report. p. 355-365.  In A.Y. Takenouti [ed.] 
Biological oceanography of the northern North Pacific Ocean.  Idemitsu Shoten, Tokyo. 
 
Longhurst, A., M. Colebrook, J. Gulland, R. LeBrasseur, C. Lorenzen, and P. Smith.  1972.  The 
instability of ocean populations. New Scientist 54:500-502. 
 
Mackas, D.L., and G.C. Louttit.  1988.  Aggregation of the copepod Neocalanus plumchrus at the 
margin of the Fraser River plume in the Strait of Georgia.  Bull. Mar. Sci. 43:810-824. 
 
Mackas, D.L., H.A. Sefton, C.B. Miller, and A. Raich.  1993.  Vertical habitat partitioning by large 
calanoid copepods in the oceanic Subarctic Pacific during spring.  Prog. in Oceanogr., 32. 
 
Marlowe, C.J., and C.B. Miller.  1975.  Patterns of vertical distribution and migration of zooplankton at 
Ocean Station "P".  Limnol. Oceanogr. 20:824-844. 
 
Martin, J.H.  1991.  Iron, Leibig's law, and the greenhouse.  Oceanogr. 4:52-55. 
 
Martin, J.H., and R.M. Gordon.  1988.  Northeast Pacific iron distributions in relation to primary 
productivity.  Deep-Sea Res. 35:177-196. 
 
McAllister, C.D.  1969.  Aspects of estimating zooplankton production from phytoplankton production.  
J. Fish. Res. Bd. Can. 26:199-220. 
 
McFarlane, G. A., and R.J. Beamish.  1986.  Production of strong year-classes of sablefish (Anoplopoma 
fimbria) off the west coast of Canada.  Int. N. Pac. Fish. Comm. Bull. 47:191-202. 
 
McFarlane, G.A. and R.J. Beamish.  1992.  Climatic influences linking copepod production with strong 
year classes in sablefish, Anoplopoma fimbria.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 49:743-753. 
 
McGowan, J.A.  1971.  Oceanic biogeography of the North Pacific, p. 9-28.  In J.M. Funnell and W.R. 
Riedel [ed.] The micropaleontology of the oceans.  Cambridge Univ. Press. 
 
McRoy, C.P.  1993.  ISHTAR, the project:  an overview of inner shelf transfer and recycling in the 
Bering and Chukchi Seas.  Cont. Shelf Res. 13:473-479. 
 
 108
Meteorological Reserach Institute of Japan Meteorological Agency.  1992.  General Circulation of the 
Pacific Ocean. 3-128.  (In Japanese). 
 
Methot, R.D.  1986.  Synthetic estimates of historical abundance and mortality for northern anchovy, 
Engraulis mordax.  NOAA Natl. Mar. Fish. Serv. Southwest Fish. Cent. Admin. Rep. LJ-86-
29:1-85. 
 
Miller, C.B.  1993a.  Pelagic production processes in the Subarctic Pacific.  Prog. in Oceanogr., 32. 
 
Miller, C.B.  1993b.  Development of large copepods during spring in the Gulf of Alaska.  Prog. in 
Oceanogr., 32. 
 
Miller, C.B., and M. Clemons.  1988.  Revised life history analysis for large grazing copepods in the 
Subarctic Pacific Ocean.  Prog. in Oceanogr. 20:293-313. 
 
Miller, C.B., B.W. Frost, H.P. Batchelder, M.J. Clemons, and R.E. Conway.  1984.  Life histories of 
large, grazing copepods in a Subarctic ocean gyre:  Neocalanus plumchrus, Neocalanus 
cristatus, and Eucalanus bungii.  Prog. in Oceanogr. 13:201-243. 
 
Miller, C.B., B.W. Frost, B. Booth, P.A. Wheeler, M.R. Landry, and N. Welschmeyer.  1991a.  
Ecological processes in the Subarctic Pacific: iron limitation cannot be the whole story.  
Oceanogr. 4:71-78. 
 
Miller, C. B., B. W. Frost, P. A. Wheeler, M. R. Landry, N. Welschmeyer, and T.M. Powell (1991b) 
Ecological dynamics in the Subarctic Pacific, a possibly iron-limited ecosystem. Limnol. 
Oceanogr. 36:1600-1615. 
 
Miller, C.B, J. Fulton, and B.W. Frost.  1992.  Size variation of Neocalanus plumchrus and Neocalanus 
flemingeri in a 20-yr sample series from the Gulf of Alaska.  Can. J. Fish. Aquatic Sci. 49:389-
399. 
 
Miller, C.B., and SUPER Group.  1988.  Lower trophic level production dynamics in the oceanic 
Subarctic Pacific Ocean.  Bull. Ocean Res. Inst., Univ. of Tokyo 26:1-26. 
 
Miller, C.B., and M. Terazaki.  1989.  The life histories of Neocalanus flemingeri and Neocalanus 
plumchrus in the Sea of Japan.  Bull. Plankton Soc. of Japan 36:27-41. 
 
Minoda, T.  1971.  Pelagic Copepoda in the Bering Sea and the northwestern North Pacific with special 
reference to their vertical distribution.  Mem. Fac. Fish. Hokkaido Univ. 18:1-74. 
 
Miyake, H.  1989.  Water mass structure and the salinity minimum waters in the western Subarctic 
boundary region of North Pacific.  Umi to Sora 65:107-118.  (In Japanese). 
 
Mizuno, K., and W.B. White.  1983.  Annual and interannual variability in the Kuroshio current system.  
J. Phys. Oceanogr. 13:1847-1867. 
 
Morel, F.M.M., J.G. Rueter, and N.M. Price.  1991.  Iron nutrition of phytoplankton and its possible 
importance in the ecology of ocean regions with high nutrient and low biomass.  Oceanogr. 4:56-
61. 
 109
Morioka, Y.  1972.  The vertical distribution of calanoid copepods off the southeast coast of Hokkaido, 
p.309-321.  In Takenouti, A.Y. et al. [ed.] Biological Oceanography of the Northern North 
Pacific Ocean.  Idemitsu Shoten, Tokyo. 
 
Motoda, S., and T. Minoda.  1974.  Plankton in the Bering Sea, p.207-241.  In Hood, D.W. and E.J. 
Kelley [ed.] Oceanography of the Bering Sea with Emphasis on Renewable Resources.  Inst. 
Mar. Sci., Univ. Alaska, Fairbanks. 
 
Musgrave, D.L., T.J. Weingartner, and T.C. Royer.  1992.  Circulation and hydrography in the 
northwestern Gulf of Alaska, Deep-Sea Res. 39:1499-1519. 
 
Mysak, L. A.  1986.  El Niño, interannual variability and fisheries in the northeast Pacific ocean.  Can. 
J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 43:464-497. 
 
Nagata, Y., K. Ohtani, and M. Kashiwai.  1992.  Subarctic Gyre in the North Pacific Ocean.  Umi no 
Kenkyu 1:75-103.  (In Japanese with English abstract). 
 
Nakata, K., A. Hada, and Y. Matsukawa.  1994.  Variations in the food abundance for Japanese sardine 
larvae related to the Kuroshio meander.  Fish. Oceanogr. 4:39-49. 
 
Nickelson, T.E.  1986.  Influences of upwelling, ocean temperature, and smolt abundance on marine 
survival of coho salmon (Onchorynchus kisutch) in the Oregon Production Area.  Can J. Fish. 
Aquat. Sci. 43:527-535. 
 
Niebauer, H.J., and V. Alexander.  1985.  Oceanographic frontal structure and biological production at 
an ice edge.  Cont. Shelf Res. 4:367-388. 
 
Niebauer, H.J., V. Alexander, and R.T. Cooney.  1981.  Primary production at the eastern Bering Sea ice 
edge: the physical and biological regimes, p. 763-772.  In Hood, D.W. and J.A. Calder [ed.] The 
Eastern Bering Sea Shelf: Oceanography and Resources, Vol. 2, NOAA/Office of Marine 
Pollution Assesment. 
 
Norton, J.  1987.  Ocean climate influences on groundfish recruitment in the California Current. p. 73-
98.  In Proceedings of the International Rockfish Symposium, Anchorage, AK, Oct. 1986.  
University of Alaska Sea Grant 87-2. 
 
Odate, K.  1993.  Tohokukaiiki ni okeru Doubutsu Purankuton no Dotai to Chokihendo ni kansuru 
Kenkyu (Studies on Population Dynamics and Long-term Variation in Abundance of 
Zooplankton in the Sea Area East of Tohoku District, Japan), Ph. D. Thesis, Hokkaido Univ., 
Hakodate, 130 p. 
 
Odate, K.  1986.  Automatic data processing for estimation of abundance of zooplankton in the waters 
off Northeastern Honshu, Japan, 1951-1976.  Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 48:31-47. 
 
Ogawa, Y.  1989.  Variations in latitude at the southern limit of the First Oyashio Intrusion.  Bull. 
Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 51:1-9.  (In Japanese). 
 
Ogura, M., Y. Ishida, and S. Ito.  1990a.  Growth variation of coho salmon Oncorhynchus kisutch in the 
western North Pacific.  Nippon Suisan Gakkaishi 57(6):1089-1093. 
 110
Ogura, M., Y. Ishida, and S. Ito.  1990b.  Ocean growth variation of coho as related to pink salmon 
abundance, p. 132-135.  In P.A. Knudsen [ed.] 14th Northeast Pacific Pink and Chum 
Workshop. Port Ludlow, Wa.  Feb. 22-24. 
 
Ogura, M., Y. Ishida, and S. Ito.  1991.  Growth variation of coho salmon Oncorhynchus kisutch in the 
western North Pacific.  Nippon Suisan Gakkaishi 57(6):1089-1093. 
 
Ohnishi, H., K. Ohtani, and G. Anma.  1992.  On the zonal transport in the North Pacific Subarctic 
Gyre. Kaiyo Monthly 24(4):252-257.  (In Japanese). 
 
Ohtani, K.  1970.  Relative transport in the Alaskan Stream in winter.  J. Oceanogr. Soc. Japan 
26(5):271-282. 
 
Ohtani, K.  1989.  The role of the Sea of Okhotsk on the formation of the Oyashio Water.  Umi to Sora. 
65(2):63-83.  (In Japanese). 
 
Ohtani, K. 1991.  To confirm again the characteristics of the Oyashio.  Bull. Hokkaido Nat. Fish. Res. 
Inst. 55:1-24.  (In Japanese). 
 
Ohwada, M.  1975.  Diatom communities in the Okhotsk Sea, principally on the west coast of 
Kamchatka, spring to summer 1955.  J. Oceanogr. Soc. Japan 13:29-34. 
 
Omori, M., and T. Ikeda.  1984.  Methods in Marine Zooplankton Ecology, Wiley, New York, 332 p. 
 
Overland, J.E., M.C. Spillane, H.E. Hurlburt, and A.J. Wallcraft.  1994.  A numerical model study of the 
circulation of the Bering Sea basin and exchange with the North Pacific Ocean.  J. Phys. 
Oceanogr. 24:736-758. 
 
Parker, K.S.  1989.  Influence of oceanographic and meteorological processes on the recruitment of 
Pacific halibut, Hippoglossus stenolepis, in the Gulf of Alaska.  In R.J. Beamish and G.A. 
McFarlane [ed.] Effects of ocean variability on recruitment and an evaluation of parameters used 
in stock assessment models.  Can. Spec. Publ. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 108:221-237. 
 
Parker, R.R.  1962.  Estimations of ocean mortality rates for Pacific salmon (Oncorhynchus).  J. Fish. 
Res. Bd. Can. 19:561-589. 
 
Parrish, R. H., and A. D. MacCall.  1978.  Climatic variation and exploitation of the Pacific mackerel 
fishery.  Calif. Dep. Fish Game, Fish. Bull. 147:6-32. 
 
Parsons, T.R., and C.M. Lalli.  1988.  Comparative oceanic ecology of the plankton communities of the 
Subarctic Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.  Oceanogr. Mar. Bio. Ann. Rev. 26:317-359. 
 
Pearcy, W.G.  1983.  Abiotic variations in regional environments.  In W.S. Wooster [ed.] From Year to 
Year.  Interannual Variability of the Environment and Fisheries of the Gulf of Alaska and 
Eastern Bering Sea.  Wash. Sea Grant Program, Univ. Wash., Seattle, WA, Sea Grant 
Publication WSG-WO83-83:30-35. 
 
Pearcy, W.G.  1992.  Ocean ecology of North Pacific salmonids.  University of Washington Press, 
Seattle, Washington, U.S.A.  179 p. 
 111
Pearcy, W.G., R.D. Brodeur, J.M. Shenker, W.W. Smoker, and Y. Endo.  1988.  Food habits of Pacific 
salmon and steelhead trout, midwater trawl catches and oceanographic conditions in the Gulf of 
Alaska, 1980-1985.  Bull. Ocean Res. Inst. 26(2):29-78. 
 
Peterman, R.M.  1991.  Density-dependent marine processes in the North Pacific salmonids:  lessons 
for experimental design of large-scale manipulations of fish stocks.  ICES Mar. Sci. Symp. 
192:69-77. 
 
Peterman, R.M., and M.J. Bradford.  1987.  Wind speed and mortality rate of a marine fish, the northern 
anchovy (Engraulis mordax).  Science 235:354-365. 
 
Peterman, R.M. 1984. Density-dependent growth in the early ocean life of sockeye salmon 
(Oncorhynchus nerka).  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 41:1825-1829. 
 
Peterman, R.M.  1987.  Review of the components of recruitment of Pacific salmon.  Am. Fish. Soc. 
Symp. 1:417-429. 
 
Peters, R.H.  1983.  The Ecological Implications of Body Size.  Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 
329 p. 
 
Power, J.H.  1986.  A model of the drift of northern anchovy Engraulis mordax, larvae in the California 
Current.  Fish. Bull., U.S. 84(3):585-603 
 
Raymont, J.E.G. 1980  Plankton and Productivity in the Oceans (2nd ed.), Vol. 1, Phytoplankton. 
Pergamon Press, Oxford, 489 p. 
 
Reed, R.K.  1984.  Flow of the Alaskan Stream and its variations.  Deep-Sea Res. 31:369-386. 
 
Reed, R.K.  1990.  A year-long observation of water exchange between the North Pacific and the Bering 
Sea.  Limnol. Oceanogr. 35(7):1604-1609. 
 
Reed, R.K.  1991.  Circulation and water properties in the Central Bering Sea during OCSEAP Studies, 
Fall 1989-Fall 1990, NOAA Tech. Rep. ERL 446-PMEL 41.  NOAA Environmental Research 
Laboratories, Boulder CO.  14 p. 
 
Reed, R.K., G.V. Khen, P.J. Stabeno, and A.V. Verkhunov.  Water properties and flow over the deep 
Bering Sea basin, summer 1991.  Deep-Sea Res.  In press. 
 
Reed, R.K., J.D. Schumacher, and A.W. Kendall Jr.  1989.  NOAA's Fisheries Oceanography 
Coordinated Investigations in the western Gulf of Alaska.  EOS Trans. Am. Geophys. Union. 
69:890-894. 
 
Reed, R.K., J.D. Schumacher, and A.T. Roach.  1988.  Geostrophic flow in the central Bering Sea, fall 
1986 and summer 1987.  NOAA Tech. Rept. ERL433-PMEL38, 13 p. 
 
Reed, R.K., and P.J. Stabeno.  1989.  Circulation and Property distributions in the central Bering Sea, 
spring 1988.  NOAA Tech. Rep. ERL 439-PMEL 39, NOAA Environmental Research 
Laboratories, Boulder CO, 13 p.  (NTIS PB90-155847). 
 
 112
Reed, R.K., and P.J. Stabeno.  1990.  Flow trajectories in the Bering Sea:  Evidence for chaos.  
Geophys. Res. Lett. 17:2141-2144. 
 
Reed, R.K., and P.J. Stabeno.  1994.  The recent return of the Alaskan Stream to Near Strait.  J. Mar. 
Res. 52:639-648. 
 
Reed, R.K., A.V. Verkhunov, G.V. Khen, E.D. Cokelet, J.E. Overland, and T.E. Whitledge.  1992.  
Recent U.S.-U.S.S.R. cruise in the Bering Sea.  EOS 73:184. 
 
Reid, J.L.  1961.  On the geostrophic flow at the surface of the Pacific Ocean with respect to 1000db 
surface.  Tellus 13:489-502. 
 
Ricker, W.E.  1962.  Comparison of ocean growth and mortality of sockeye salmon during their last two 
years.  J. Fish. Res. Bd. Can. 19:531-560. 
 
Ricker, W.E.  1976.  Review of the rate of growth and mortality of Pacific salmon in salt water, and 
noncatch mortality caused by fishing.  J. Fish. Res. Bd. Can. 33:1483-1524. 
 
Roden, G.I., B.A. Taft, and C.C. Ebbesmeyer.  1982. Oceanographic aspect of the Emperor Seamount 
region.  J. Geophys. Res. 87:9537-9552. 
 
Rogers, D.E.  1984. Trends in abundance of north-eastern Pacific stocks of salmon, p. 100-127.  In 
W.G. Pearcy [ed.] The influence of ocean conditions on the production of salmonids in the North 
Pacific.  Oregon State Univ. Sea Grant Pub.  ORESU-W-83-001. 
 
Royer, T.C.  1981.  Baroclinic transport in the Gulf of Alaska, Part I.  Seasonal variations of the Alaska 
Current.  J. Mar. Res. 39:239-250. 
 
Royer, T.C.  1993.  High-latitude oceanic variability associated with the 8.6-year Nodal Tide.  J. 
Geophys. Res. 98:4639-4644. 
 
Saijo, Y., and S. Ichimura.  1960.  Primary production in the northwestern Pacific Ocean.  J. Oceanogr. 
Soc. Japan 16:139-145. 
 
Saijo, Y., T. Kawamura, S. Iizuka, and K. Nozawa.  1972.  Primary production in Kuroshio and its 
adjacent area, p. 169-175.  In Sugawara, K. [ed.] The Kuroshio II, Proc. 2nd CKS Symp., Saikon 
Publ., Tokyo. 
 
Saito, K. and Taniguchi.  1978.  Phytoplankton communities in the Bering Sea and adjacent seas, II. 
Spring and summer communities in the seasonally ice-covered areas.  Astarte 11:27-35. 
 
Salo, E.O.  1991.  Life history of chum salmon (Oncorhynchus keta), p.231-309.  In C. Groot and L. 
Margolis [ed.] Pacific Salmon Life Histories.  Univ. of British Columbia Press, Vancouver, B.C. 
 
Sambrotto, R.N., H.J. Niebauer, J.J. Goering, and R.L. Iverson.  1986.  Relationships among vertical 
mixing, nitrate uptake, and phytoplankton growth during the spring bloom in the southeast Bering 
Sea middle shelf.  Cont. Shelf Res. 5:161-198. 
 
 113
Sambrotto, R.N., and C.J. Lorenzen.  1986.  Phytoplankton and primary production, p. 249-282.  In 
W.D. Hood and S.T. Zimmerman [ed.] Physical Environment and Biological Resources.  U.S. 
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 
 
Sanger, G.A.  1972.  Fisheries potentials and estimated biological productivity of the Subarctic Pacific 
region, p. 561-574.  In Biological oceanography of northern North Pacific Ocean.  Idemitsu 
Shoten, Tokyo. 
 
Sano, O.  1963.  Notes on environmental factors affecting the salmon populations in their oceanic life.  
Bull. Jap. Soc. Sci. Fish. 29:749-753. 
 
Sayles, M.A., K. Aagaard, and L.K. Coachman.  1979.  Oceanographic Atlas of the Bering Sea basin. 
University of Washington Press. Seattle. 158 p. 
 
Schmidt-Nielsen, K.  1972.  How Animal Work, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge. 
 
Schumacher, J.D., and A.W. Kendall, Jr.  1991.  Some interactions between young and Walleye Pollock 
and their environment in the Western Gulf of Alaska.  CalCOFI Rep. 32:22-40. 
 
Schumacher, J.D., and R.K. Reed.  1980.  Coastal flow in the northwest Gulf of Alaska:  the Kenai 
Current.  J. Phys. Oceanogr. 9:785-801. 
 
Schumacher, J.D., and R.K. Reed.  1992.  Characteristics of currents over the continental slope of the 
eastern Bering Sea.  J. Geophys. Res. 97:9423-9433. 
 
Schumacher, J.D., P.J. Stabeno, and S.J. Borgrad.  1993.  Characteristics of an eddy over a continental 
shelf:  Shelikof Strait, Alaska.  J. Geophys. Res. 98:8395-8404. 
 
Schumacher, J.D., P.J. Stabeno, and A.T. Roach.  1990.  Volume transport in the Alaskan Coastal 
Current.  Cont. Shelf Res. 9:1071-1089. 
 
Schweigert, J.F., and D.J. Noakes.  1991.  Forecasting Pacific herring (Clupea harengus pallasi) 
recruitment from spawner abundance and environmental information.  Proc. Int. Herring Symp. 
Oct. 1990, Anchorage, Alaska, Lowell Wakefield Fisheries Symp. Alaska Sea Grant Rep. 91-
01:373-387. 
 
Sekine, Y.  1988a.  Anomalous southward intrusion of the Oyashio east of Japan I.  Influence of the 
interannual and seasonal variations in the wind stress over the North Pacific.  J. Geophys. Res. 
93: 2247-2255. 
 
Sekine, Y.  1988b.  A numerical experiment on the anomalous southward intrusion of the Oyashio east 
of Japan.  Part I Barotropic model.  J. Oceanogr. Soc. Japan 44:60-67. 
 
Shiga, N.  1990.  Studies on the Taxonomy and Seasonal Distribution of Appendicularians in the 
Northern North Pacific Ocean and Adjacent Seas, Ph. D. Thesis, Hokkaido Univ., Hakodate, 
155p.  (In Japanese). 
 
Shimazaki, K.  1986.  Distribution of the pelagic fish community around the subarctic boundary in the 
North Pacific Ocean.  Int. N. Pac. Fish. Comm. Bull. 47:247-264. 
 
 114
Simenstad, C.A., and E.O. Salo.  1982.  Foraging success as a determinant of estuarine and nearshore 
carrying capacity of juvenile chum salmon (Oncorhynchus keta) in Hood Canal, Washington, p. 
21-37.  In B.R. Melteff and R.A. Nev’e [ed.] Proceedings of the North Pacific Aquaculture 
Symposium, Alaska Sea Grant Rep. 82-2. 
 
Sinclair, M., M.J. Tremblay, and P. Bernal.  1985.  El Niño events and variability in a Pacific mackerel 
(Scomber japonicus) survival index:  support for Hjort's second hypothesis.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. 
Sci. 42:602-608. 
 
Smayda, T. J.  1958.  Biogeographical studies of marine phytoplankton.  Oikos 9:158-191. 
 
Smith, S.L., and J. Vidal.  1984.  Spatial and temporal effects of salinity, temperature, and chlorophyll 
on the communities of zooplankton in the southeastern Bering Sea.  J. Mar. Res. 42:221-257. 
 
Smith, S.L., and J. Vidal.  1986.  Variations in the distribution, abundance, and development of 
copepods in the southeastern Bering Sea in 1980 and 1981.  Cont. Shelf Res. 5:215-239. 
 
Springer, A.M.  1992.  A review:  Walleye pollock in the North Pacific - how much difference do they 
really make?  Fish. Oceanogr. 1 (1):80-96. 
 
Stabeno, P.J., and R.K. Reed.  1992.  A major circulation anomaly in the western Bering Sea.  
Geophys. Res. Lett. 19:1671-1674. 
 
Stabeno, P.J., and R.K. Reed.  1994.  Circulation in the Bering Sea basin observed by satellite-tracked 
drifter: 1986-1993.  J. Phys. Oceanogr. 24:848-854. 
 
Stocker, M., V. Haist, and D. Fournier.  1985.  Environmental variation and recruitment of Pacific 
herring (Clupea harengus pallasai) in the Strait of Georgia.  Can. J. Fish.  Aquat. Sci. 
42:174-180. 
 
Stommel, H.  1958.  The abyssal circulation.  Deep-sea Res. 5:80-82. 
 
Strom, S., and N.A. Welschmeyer.  1991.  Pigment-specific rates of phytoplankton growth and 
microzooplankton grazing in the open Subarctic Pacific Ocean.  Limnol. Oceanogr. 36:50-63. 
 
Strom, S.  1993.  Abundance, variability, and potential grazing impact of ciliated protozoa during spring 
and summer in the open Subarctic Pacific Ocean.  Prog. in Oceanogr., 32. 
 
Sugimoto, T.  1993.  On the effect of winter monsoon, the Kuroshio and the Oyashio on the recruitment 
of Japanese sardine.  Mar. Sci. 25:428-433.  (In Japanese). 
 
Sugimoto, T., and M. Kobayashi.  1987.  Numerical studies on the influence of the variations of the 
Kuroshio path on the transport of fish eggs and larvae.  Geo. Journal 16:133-117. 
 
Sugimoto, T.M. Kobayashi, K. Matsushita, S. Kimura, and H.S. Choo.  1991.  Circulation and transport 
environment for sardine eggs and larvae in Tosa Bay, p. 91-99.  In Kawasaki et al. [ed.] Long-
Term variations of Pelagic Fish Populations.  Pergamon Press. 
 
Sverdrup, H.U.  1953.  On conditions for the vernal blooming of phytoplankton.  J. Cons. Perm. Int. 
Explor. Mer. 18:287-295. 
 115
 
Tabata, S.  1961.  Temporal changes of salinity,  temperature, and dissolved oxygen content of the 
water at Station "P" in the northeast Pacific Ocean, and some of their determining factors.  J. 
Fish. Res. Bd. of Can. 18:1073-1124. 
 
Tabata, S., and J.L. Peart.  1985.  Statistics of oceanographic data based on hydrographic/STD casts 
made at Ocean Station P during August 1956 through June 1981.  Can. Data Rept., Hydrogr. 
Ocean Sci. 31:133. 
 
Taguchi, S., H. Saito, H. Kasai, T. Kono, and Y. Kawasaki.  1992.  Hydrography and spatial variability 
in the size distribution of phytoplankton along the Kurile Islands in the western Subarctic Pacific 
Ocean.  Fish. Oceanogr. 1:227-237. 
 
Takeuchi, I.  1972. : Food animals collected from the stomachs of three salmonid fishes (Oncorhynchus) 
and their distribution in the natural environments in the northern North Pacific.  Bull. Hokkaido 
Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 38:1-119. 
 
Tamura, T.  1951.  Observation of the plankton in drift ice.  Bull. Fac. Fish. Hokkaido Univ. 1:134-138. 
(In Japanese with English abstract). 
 
Tanasichuk, R.W. and D.M. Ware.  1987.  Influence of interannual variations in wither sea temperature 
on fecundity and egg size in Pacific herring (Clupea harengus pallasii).  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 
44:1485-1495. 
 
Taniguchi, A.  1972.  Geographical variation of primary production in the western Pacific Ocean and 
adjacent seas with reference to the inter-relations between various parameters of primary 
production.  Mem. Fac. Fish. Hokkaido Univ. 19:1-33. 
 
Taniguchi, A.  1981.  Plankton productivities in the Pacific Subarctic Boundary Zone: food conditions 
of the migrating pelagic fishes.  Res. Inst. N. Pac. Fish., Hokkaido Univ., Spec. Vol., 23-35.  (In 
Japanese with English abstract). 
 
Taniguchi, A.  1984.  Microzooplankton biomass in the arctic and Subarctic Pacific in summer.  
Memoirs of the Nat. Inst. Polar Res., Special Issue 32:63-76. 
 
Taniguchi, A.  1989.  Bishodobutsu Purankuton no Sonzai (Significance of microzooplankton), p. 
27-48. In Nishizawa, S. [ed.] Seibutsu Kaiyogaku (Biological Oceanography).  Koseisha 
Koseikaku, Tokyo. 
 
Taniguchi, A.  1991.  On large amplitude of regularly occurring seasonal variation in food conditions of 
pelagic fish in the Oyashio region east of northern Japan.  Bull. Hokkaido Nat. Fish. Res. Inst. 
55:27-34.  (In Japanese with English abstract). 
 
Taniguchi, A.  1993.  Gyoshukotai o suru Gyorui no Seitai ni tsuite no Kangaekata (An aspect of 
ecology of fishes generating the population replacement phenomenon).  Kaiyo (Ocean) 
25:439-446.  (In Japanese). 
 
Taniguchi, A., and T. Kawamura.  1972.  Primary production in the Oyashio region with special 
reference to the subsurface chlorophyll maximum layer and phytoplankton-zooplankton 
 116
relationships, p. 231-243.  In Takenouti, A. Y. et al. [ed.] Biological Oceanography of the 
Northern North Pacific Ocean.  Idemitsu Shoten, Tokyo. 
Taylor, F.J.R., and R.E. Waters.  1982.  Spring phytoplankton in the Subarctic North Pacific Ocean.  
Mar. Biol. 67:323-335. 
 
Terazaki, M.  1989.  Recent large-scale changes in the biomass of the Kuroshio Current ecosystem. In 
K. Sherman and L.M. Alexander [ed.] Biomass Yields and Geography of Large Marine 
Ecosystems. AAAS Symposium 111. 
 
Theilacker, G.H.  1986.  Starvation-induced mortality of young sea-caught jack mackerel, Trachurus 
symmetricus, determined with histological and morphological methods.  U.S. Fish. Bull. 84(1):1-
17. 
 
Thomson, K.A., W.J. Ingraham, M.C. Healey, P.H. LeBlond, C. Groot, and C.G. Healey.  1992.  The 
influence of ocean currents on latitude of landfall and migration speed of sockeye salmon 
returning to the Fraser river.  Fish. Ocean. 2. 
 
Trenberth, K.E.  1990.  Recent observed interdecadal climate changes in the Northern Hemisphere.  
Bull. Am. Met. Soc.  71:988-993. 
 
Tully, J.P., and L.F. Giovando.  1963.  Seasonal temperature structure in the eastern Subarctic Pacific 
Ocean, p. 10-36.  In M.J. Dunbar [ed.] Marine distributions. Roy. Soc. Can. Spec. Pub. 5. 
 
Tyler, A. V., and S. J. Westrheim.  1986.  Effects of transport, temperature, and stock size on 
recruitment of Pacific cod (Gadus macrocephalus).  Int. N. Pac. Fish. Comm. Bull. 47:175-190. 
 
Valiela, I.  1984.  Marine Ecological Processes, Springer-Verlag, New York, 546 p. 
 
Venrick, E.L., J.A. McGowan, D.R. Cayan, and T.L. Hayward.  1987.  Climate and chlorophyll A:  
long term trends in the central North Pacific Ocean.  Science 238: 70-72. 
 
Verity, P.G.  1985.  Grazing, respiration, excretion, and growth rates of tintinnids.  Limnol. Oceanogr. 
30:1268-1282. 
 
Verkhunov, A.V., and Y.Y. Tkachenko.  1992.  Recent observations of variability in the Western Bering 
Sea current system.  J. Geophys. Res. 97:14,369-14,376. 
 
Vidal, J., and S.L. Smith. 1986.  Biomass, growth, and development of populations of herbivorous 
zooplankton in the southeastern Bering Sea during spring.  Deep-Sea Res. 33:523-556. 
 
Vinogradov, M.E.  1968.  Vertical distribution of the oceanic zooplankton.  Israel Prog. for Sci. Trans., 
Jerusalem, 1970, 339 p. 
 
Walsh, J.J., and C.P. McRoy.  1986.  Ecosystem analysis in the southeastern Bering Sea.  Cont. Shelf 
Res. 5:259-288. 
 
Ware, D.M., and G.A. McFarlane.  1989.  Fisheries production domains in the Northeast Pacific Ocean, 
p. 359-379.  In R.J. Beamish and G.A. McFarlane [ed.] Effects of ocean variability on 
recruitment and an evaluation of parameters used in stock assessment models.  Can. Spec. Publ. 
Fish. Aquat. Sci. 108. 
 117
 
Ware, D.M., and R.E. Thomson.  1991.  Link between long-term variability in upwelling and fish 
production in the north-east Pacific Ocean.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 48:2296-2306. 
 
Welch, D.W.  1992.  Possible future high seas salmon research by the Pacific Biological Station, p. 37-
42. In Y. Ishida, K. Nagasawa, D.W. Welch, K.W. Myers, and A.P. Shershnev [ed.] Proceedings 
of the International Workshop on Future Salmon Research in the North Pacific Ocean.  Nat. Res. 
Inst. of Far Seas Fish., Shimizu, Japan. 
 
Welch, D.W.  1993.  Phytoplankton productivity?  Nature 362:795-796. 
 
Welch, D.W., and T.R. Parsons.  1993.  δ
13
C-δ
15
N values as indicators of trophic position and 
competitive overlap for Pacific salmon (Oncorhynchus spp.).  Fish. Oceanogr. 2:11-23. 
 
Welch, D.W., A.I. Chigirinsky, and Y. Ishida.  Upper thermal limits on the oceanic distribution of Pacific 
salmon (Oncorhynchus spp.) in the spring.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci.  In press. 
 
Welschmeyer, N., R. Goericke, S. Strom, and W. Peterson.  1991.  Phytoplankton growth and herbivory 
in the Subarctic Pacific:  a chemotaxonomic analysis.  Limnol. Oceanogr. 36:1631-1649. 
 
Wheeler, P.A., and S.A. Kokkinakis.  1990.  Ammonium recycling limits nitrate use in the oceanic 
Subarctic Pacific.  Limnol. Oceanogr. 35:1267-1278. 
 
Wickett, P.  1967.  Ekman transport and zooplankton concentration in the North Pacific Ocean.  J. Fish. 
Res. Bd. Canada 24:581-594. 
 
Winberg, G.G.  1956.  Rate of Metabolism and Food Requirements of Fishes.  Fish. Res. Bd. Can., 
Transl. Ser. 194, 202 + 32 p. 
 
Wooster, W.S., and K.M. Bailey.  1989.  Recruitment of marine fishes revisited.  In R.J. Beamish and 
G.A. McFarlane [ed.] Effects of ocean variability on recruitment and an evaluation of parameters 
used in stock assessment models.  Can. Spec. Publ. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 108:153-159. 
 
Yoshida, T.  Sea surface temperature fronts around the south boundary of the western Subarctic Gyre.  
Umi to Sora.  In press.  (In Japanese). 
 
Zeitzschel, B.  1990.  Zoogeography of marine protozoa; an overview emphasizing distribution of 
planktonic forms, p. 139-185.  In G.M. Capriulo [ed.] Ecology of Marine Protozoa.  Oxford 
Univ. Press, New York. 
 
Zenkevitch, L.  1963.  Biology of the Seas of the U.S.S.R. Intersci.-John Wiley, London, 955 p. 
 
Zhang, Ruo-Chao, and K. Hanawa.  1991.  On the fronts in the western North Pacific.  Kaiyo Monthly 
23(8):526-529.  (In Japanese). 
 
Zwiefel, J.R., and R. Lasker.  1976.  Prehatch and posthatch growth of fishes a general model.  Fish. 
Bull., U.S. 74(3):609-621. 
 
 118
7.0 APPENDICES 
 
Appendix 1 
 
Recommendations and Action Items 
 
General Recommendations 
 
GR.1 WG-6 strongly recommends that the 
relationship between the North Pacific 
Anadromous Fish Commission (NPAFC) and 
PICES be clarified as soon as possible.  PICES 
should support the science needs of NPAFC. 
 
GR.2 WG-6 recommends that PICES support 
GLOBEC activities in the North Pacific region, 
especially those directed towards understanding 
the physical and biological oceanographic linkages 
to long term variations in zooplankton and fish 
populations. 
 
GR.3 WG-6 recommends cooperation and 
coordination of activities between PICES and 
existing international programs, such as Global 
Ocean Ecosystem Dynamics (GLOBEC), the 
World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE), 
Joint Global Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS) and 
Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS). 
  
GR.4 WG-6 recommends that PICES should 
encourage and support long-term monitoring 
programs required to assess the biological 
productivity of the Subarctic North Pacific Ocean. 
PICES should ensure that current, cost-effective 
programs are maintained, and essential new 
programs initiated to measure key parameters at 
the critical time and space scales. 
 
GR.5 PICES should strongly encourage and 
support the exchange of scientific data, 
information, plans and ideas between Pacific Rim 
countries.  Reliable, detailed, and timely 
information about ongoing and planned national 
and international research activities is required to 
achieve maximum scientific benefits for minimum 
cost and effort.  Formal international technical 
committees may be needed to achieve this goal 
(e.g. Ship Committee to organize, plan, and 
coordinate scientific cruises within the Subarctic 
Pacific). 
 
GR.6 WG-6 should organize a scientific 
workshop in 1994: "PICES-GLOBEC Program for 
the North Pacific Ocean".  The purpose is to 
further develop and plan collaborative research 
programs between PICES and International 
GLOBEC for the North Pacific Ocean. 
 
GR.7 WG-6 should plan and organize a 
scientific symposium: "Structure, Trophic 
Linkages, and Ecosystem Dynamics of the 
Subarctic North Pacific" for the PICES Third 
Annual Meeting in 1994.  This symposium would 
review and summarize current knowledge of the 
structure of the Subarctic food web, and the 
physical and biological processes which control 
the spatial and temporal (annual, interannual, 
decadal, etc.) variability. 
 
GR.8 WG-6 should continue working in 1994 to 
complete scientific reviews of the physics and 
biology of the Subarctic Pacific, and prepare 
detailed proposals for collaborative research 
programs. 
 
Specific Recommendations For Collaborative 
Programs 
 
 WG-6 endorses the following proposals 
for collaborative research, based on the 
discussions of participants at the 1993 Nemuro 
Workshop.  These programs are at various stages 
of completion, including work that is ongoing or 
planned to start soon.  In each case members 
considered both the scientific and practical 
importance of the proposed research, the 
likelihood of success, and whether or not the 
results would be useful.  For convenience these 
proposals were classified into 2 categories: (1) 
short term programs (expected to be completed 
within 2-3 years); and (2) long-term programs (>5 
yrs).  These categories were based on the 
probable times required for planning and carrying 
out the research, and also the expected short vs. 
 119
long term pay-offs.  WG-6 also carefully 
considered the extent to which PICES member 
states collectively and individually have the 
necessary resources to conduct the proposed work, 
both currently and in the foreseeable future.  Each 
of these specific research proposals is preceded by 
a question (numbered Qx:).  These questions were 
identified as the highest priority among the longer 
lists of key questions identified by each member 
(see section 3.0 for full lists of "Key Questions"). 
 
Q1: What processes control western and 
eastern boundary current system, including 
meso-scale processes and productivity of the 
ecosystem? 
 
 WG-6 strongly recommends and endorses 
continuation and future expansion of comparative 
studies among the following four key Pacific Rim 
ecosystems: Kuroshio-Oyashio Current, Western 
Subarctic Gyre, Alaskan Gyre, and California 
Current. In particular, WG-6 recommends 
comparisons between the Western and Eastern 
Subarctic Gyre ecosystems, between the western 
and eastern Boundary Current ecosystems, and 
between the California Current and the Alaskan 
Current ecosystems.  Members view these 
comparative studies as the best approach to 
determining the main factors which control both 
long-term (e.g. global climate change) and short-
term (e.g. interannual) variation in the structure 
and productivity of the Subarctic ecosystems.  
WG-6 recommends that these comparative studies 
also be extended in the future to include the 
marginal seas: Bering Sea, Okhotsk Sea, and East 
China Sea. WG-6 also recommends these PICES 
comparative studies be closely linked to, and 
coordinated with, other international research 
programs such as GLOBEC, WOCE, JGOFS, and 
GOOS. 
 
Action: 
 
1. WG-6 recommends that PICES support 
ongoing and expanded comparative studies of 
the Kuroshio-Oyashio Current and California 
Current ecosystem.  These studies should 
focus on determining how the physical 
environment affects the productivity and 
composition of the nutrient and plankton 
dynamics, and production and recruitment of 
major fishes (e.g. sardine and anchovy) in 
these ecosystems.  In the short term (within 
the next 2-3 years), existing physical and 
biological data (routine national surveys, 
U.S.A. CalCOFI, Canada LaPerouse Bank 
project and Line P, Alaskan GAK-1 
hydrographic line, Hokkaido University 
sampling series, etc.)  should be continued.  
The data from these series should be analyzed 
to assess the important spatial/temporal scales 
of changes in these ecosystems.  Much 
historic data is available for the Eastern and 
Central Pacific, but there is a critical need for 
more data from the Western Pacific.  
Therefore, WG-6 strongly recommends that 
intensive field programs be initiated there 
immediately, focusing on determining the 
effects of physical oceanography on biological 
processes and fisheries dynamics.  These new 
studies should include the Hakuho-maru 
cruises planned for the Kuroshio and Kuroshio 
Extension areas in 1994. 
 
2. For the longer term, WG-6 recommends 
that PICES support initiation within 5 years of 
more detailed comparative studies on the 
Subarctic ecosystem dynamics, encompassing 
larger space and time scales.  These expanded 
studies should include maintaining existing 
and establishing additional long-term 
monitoring and data exchange programs.  
These studies should also develop numerical 
models describing the ecosystem dynamics to 
determine what triggers major ecosystem 
changes (e.g. "regime shifts" in important fish 
species). 
 
3. For both 1. and 2. above, WG-6 should 
prepare detailed research proposals 
(background, requirements, participants, 
schedule, costs, etc.).  Proposals for 
immediate implementation should be prepared 
in 1994 and reviewed by all WG-6 members at 
the 1994 WG-6 meeting.  The revised 
proposal should be included in the WG-6 1994 
Annual Report for further consideration by the 
PICES Science Board. 
 
 120
Q2: What is the interannual variability of 
the physical parameters in the Subarctic Gyre, 
especially those related to biological 
productivity? 
 
 WG-6 recommends PICES support the 
continuation of existing programs and platforms 
designed to improve understanding of interannual 
and interdecadal variability in the physics of the 
upper 250 m in the northern Northeast Pacific 
Ocean.  WG-6 also recommends PICES 
encourage expansion of these programs to include 
additional measurements designed to assess the 
effects of physical variations on biological 
productivity. Important projects include: 1) the 
ongoing 23 year record of coastal temperature and 
salinity versus depth from the GAK-1 
hydrographic line at Resurrection Bay, Alaska 
(60
o
N, 149
o
W), 2) the U.S.A. WOCE Volunteer 
Observing Ship (VOS) program that will conduct 
quarterly transects from Valdez, Alaska to 
Honolulu, Hawaii from 1993-1998.  This VOS 
section is particularly significant to WG-6 as it 
will allow determination of the position of the 
Subarctic boundary, and also the meridional upper 
layer thermal structure. 
 
Action: 
 
1. WG-6 recommends PICES endorse 
continuation of the GAK-1 hydrographic line 
series.  This is one of the few long-term data 
series in this region, and continuation of this 
series is vital to understanding the upper ocean 
variability in the northern Northeast Pacific.  
PICES should also strongly encourage the 
U.S.A. to expand the current measurements to 
include nutrients, dissolved oxygen, larval 
fish, plankton and ocean color. 
 
2. WG-6 recommends PICES endorse the 
continuation of the current U.S.A. VOS 
section.  PICES should also strongly 
encourage expansion of the current 
measurements to include sea surface 
temperature, salinity and fluorometry. 
Continuous plankton recorders should also be 
added, if possible.  PICES should also 
encourage use of these current VOS platforms 
for other types of observations important to 
PICES member states. 
 
3. PICES should immediately begin planning 
to address anticipated changes in the ongoing 
U.S. VOS program.  PICES should carefully 
consider a recommendation to the U.S.A. that 
this VOS section be continued beyond 1998. 
 
4. WG-6 recommends PICES support and 
encourage initiation of additional VOS 
sections in the North Pacific as soon as 
possible.  Currently the U.S.A. VOS section 
is complemented in the central North Pacific 
only by a Japan VOS section between Tokyo 
and Vancouver. 
 
5. PICES should support and encourage 
development of additional instrument 
"packages" which can be routinely placed on 
current VOS and other ships of opportunity, as 
part of an ongoing PICES commitment to 
VOS-type programs. These new instrument 
"packages" should be capable of measuring 
physical, biological and chemical parameters 
in the upper ocean. WG-6 recommends this 
could be a very cost-effective and valuable 
approach to measuring upper ocean variability 
in the North Pacific. 
 
Q3: What controls interannual variability in 
mesozooplankton abundance in surface waters 
of the oceanic Subarctic Pacific? 
 
 WG-6 recommends that new collaborative 
work be initiated to observe the dynamics of 
species composition, abundance and production of 
plankton in controlled shipboard experiments 
involving manipulations of key processes and 
properties.  Microcosms containing natural 
assemblages of plankton should be treated in 
experiments of multi-factorial design with 
different combinations of light, nutrients (trace 
nutrients and ammonia), and abundance and 
composition of mesozooplankton.  Sufficient 
effort should be devoted to field (in situ) 
measurements of rates and distributions to verify 
interpretations derived from these "enclosure" 
experiments.  The biological responses should be 
monitored for several days to a week.  The 
 121
potential effects of spatial variation in some 
physical properties (light field, mixed depth layer) 
utilizing undulating towed vehicles to measure in 
situ fluorescence, irradiance, temperature and 
salinity in underway surveys should also be 
explored.  The results from this work would 
determine not only the types of observations 
required in future investigations of plankton 
production in the open Subarctic Pacific, but also 
whether crucial missing information compromises 
the value of extant long term data sets and samples 
(such as those from Ocean Station P). 
 
Action: 
 
1. WG-6 recommends that this proposal be 
given high priority for immediate action.  To 
begin, selected members should prepare a 
detailed research proposal (background, 
requirements, participants, schedule, costs, 
etc.) in 1994.  This proposal should be 
reviewed and discussed by all members at the 
1994 meeting, and the revised proposal 
included in the 1994 Annual Report for further 
consideration by the PICES Science Board. 
 
Q4: How do processes occurring in oceanic 
regions of the Subarctic Pacific affect the 
production of coastal marine nekton? 
 
 WG-6 recommends that a large-scale 
physical and biological oceanographic program 
should be initiated to monitor a series of key 
transects around the North Pacific rim once a 
month (or at least through the spring and summer 
months), for several complete cycles (3-5 years).  
These transects would extend offshore  sufficient 
distances to encompass the major currents in 
coastal waters with an additional 1-2 transects in 
oceanic waters across the Kuroshio 
Extension/Subarctic Current.  We propose that the 
following suite of measurements and samples be 
made along these transects: 1) current speed and 
direction, 2) temperature and salinity profiles, 3) 
nutrients, 4) chlorophyll, 5) zooplankton 
(including ichthyoplankton) collections, and 6) 
micronekton collections.  A high degree of 
consistency in sampling techniques among 
laboratories would be a necessity. 
 
Action: 
 
1. This project is a long-term objective 
which will require much planning to achieve 
the maximum benefits.   WG-6 recommends 
that selected members prepare a detailed 
research proposal (background, requirements, 
participants, schedule, costs, etc.) in 1994.  
This proposal should be reviewed and 
discussed by all WG-6 members at the 1994 
meeting, and the revised proposal included in 
the WG-6 1994 Annual Report for further 
consideration by the PICES Science Board.  
Upon approval by the Science Board, WG-6 
should initiate detailed planning and formal 
requests for support (e.g. ship time) from all 
PICES member states. 
 
Q5: What is the structure of the Subarctic 
food web and what controls its spatial, seasonal 
and interannual variability? 
 
 WG-6 recommends that increased 
emphasis be placed on improving our knowledge 
of the structure and dynamics of the Subarctic 
food webs, including oceanic and mesopelagic 
animals, and how trophodynamic processes affect 
the production of nektonic animals such as 
salmonids, other fishes, seabirds, and marine 
mammals.  Mesopelagic and bathypelagic animals 
such as myctophids, shrimp, and squids likely 
form a critical, but currently poorly understood, 
role in the trophic structure of the Subarctic 
region. 
 
Action: 
 
1. The highest priority for immediate action 
is to conduct further analyses of the existing 
zooplankton data of Dr. Odate (40 yr. monthly 
series of zooplankton wet weight and 
taxonomic group composition).  The 
relationship between zooplankton variation 
and environmental factors should be analyzed.  
Fishery statistics should also be examined to 
determine if there are significant relationships 
between zooplankton and fish variability. 
 
2. The second priority for immediate action 
should be initiation by WG-6 of new work to 
 122
inventory existing plankton/ micronekton/ 
nekton collections and data in PICES member 
states.  These existing samples and data 
should enable at least preliminary examination 
of food habits and long term variations in 
trophic relationships and species composition. 
 
3. PICES should insure adequate curation of 
existing historic sample and data collections in 
PICES member states (e.g. plankton samples 
from Ocean Station "P" and CalCOFI).  Such 
collections are irreplaceable and their 
immense value in addressing current and 
future questions (e.g. effects of climate change 
on fisheries) is not always apparent to those 
responsible 
 
4. In the longer term, additional routine 
research surveys are needed determine the 
long-term variation in food web structure and 
the causative factors.  These new samples and 
data are especially needed to estimate the 
future carrying capacity of the Subarctic 
Pacific, and could also test theories developed 
from trophodynamic modelling.  WG-6 
should develop or solicit detailed research 
proposals (background, requirements, 
participants, schedule, costs, etc.) for these 
new surveys, and should try to link and 
coordinate these surveys with other PICES 
and WG-6 proposals and activities (e.g. 
Pacific Rim experiment outlined in Q3 section 
above).  Upon approval by the Science Board, 
WG-6 should initiate detailed planning and 
formal requests for support (e.g. ship time) 
from all PICES member states. 
 
Q6: What processes affect the production of 
salmon and other nekton in the Subarctic 
Pacific? 
 
Action: 
 
1. WG-6 recommends PICES support 
continuation of the ongoing analyses of ocean 
growth of salmon using the time series of 
salmon scale samples accumulated by Canada, 
Japan, the United States, and (if possible) 
Russia. These data provide insight into the 
variations in growth that have occurred in 
different salmon stocks, patterns of co-
variation, and whether the types of 
oceanographic data products currently 
collected are correlated with variations in 
oceanic growth. WG-6 should contact PICES 
member states to obtain information about 
existing collections of salmon scales in each 
country.  PICES should encourage additional 
new collaborative research using salmon 
scales.  After ongoing scale analyses projects 
are completed, WG-6 should prepare and/or 
solicit detailed research proposals 
(background, requirements, participants, 
schedule, costs, etc.) for new activities. 
Proposals endorsed by WG-6 should be 
included in the 1994 Annual Report for further 
consideration by the PICES Science Board.  
Upon approval by the Science Board, WG-6 
should initiate detailed planning and formal 
requests for support (e.g. additional collection 
of scales) from all PICES member states. 
 
2. WG-6 recommends that PICES support 
continuation of ongoing collaborative research 
between PICES member states on salmon 
distributions in the Subarctic region.  Recent 
results from joint work between Japan and 
Canada show sharp thermal limits to the 
distribution of Pacific salmon in the North 
Pacific.  Therefore, the potential impacts of 
expected warming trends in the Subarctic 
Pacific could have important impacts on the 
production dynamics of Pacific salmon.  
These results need to be verified, and their 
impact on salmon yields clarified by 
additional analyses of existing data in order to 
better understand their possible future impact. 
 
3. WG-6 recommends that PICES support 
and facilitate expanding the information 
collected by fishery research vessels to include 
the collection of more physical and biological 
data relevant to the understanding of the 
changes that have occurred at lower trophic 
levels in recent decades. WG-6 should prepare 
and/or solicit a detailed research proposal 
(background, requirements, participants, 
schedule, costs, etc.) for these expanded 
biological and physical measurements, for 
further consideration by the PICES Science 
 123
Board.  Upon approval by the Science Board, 
WG-6 and other appropriate PICES Working 
Groups (e.g. WG-4: Data Collection and 
Quality Control) should initiate detailed 
planning and coordination of activities by all 
PICES member states. 
 
Q7: What new approaches and technology 
can be used to track the movements and fate 
(e.g. living, dying, or dead) of migratory nekton 
species over large regions of the North Pacific 
Ocean? 
 
 WG-6 recommends PICES support the 
development of new technology designed to solve 
significant fundamental physics, biology, and 
fisheries management problems.  This is a 
strategic, ongoing and long-term objective: new 
technology and methods are needed to support 
both current and proposed WG-6 activities.  One 
example, among many, is development of new 
"intelligent" fish tags, which would continuously 
record or transmit the real-time position (location, 
depth) of a fish over the entire lifetime of the fish. 
 
Action: 
 
1. In the short term, WG-6 recommends that 
detailed research proposals (background, 
requirements, participants, schedule, costs, 
etc.) should be prepared for all proposed new 
methods and technology.  These proposals 
should be reviewed and discussed by all 
members at the annual WG-6 meetings, and 
proposals endorsed by members should be 
included in the WG-6 1994 Annual Report for 
further consideration by the PICES Science 
Board.  Upon approval by the Science Board, 
WG-6 should initiate any detailed planning 
and formal requests for support (e.g. ship time, 
collaborative field experiments, etc.) from 
PICES member states. 
 
2. For the longer term, we recommend that 
WG-6 form a new Methods and Technology 
Sub-Committee for assessing the potential 
value and costs of all proposed new methods 
and technologies.  This MTC would 
implement a standard review procedure, such 
as: 
 
 - identification of required data 
 - review relevant existing methods and 
technology 
 - identify requirements to solve specific 
problem 
 - identify and assess technical problems 
 - develop or invite detailed R/D proposals 
 - review and endorse/reject R/D proposals 
 - recommend R/D proposals to PICES 
Science Board 
 - coordinate/facilitate PICES collaborative 
efforts to develop and test resulting 
new methods and technology 
 
 124
Appendix 2 
 
Terms of Reference 
 
Many important phenomena which link layer of 
the North Pacific were identified by the physical 
and biological processes in the upper PICES 
Climate Change group and the Physical 
Oceanography group in the PICES workshop in 
1991, and also in the 1992 BIO Committee report 
to the PICES first annual meeting in Victoria, B.C. 
(see PICES Annual Report, 1992).  The initial 
mandate of WG-6 is to further clarify the present 
state of scientific knowledge about the Subarctic 
Gyre region, to facilitate and promote future 
studies of the physical environments, the dynamics 
of the primary and secondary production, the 
trophic linkages and transfer functions, and 
fisheries recruitment and population dynamics in 
response to climatic change.  WG-6 is also tasked 
with identifying and evaluating methods of 
determining the carrying capacity of the Subarctic 
Gyre for nekton, and assessing the effects of 
climate and oceanic change on primary and 
secondary production in this region.  Other 
PICES working groups (WG-5 and WG-1) deal 
with the Bering Sea and Okhotsk Sea, 
respectively.  Therefore WG-6 will focus on the 
physical fluctuations of the Alaskan Gyre and 
Western Subarctic Gyre, and the effects on the 
ecosystem. 
 
 The PICES Science Board provided the 
following seven specific Terms of Reference for 
WG-6 for 1993: 
 
 - Review the existing level of description of 
ocean circulation and climate variability 
in the Subarctic North Pacific and identify 
gaps in knowledge; 
 
 - Review the present level of knowledge of the 
important processes determining ocean 
circulation in the Subarctic North Pacific 
and identify gaps in knowledge; 
 
 - Review existing information on the biomass 
of major trophic levels, and distribution of 
the dominant species within each level; 
 
 - Review existing information on the carrying 
capacity for salmon and other nektonic 
species in the subarctic, and what is 
known about variations in the carrying 
capacity of this region in response to 
climate change.  Advise on how changes 
in carrying capacity could be quantified; 
 
 - Review existing level of knowledge of the 
processes affecting primary and secondary 
production in this region and identify 
information gaps.  Advise on how these 
gaps could be studied; 
 
 - Identify key scientific questions, and propose 
collaborative programs which can be 
conducted to advance knowledge and test 
major hypotheses; 
 
 - Determine relationship to GLOBEC.  
Advise which PICES and GLOBEC 
objectives could be linked. 
 
 126
Appendix 3 
 
Participants of Subarctic Gyre Working Group 
 
# Brodeur, Richard National Marine Fisheries Service U.S.A. 
* Denman, Ken Institute of Ocean Sciences Canada 
* Eggers, Doug Alaska Department Fish & Game U.S.A. 
* Hu, Dun-Xin Inst. Oceanology, Academia Sinica China 
# Endo, Yoshinari Faculty Agriculture, Tohoku Universit Japan 
*# Frost, Bruce University of Washington U.S.A. 
* Hanawa, Kimio Tohoku University Japan 
*# Hargreaves, Brent Pacific Biological Station Canada 
# Hatanaka, Hiroshi Nat. Res.Inst. Far Seas Fish. Japan 
* Henderson, Mike DFO Headquarters, Vancouver Canada 
* Hollowed, Anne Nat. Marine Fisheries Service U.S.A. 
*# Ishida, Yukimasa Nat. Res. Inst. Far Seas Fish. Japan 
# Kawaguchi, Kouichi Ocean Research Inst. Univ. Tokyo Japan 
* Mackas, Dave Institute of Ocean Sciences Canada 
# McKone, Douglas PICES Secretariat Canada 
# Nakata, Hideaki Ocean Research Inst. Univ. Tokyo Japan 
*# Pearcy, William Oregon State Universtiy U.S.A. 
*# Royer, Thomas University of Alaska U.S.A. 
* Shimaszaki, Kenji Hokkaido University Japan 
* Schumacher, Jim Pac. Marine Envir. Lab. NOAA U.S.A. 
* Sugimori, Yasuhiro Tokai University Japan 
*# Sugimoto, Takashige Ocean Research Inst. Univ. Tokyo Japan 
* Taniguchi, Akira Faculty Agriculture, Tohoku Univ. Japan 
*# Welch, David Pacific Biological Station Canada 
*# Yoshida, Takashi Japan Meterological Agency Japan 
# Yatsu, Akihiro Nat. Res. Inst. Far Seas Fish. Japan 
 
*denotes formal member of Working Group 6 
#denotes participated in Working Group 6 discussions at 1993 Nemuro Workshop 
 
 
 
