  
 
 
 
 
 
 
PICES Scientific Report No. 11 
1999 
 
 
 
 
PICES-GLOBEC INTERNATIONAL PROGRAM ON 
CLIMATE CHANGE AND CARRYING CAPACITY 
 
SUMMARY OF THE 1998 MODEL, MONITOR AND  
REX WORKSHOPS, AND TASK TEAM REPORTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Edited by R.C. Dugdale (MODEL), Douglas E. Hay (REX),  
Gordon A. McFarlane (BASS), Bruce A. Taft (MONITOR)  
and Sinjae Yoo (MODEL) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 1999 
Secretariat / Publisher 
North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES) 
c/o Institute of Ocean Sciences, P.O. Box 6000, Sidney, B.C., Canada.  V8L 4B2 
E-mail:  pices@ios.bc.ca   Home Page:  http://pices.ios.bc.ca
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 Page 
 
Executive Summary .................................................................................................................................... v 
 
MODEL Task Team Report ...................................................................................................................... 1 
 
MONITOR Task Team Report ............................................................................................................... 21 
 
REX Task Team Report........................................................................................................................... 57 
 
BASS Task Team Report ......................................................................................................................... 83 
 
CCCC / Executive Committee and Task Team List .............................................................................. 87 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
 
This volume summarizes the results of three workshops organized by the PICES-GLOBEC Climate 
Change and Carrying Capacity Program that were held just prior to the PICES Seventh Annual Meeting 
in Fairbanks, Alaska, in October 1998.  These workshops represent the efforts of the REX, MODEL, and 
MONITOR Task Teams to integrate the results of national GLOBEC and GLOBEC-like programs to 
arrive at a better understanding of the ways in which climate change affects North Pacific ecosystems.  
The BASS Task Team published the results of their Science Board Symposium 1997 in a refereed journal 
(Progress in Oceanography, 1999. 43:2-4).  The detailed reports and recommendations for the future work 
of each of the Task Teams from their last meeting in 1998 can be found in the PICES Annual Report 
1998, pages 129-138. 
 
The REX Workshop on "Small Pelagic Species and Climate Change" reviewed the status of national 
efforts on small pelagic fish and climate research.  The workshop participants presented research results 
from seven different regions around the North Pacific Rim, and identified key hypotheses that link 
climate variability and small pelagic fish response.  These hypotheses will be used in future cooperative 
research. 
 
A “Lower Trophic Level Model” Workshop was sponsored by the MODEL Task Team, in collaboration 
with researchers involved in the Joint Global Ocean Flux Study Program (JGOFS).  The goal of this 
workshop was to deal with model comparison issues related to the lower trophic level and to gather 
information for nutrient databases.  This activity provides a crucial link between the JGOFS synthesis and 
modeling efforts and the application of those results to GLOBEC research.  The Task Team is planning 
activities that relate to upper trophic level models.  However, the lower trophic level model efforts will 
remain a key activity in the near future.  Several recommendations about lower trophic level models were 
made at the workshop that will be followed up on in the next two years.  These include building a 
prototype model that will be executable on the web and holding another lower trophic level model 
workshop in the year 2000 for comparison of different marine ecosystems using the prototype model.   
 
The MONITOR Task Team is the most recently formed component of the CCCC Program.  They report 
here on the results of their first workshop, held to outline the present monitoring activities of PICES 
nations and to identify future monitoring needs and intercalibration experiments that might be conducted.  
The workshop resulted in several recommendations, particularly with regard to zooplankton monitoring 
efforts.  The focus of the Task Team's future work will likely be on intercalibration experiments to 
facilitate comparison of zooplankton time series, design of a monitoring system for zooplankton 
production, and discussion of Continuous Plankton Recorder (CPR) use in the PICES region.   
 
 
Although the BASS Task Team did not hold a workshop in 1998, it was occupied with review and 
publication of papers from their 1997 symposium.  The Task Team is now proposing to identify new 
BASS members to assist in the development of a long-term work plan for BASS.  They will also be 
holding a special workshop just prior to the PICES Eighth Annual Meeting in October 1999, in which 
they will develop a conceptual model of how the subarctic gyres work and how they change with regime 
shifts.  This workshop will provide a basis for future comparative work by the Task Team. 
 
 
 
Patricia Livingston 
Chairman, Science Board 
 1
MODEL TASK TEAM REPORT 
 
 
The MODEL Task Team is concerned with 
advancing the development of 
conceptual/theoretical and modeling studies 
needed for both regional and basin scale 
components of PICES/GLOBEC Climate 
Change and Carrying Capacity (CCCC) 
Program. 
 
The MODEL workshop in Nemuro, Japan in 
1996 was a step toward the goal of promoting 
MODEL activities, one of five "Key Research 
Activities" defined in the CCCC Implementation 
Plan.  Lower Trophic Level (LTL) modeling 
aims to understand how a change in physical 
forcing is translated into a change in the 
structure and productivity of lower trophic levels 
and subsequently moves through foodweb to 
higher trophic levels.  To make progress on this 
issue, it was recommended at the LTL modeling 
discussion in Nemuro to hold a workshop that 
focuses on model inter-comparison. 
One way to start to deal with diverse process 
formulation problem is to reduce the possible 
combinations for a particular structure. M. Kishi 
gave an example of such effort for NPZD model 
(Appendix A).  He examined the stability of 
different combinations of possible process 
formulations.  Among the 2,400 combinations, about 
half were unstable.  He also checked the sensitivity 
of the stability to the initial values.  Three types of 
combinations were found stable. 
 
Unfortunately, several participants were unable to 
attend the Fairbanks meeting on short notice so the 
workshop scope was reduced accordingly.   
 
Assembling an inventory of nutrient data in the 
North Pacific region was also identified as an 
immediate action item to advance the CCCC LTL 
modeling activities. 
 
 
 
 
I. WORKSHOP ON LOWER TROPHIC LEVEL MODELING 
OCTOBER 14, 1998 (Convenor: Sinjae Yoo) 
 
 
Review of JGOFS/GLOBEC modeling activities  
 
S. Yoo (KORDI) gave a brief summary of 
JGOFS 1995 modeling workshop report 
(JGOFS, 1997).  The workshop aimed to 
produce a systematic comparison of the diverse 
JGOFS models, comparing both how they were 
formulated and how well they reproduced 
observations.  Ten models with variable 
numbers of compartments (3 - 7) were planned 
to be run on four data sets to compare the model 
behavior with observations at different locations.  
Most of the runs succeeded only with the Station 
P data set.  Despite significant efforts before and 
after the workshop, no conclusions about the 
intercomparisons were drawn and there appeared 
to be no further advances after the workshop.  
Presumably, the 1995 JGOFS model workshop 
was too ambitious in addressing the comparison 
issue by compounding differences in structure, 
formulation, and data sets.  
 
R. Brown gave a summary of the recent JGOFS 
synthesis workshop with particular reference to data 
management.  The goals of CCCC models are 
somewhat different from those of JGOFS models in 
that not only the material flux but also the structure 
of the foodweb is among the target properties. 
 
R.C. Dugdale pointed out that JGOFS models lack 
silicate and iron and presented a model that 
incorporated these components. 
 
 2
M. Kishi briefly reviewed GLOBEC modeling 
activities.  A workshop on numerical modeling 
was held in 1993, where the model inter-
comparison was not included in the agenda.  
Since then, no subsequent workshops concerning 
modeling have been held.  Nevertheless, the draft 
implementation plan (GLOBEC, 1998) identifies 
model inter-comparison as an important issue. 
 
 
Group discussion on model intercomparison 
 
 
Model inter-comparison was identified as one of 
the major technical issues to be resolved.  Model 
inter-comparison issues arise from two main 
sources: different model structure and different 
submodel formulation.  Different model 
structures means that models have different 
numbers of state variables and the links between 
them.  For process models, there could be a 
variety of different formulations.  For example, a 
number of different formulations have been 
proposed for the light-photosynthesis 
relationship.  When the outputs from two 
different models are compared, a portion of the 
differences must be due to the differences in 
structure or formulation.  Therefore, it is of 
utmost importance to judge whether the crucial 
differences are not due to idiosyncrasies in 
model structure or process formulation.  When 
these two sources of variation are compounded, 
the judging would become even more difficult.  
Since comparison of the behavior of 12 different 
ecosystems is the core of the CCCC, models 
should have similar structures as long as they 
correctly represent the characteristics of each 
system.  There may not be a single consensus 
model but a small set of models can be 
consented upon.  The same can be said to 
process formulation.  Thus a prototype model could 
facilitate the development of comparison protocols. 
 
B. Megrey pointed out that well-established methods 
of model comparison exist for higher trophic levels, 
it seemed that this was not the case for lower trophic 
modeling.  Model structure and process formulations 
might be more diverse for lower trophic level than 
those of higher trophic level. For model inter-
comparison to be successful, compounding structural 
differences and formulation differences must be 
minimized.  If the variability of model structure and 
formulation could be reduced, systematic 
comparisons would be easier. 
 
The CCCC LTL models aim to model the change in 
the trophic structure as well as material flux.  In the 
Nemuro workshop, a model structure with twelve 
compartments was recommended to model such 
change.  For example, diatoms and non-diatoms 
should be separated to incorporate changes in 
trophodynamic linkages. 
 
A prototype model on which variations can be made 
will serve as a base where model inter-comparison 
protocols are developed.  M. Kashiwai suggested a 
follow-on workshop in that direction. 
 3
II. WORKSHOP ON SOURCES OF HIGH QUALITY NUTRIENT DATA 
FOR MODELING LOWER TROPHIC LEVELS 
OCTOBER 15, 1998 (Convenor: R.C. Dugdale) 
 
 
The objective was to provide information about nutrient databases suitable for initiating and validating 
ecosystem models as part of the LTL Modeling Workshop. The results are summarized in Table 1. 
 
 
Cruise level summary based on NODC holdings for the region of the open Pacific and adjacent 
Bering Sea.  
 
R.M. Brown 
Institute of Ocean Sciences, Sidney, Canada 
 
 
The cruise level data available for the North 
Pacific from the U.S. NODC was presented 
along with a discussion of quality control 
problems that culminated in retraction of a 
published article.  The U.S. NODC personnel 
are eager to receive help on the design of 
algorithms to detect bad data.  From the data 
represented geographically it was clear that a 
considerable amount of data known to the 
participants of the workshop was not present in the 
NODC archives.  These considerations demonstrated 
the importance of gathering information on the 
major programs carried out in the North Pacific and 
Bering Sea that measured nutrients. 
 
 
Ocean Station ‘P’ region   
 
C.S. Wong
1
 and P.J. Harrison
2 
1
Institute of Ocean Sciences, Sidney, Canada  
2
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada 
 
 
The extensive time series of nutrients obtained 
from 1970 onward at Station P during and after 
the weathership occupation will soon become 
available as a series of papers are published. 
Large variations in nitrate and silicate were 
observed and some appeared to be related to El 
Niño conditions.  A trend of increasing 
temperatures, decreasing salinities, decreasing 
nitrate and increased stability was also evident tha 
may be related to increased productivities that have 
been observed in recent years. The region of low 
nitrate concentration in summer has expanded 
westward in recent years and now includes Station 
P. 
 
 
Ships of opportunity (SOO) program 
 
C.S. Wong
1
 and Y. Nojiri
2
  
1
Institute of Ocean Sciences, Sidney, Canada  
2
National Institute for Environmental Studies, Tsukuba, Japan 
 
 4
This data comes from the container ship 
Skaugran that crosses between Japan and 
Vancouver, B.C ten times each year.  To date, 
the data comprise 43 crossings since 1995.  A 
new container ship program has been initiated 
between Japan and Australia.  The ship tracks 
vary depending upon weather and destinations, 
but generally move south of the great circle 
route in winter. The data show regions of 
undetectable nitrate along the west coasts of the U.S. 
and Canada with values of 5 mmol•m
-3
 just south of 
the Aleutians.  The data reside at IOS and are on a 
migration path to Data Center A of the U.S. NODC. 
SOO data were used to obtain temperature/nitrate 
regressions and maps of the surface distribution of 
nitrate obtained using these regressions and OCTS 
satellite temperature and color data were presented. 
 
 
Bering Sea-PROBES and ISHTAR 
 
T. Whitledge and J.J. Goering 
University of Alaska, Fairbanks, U.S.A. 
 
 
The major programs of the Bering Sea that 
contained nutrient data sets were reviewed.  
They include PROBES which occupied a cross 
shelf line in the southern Bering Sea 55 times in 
five years, providing an excellent seasonal view 
of nutrient and production processes in that area.  
Nutrient budgets are well constrained from 
annual measurements and uptake rate 
measurements.  The strongest data collection 
years were 1979, 1980 and 1981.  The ISHTAR 
program obtained data in the southern Bering 
Sea, often on about the same line occupied by 
PROBES, but extending also to the North 
Bering Sea and the South Chukchi Sea.  
ISHTAR data were obtained in 1986, 1987 and 
1988.  Nutrients, chlorophyll and zooplankton 
collections were obtained on every station in both 
PROBES and ISHTAR programs.  The PROBES 
data show very rapid spring blooms and reduction in 
nutrients but these clear patterns appear to have 
changed significantly in recent years.  The PROBES, 
ISHTAR data sets are particularly useful for 
modeling lower trophic levels since they include 
ammonium, one of the nutrients needed in a 3 
nutrient (nitrate, ammonium and silicate) model.  
The PROBES and ISHTAR data sets were migrated 
to U.S. NODC.  Beginning in 1997 a GLOBEC line 
has been established from Resurrection Bay 
southward into the Gulf of Alaska.  The full nutrient 
set including ammonium is being measured.
 
 
Japanese National Database 
 
T. Saino 
Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan 
 
A thorough review of the available data (See 
Table 1) collected by Japanese scientists, some 
of which is archived at JODC (Japan Ocean 
Data Center) was given. 
 5
Bering Sea-NOAA COP (Coastal Ocean Program) Bering Sea ecosystems program.  
 
B.A. Megrey 
Alaska Fisheries Science Center, Washington, U.S.A. 
 
 
The SEBSCC (South East Bering Sea Carrying 
Capacity) program of U.S. NOAA (National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Agency) COP 
collected nutrient and other data beginning in 
1995 from approximately the same location as 
the PROBES line providing a post-PROBES 
view of the southern Bering Sea.  Recently NSF 
sponsored studies of fronts have provided local, 
high density data.  The Bering Sea Ecosystem 
Biophysical Metadata Base project was reviewed.  
This system does not hold data. It is a catalog with 
pointers to locations where the data are available or 
held, and gives ways to access the SEBSCC and 
FOCI (Bering Sea Fisheries Oceanography 
Coordinated Investigations) data. Some nutrient data 
is included and the system may be a model for a 
smaller project on data sources for modelers, the 
objective of the workshop. 
 
 
 
Group Discussions on approaches to quality assessment and developing and assembling an 
iron database 
 
 
The nutrient workshop finished with group 
discussions that noted the need for reliable iron 
data since a strong link between iron, silicate 
and diatom productivity is now well established.  
However, iron data are extremely sparse and 
cannot, at the present time, be included 
explicitly into lower trophic level models.  The 
workshop also observed a good congruence between 
strong modeling programs in some of the 12 CCCC 
model regions and the availability of nutrient data 
likely to be of high quality. 
 
 
 
 
 
Workshop References 
 
JGOFS. 1997. Report 23: One-dimensional 
Models of Water Column Biogeochemistry. 
G.T. Evans, and V.C. Garcon [ed.] 85 p. 
GLOBEC. 1998. Draft Implementation Plan. 
PICES. 1997. Workshop on Conceptual/ 
Theoretical Studies and Model 
Development. R.I. Perry, S. Yoo, and M. 
Terazaki [eds.] PICES Scientific Report No. 
7, 93p. 
 
 6
Table 1 Available nutrient data and sources for the North Pacific. 
 
 
Data Source  Geographical 
Area 
Type of Data Contact 
    
U.S. NODC 
(World Ocean 
Database 1998) 
N. Pacific 26000 profiles since 
1929 
 
US NODC/IOS  Station P 
Line P 
 brownro@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
wongc@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
UBC (University of 
British Columbia) 
Station P 
Line P 
 pharrisn@unixg.ubc.ca 
US NODC/IMCS 
(Inst. Mar. Sci.) Univ 
Alaska 
Bering Sea  PROBES Program 
ISHTAR Program  
whitledge@ims.uaf.edu 
goering@ins.alaska.edu 
Bering Sea 
Biophysical 
Metadatabase Project 
 
Bering Sea Data Index bmegrey@afsc.noaa.gov 
macklin@pmel.noaa.gov 
SEBSCC (SE Bering 
Sea Carrying Capacity 
Program) and FOCI 
(Bering Sea Fisheries-
Oceanography 
Coordinated 
Investigations 
Bering Sea 5 cruise/year since 
1995 
napp@afsc.noaa.gov 
NOAA-COP (Coastal 
Ocean Program) 
Bering Sea  coastalocean@cop.noaa.gov 
GLOBEC Monitoring 
Project  
Ressurection Bay 
south to Gulf of 
Alaska,  
4 lines, 20 stas, 1997-
2001, 300 
samples/cruise 
whitledge@ims.uaf.edu 
Skaugran - Ship of 
Opportunity 
JEA (Japan Env. 
Agency)/IOS 
N. Pacific  
(Japan-
Vancouver) 
10 cruises/year 
43 crossings since 
1995 
wongc@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
Nojiri 
JODC (Japan Ocean 
Data Center) 
 
137 E line (35°N-
0°N) 
From 1964- 
4 cruise/yr, 5 regions 
tsaino@ihas.nagowya-u.ac.jp 
Japan Meteorol. 
Agency, JODC 
E line, 165°E 1996- tsaino@ihas.nagowya-u.ac.jp 
Japan Fish. 
Agency/JAFIC (Japan 
Fish Info Ctr), JODC 
Local fish stations  tsaino@ihas.nagowya-u.ac.jp 
 
 7
Table 1 (continued) Available nutrient data and sources for the North Pacific. 
 
 
Data Source  Geographical 
Area 
Type of Data Contact 
    
ORI (Ocean Research 
Inst.)/UT (U. Texas) 
Vessel Hakuho Maru 
48°N, 165°E 
Bering Sea 
1975 on 
5-6 cruises  
tsaino@ihas.nagowya-u.ac.jp 
Hokkaido University 
Vessels, Oshoro Maru 
and Hokusei Maru 
NW Pacific, 155 
line 
180 line, Bering 
Sea 
1950-- summer 
some nutrients 
tsaino@ihas.nagowya-u.ac.jp 
Hokkaido National 
Fish. Lab. 
Vessels, Hokko Maru 
and Tankai Maru 
Okhotsk Sea 
Line A (SE 
Hokkaido) 
1992-- seasonal tsaino@ihas.nagowya-u.ac.jp 
NOPACCS (North 
Pacific Carbon 
Cycling Study)/NIRE 
(National 
Inst.Resources and 
Environment) 
Vessels-Hakurei Maru 
I 
E line 175°E 
(48°N-10°S) 
1991-6,  
onboard nutrients 
tsaino@ihas.nagowya-u.ac.jp 
KNOT(Kyodo North 
Pacific Ocean Time 
Series) 
44°N, 155°E 1998 tsaino@ihas.nagowya-u.ac.jp 
JAMSTEC (Japan 
Marine 
Sci.Technology 
Center), Vessel Mirai 
NNWP some 
Artcic, include 
Bering Sea 
1997 tsaino@ihas.nagowya-u.ac.jp 
MasFLEX E. China Sea 1994-96  
on CD Rom 
tsaino@ihas.nagowya-u.ac.jp 
NIRE COSMIC 
(Carbon Dioxide 
Ocean Sequestration 
for Mitigation of 
Climate Change) 
Vessel Hakurei -Maru 
II 
5-10°N, 130, 135 
140,155,165, 
175°E 
1997-2001 tsaino@ihas.nagowya-u.ac.jp 
 
 8
Task Team Recommendations 
 
The participants agreed that (i) models with too 
diverse structures might be difficult to compare, 
and (ii) comparison protocols are necessary to 
tackle the problem. 
 
Long-term 
Development of prototype models and 
comparison protocols. 
 
Short-term 
To achieve advances toward long term 
objectives, following activities were 
recommended: 
1. Develop an executable prototype model with 12 
compartments (1996 Nemuro Workshop) on 
web by June, 1999 (Dr. Kishi). 
2. Apply the model to more than two sites, 
including Bering Sea and Sanriku area and 
compare with the Bering Sea ecosystem model. 
3. Expand MODEL web page to include more 
regional circulation models. 
4. Add nutrient database directory to the PICES 
home page. 
5. Facilitate interactions with JGOFS/GLOBEC 
modeling activities. 
6. Convene a workshop on the development of 
prototype model and comparison protocols as 
follows (See Appendix B). 
 
 
 
APPENDIX A:  STABILITY ANALYSIS OF DIFFERENT PROCESS 
FORMULATIONS (MICHIO J. KISHI) 
 
 
Introduction  
During the 6
th
 Annual Meeting in Pusan, our 
Task Team discussed the stability of lower 
trophic ecosystem models.  It was my task to 
evaluate the stability of some ecosystem models 
before the 7
th
 Annual Meeting.  There are many 
kinds of lower trophic ecosystem models which 
have been applied to open ocean ecosystems.  If 
we limit them to Pacific ecosystems, still many 
models have been applied to the Ocean Station 
Papa and HOTS time series data and so on 
(Evans and Garcon 1997, Glover et al. 1994, 
Kawamiya et al. 1995, 1997, Kawamiya et al. 
1999 a, b, Yoshimori et al. 1995). 
 
Here the most simple and common NPZD model 
(Fig. A1) is treated.  Even for this simple model, 
there have been proposed many kinds of 
equations which describe the material flows 
among compartments.  In Figure A1, the 
different kinds of equations are shown beside 
the arrows, and all equations and their references 
are shown in Table A1. 
 
If all equations are combined, there are 2400 
combinations (5*3*1*8*...).  So, I calculated  
 
 
Fig. A1 Tested ecosystem model. Kinds of equations 
which were referred here are shown beside the 
arrows. 
 
the time dependent features of four compartments 
with all combinations by fourth order Runge-Kutta 
method under the following four conditions.  (1) 
Using normalized parameters i.e. parameters are 
selected such that all processes are ≤1.0, (2) giving 
daily oscillations of light intensity to case (1), (3) 
using real parameter values from each referenced 
paper, (4) giving daily light oscillation to case (3).  
After calculations are carried out for 300 days for 
 9
each combination, the stability of the solutions is 
examined.  Stable refers to a case where there is 
no oscillation without a daily oscillation 
corresponding to the light change, and unstable 
is a case where there is an oscillation in the 
solution and/or a divergence. 
 
Results 
Percentage of stable cases - In Figures A2-A5, 
the percentage of stable cases and unstable cases 
are shown.  Solutions of almost half of the 
combinations of process equations are unstable.  
For example, in the table under Figure 2A the 
row of A-1 shows that if we use A-1 for light 
limitation, there are 6 cases in which the solution 
diverges, 255 cases in which the solution shows 
unstable oscillations, and 517 cases stable 
solutions with all combinations except light 
limitation. 
 
Stability to initial conditions of 4 compartments 
In order to investigate the stability due to initial 
conditions, the initial values were changed to 
0.5, 0.8, 1.2, 1.5 times the standard case.  The 
stable cases are shown in Table A2.  We 
selected the most stable of these (Fig. A6-A8) 
named Patterns P1, P2a and P2b together with 
their equivalent equations.  I suggest that these 
three stable combinations be used for the NPZD 
model. 
 
Acknowledgement 
I would like to thank my student, Nobuyuki 
Imamura for his help of calculations and 
preparation of figures. 
 
 
 
References 
Evans, G.T., and V.C. Garcon [ed.]  1997.  One-
dimensional models of water column 
biochemistry. Report of workshop held in 
Toulouse, France, 1995. JGOFS Report. 
Glover, D.V., J.S. Wroblewski and C.R. McClain.  
1994.  Dynamics of the transition zone in coastal 
zone color scanner - sensed ocean color in the 
North Pacific during oceanographic spring. 
Journal of Geophysical Research, 99, c4, 7501-
7511. 
Kawamiya, M., M.J. Kishi, Y. Yamanaka and S. 
Suginohara.  1995.  An ecological-physical 
coupled model applied to station Papa. Journal 
of Oceanography, 51, 635-664. 
Kawamiya, M., M.J. Kishi, Y. Yamanaka and S. 
Suginohara.  1997.  Obtaining reasonable results 
in different oceanic regimes with the same 
ecological-physical coupled model. Journal of 
Oceanography, 53, 397-402. 
Kawamiya, M., M.J. Kishi and S. Suginohara.  
1999a.  An ecosystem-physical combined model 
for the North Pacific. Part I: Model Description 
and the Characteristics of the spatial 
distributions of biological variables. submitted 
to Journal of Marine Systems. 
Kawamiya, M., M.J. Kishi and S. Suginohara.  
1999b.  An ecosystem-physical combined model 
for the North Pacific. Part II: Mechanisms of the 
seasonal variation of chlorophyll. submitted to 
Journal of Marine Systems. 
Yoshimori, A., J. Ishizaka, T. Kono, H. Kasai, H. 
Saito, M.J. Kishi and S. Taguchi.  1995.  
Modelling of spring bloom in the western 
subarctic Pacific (off Japan) with observed 
vertical density structure. Journal of 
Oceanography, 51, 471-488. 
 
 
 10
 
 
Fig. A2 Percentage of stable and unstable results for Case 1. Value=0 means stable but P=Z=D=0 and 
N=NT, and value<>0 means all of NPZD have non-zero stable solutions. See text for 
description of the table. 
 11
 
 
Fig. A3 Same as in Figure A2, except for Case 2. 
 12
 
Fig. A4 Same as in Figure A2, except for Case 3. 
 13
 
Fig. A5 Same as in Figure A2, except for Case 4. 
 14
 
Fig. A6 Most stable combination pattern P1. 
 
 
Fig. A7  Most stable combination pattern P2a. 
 15
 
 
Fig. A8 Most stable combination pattern P2b. 
 16
Table A1 Parameters and biological equations. 
 
 
 17
Table A1 (continued) Parameters and biological equations. 
 
 
 18
Table A2 Combinations which are considered to be the most stable. 
 
 
 19
APPENDIX B. MODEL WORKSHOP 1999:  INTERNATIONAL 
WORKSHOP ON PROTOTYPE OF LOWER TROPHIC LEVEL 
ECOSYSTEM MODEL FOR COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT MARINE 
ECOSYSTEMS IN THE NORTH PACIFIC 
 
 
Title   CCCC Workshop on Lower Trophic Level Modeling 
Date   January 24 - 27, 2000 
Place   Nemuro Cultural Center, Nemuro, Hokkaido, Japan 
Convenors  Michio Kishi, Dan Ware, and Makoto Kashiwai 
Steering Committee S. Yoo, M. Kishi, D. Ware, M. Kashiwai, B. Megrey, D. Dugdale, J. Napp 
(to be confirmed or modified based on Workshop program) 
 
 
Objectives 
1. to develop lower trophic level models with 
common structure for study areas of CCCC 
program, by applying prototype model 
developed by M. Kishi; 
2. to compare dynamics of lower trophic level 
models for study areas of CCCC program; 
3. to identify necessary data for validation and 
comparative studies; 
4. to develop strategy how to apply lower 
trophic level model to GCMs; and 
5. to develop strategy how to connect lower 
trophic level model to higher trophic level 
models. 
 
Tentative Schedule 
1st day:  Jobs on Objective 1) by modelers of 
component programs 
2nd day:  Jobs on Objective 2) by modelers of 
component programs; 
3rd day: Presentation on results of Jobs on 
Objectives 1), 2) and 3);  
4th day: Presentation and discussion of 
objectives 4) and 5). 
 
Reports 
1. Workshop Report in PICES Scientific 
Report Series 
2. Scientific papers to be submitted to Fisheries 
Oceanography or to another Journal 
proposed by Publication Committee. 
 
Invitation list 
(to be identified) 
1. modelers to work on objectives 1, 2, and 3 
from day 1 to day 4 
2. scientists to work on objectives 3, 4 and 5 
from day 3 to day 4. 
 
Public Lecture 
Programs to be decided by Nemuro Supporting 
Committee.
 
 
 21
MONITOR TASK TEAM REPORT 
 
 
The MONITOR Task Team was formed in 1998 
and held its first meeting from Oct. 16-17, 1998, 
immediately prior to the PICES Seventh Annual 
Meeting in Fairbanks, Alaska. 
 
 
The format of the meeting was a workshop (Co-
convenors:  Drs. Yasunori Sakurai and Bruce A. 
Taft) on the design of a monitoring system for 
PICES.  The first day was devoted to presentations 
by Task Team members and invited speakers.  The 
speakers were asked to review present and planned 
long-term monitoring programs in the North 
Pacific that contribute to the attainment of the 
goals of PICES, and to suggest ways to improve 
the state of monitoring.  The papers would be used 
to focus future discussions of how to design a 
more effective monitoring system. 
 
A discussion of issues raised in the papers took 
place the on second day and a set of 
recommendations was drafted for forwarding to 
the CCCC Implementation Panel. 
 
This report summarizes presentations given at the 
meeting and the proposed future activities. It is 
organized into 4 sections: (I) Introduction, (II) 
Components of Monitoring System, (III) 
International Planning for Ocean Climate 
Monitoring, and (IV) Task Team 
Recommendations.  Appendix A contains a plan 
for using the Hardy Continuous Plankton Recorder 
to monitor zooplankton in the subarctic Pacific.  
The scientific proposal “A Continuous Plankton 
Recorder Monitoring Program” has been 
submitted recently to the North Pacific Marine 
Initiative and funded for a period of two years. 
 
 
 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
 
 
CCCC Expectations of the Workshop 
 
Patricia Livingston 
Alaska Fisheries Science Center, Seattle, U.S.A. 
 
 
The intent of this first workshop of the MONITOR 
Task Team of the PICES/GLOBEC Climate 
Change and Carrying Capacity Program (CCCC) 
is to review existing monitoring activities of 
PICES member nations and to suggest 
improvements in the monitoring of the subarctic 
Pacific to further understanding of the effects of 
climate variations on the subarctic marine 
ecosystem. 
 
The first day is devoted to a series of lectures on 
various aspects of monitoring.  On the second day 
discussions will be held, both in small break-out 
groups and in plenary session, to determine 
important gaps in existing monitoring activities 
and provide suggestions for improvement.  A set 
of workshop recommendations will be prepared 
and forwarded to the CCCC Implementation 
Panel. 
 
The following terms of reference for the 
MONITOR Task Team were the guiding force in 
designing the format of the workshop and should 
likewise guide the discussions and types of 
recommendations that will be made. 
 
1. Review existing activities of PICES member 
nations and to suggest improvements in the 
monitoring of the subarctic Pacific to further 
the goals of the CCCC Program. 
 22
2. Consult with REX, BASS and MODEL Task 
Teams and TCODE on the scientific basis for 
designing the PICES monitoring system. 
Questions of standardization and 
intercalibration of measurements, particularly 
in the area of biological collections, should be 
addressed. 
 
3. Assist in the development of a coordinated 
monitoring program to detect and describe 
events, such as El Niño, that strongly affect 
the subarctic Pacific. 
 
4. Report to CCCC IP/EC on the monitoring in 
the subarctic Pacific to be implemented in the 
international Global Ocean Observing System 
(GOOS) or other related activities. 
 
The overarching goal of the CCCC Program is to 
integrate and stimulate national activities on the 
effects of climate variations on the marine 
ecosystems of the subarctic Pacific through a 
coordinated implementation plan and oversight of 
the plan.  It is thus important to hear from the 
national representatives about the status of 
monitoring various ecosystem components in their 
region and, in particular, the status of monitoring 
in national GLOBEC programs.  We also hope to 
coordinate our activities with other international 
efforts such as the Joint Global Ocean Flux Study 
Program (JGOFS) and the Global Ocean 
Observing System (GOOS), so we have provided 
time on the agenda to hear from representatives of 
those organizations. 
 
An overview of the CCCC Program and the 
present activities of the other Task Teams was 
provided.  This overview gave workshop 
participants and the MONITOR Task Team 
representatives a more complete understanding of 
the role of monitoring in the science and 
implementation plans of the CCCC Program and 
also provided guidance on the kinds of activities 
that the Task Team could undertake. 
 
 
 
Monitoring Planning in PICES 
 
Bruce A. Taft 
MONITOR Task Team Co-Chairman, U.S.A. 
 
 
General aspects of ocean monitoring 
A monitoring system is a systematic (regular) set 
of measurements collected over a period of time 
long enough to encompass several representations 
of the phenomena of interest.  Because climate 
variability typically has long time-scales (for 
example N. Pacific regime shifts) the climate time 
series need to be long (several decades).  Because 
the background high-frequency variability is often 
of large amplitude, the density of measurements 
must be adequate to resolve the time scales of the 
significant background variability so that it can be 
averaged out.  The same considerations apply to 
the space scales.  Often the background variability 
is unknown and must be estimated by initially 
over-sampling and then choosing an adequate 
sampling scheme.  Ultimately the final design 
must lead to reliable estimation of the climate 
signals. 
 
There are two main approaches to designing 
monitoring schemes.  If data have been collected 
and analyzed, there may be an hypothesis that has 
been proposed and needs to be tested.  In this case 
the design is guided by the nature of the 
hypothesis.  An example of an hypothesis-testing 
monitoring scheme, which is highly relevant to 
PICES, is found in the proposal of Gargett (1997) 
that there is a link between size of the eastern 
North Pacific salmon stocks and the strength of the 
Aleutian Low.  The link proposed by Gargett is 
the variation of the hydrostatic stability in the 
coastal ocean.  The basic monitoring scheme 
would involve CTD sections across the coastal 
regime at several latitudes over several decades. 
 23
The other approach applies in cases where the 
ocean variability needs to be described before 
hypotheses can be developed.  The collection of 
basic time-series data will lead to insights into the 
structure of the system and the formulation of 
hypotheses on the dynamics of the system.  The 
preliminary monitoring data set will guide the 
design of future hypothesis-testing monitoring 
schemes. 
 
Previous discussions of monitoring in PICES 
a. PICES-STA Workshop on Monitoring 
Subarctic Pacific Variability - In October 
1994, a two-day workshop on monitoring was 
held in conjunction with the PICES Third 
Annual Meeting in Nemuro, Japan.  The 
results (six papers) of the workshop were 
published (in 1995) as PICES Scientific 
Report No. 3.  The papers covered physical 
conditions (temperature, salinity, currents, ice 
cover) and lower trophic level variability in 
the subarctic Pacific.  The emphasis was on 
the status of knowledge of the region but a few 
suggestions were made on the need for 
improved monitoring of certain parameters.  
The paper by Riser (1995) was particularly 
noteworthy because it treated in depth the 
statistical principles of design of monitoring 
arrays. 
 
b. PICES Working Group 9 on Subarctic Pacific 
Monitoring - Working Group 9 held three 
meetings (1995, 1996, 1997).  These 
discussions led to the recommendation of three 
new initiatives and the enhancement of two 
existing programs. 
 
 New initiatives 
 
1. Ecological moorings.  A high priority is the 
determination of response of primary and 
secondary production to atmospheric forcing 
and physical and chemical water-column 
structure in subarctic gyres.  Understanding 
the relationship between forcing and response 
requires well-resolved time series of the 
physical, chemical and biological variables.  
Neither occasional shipboard (subject to 
aliasing) or satellite (infrequent surface data) 
measurements provide a sufficient data base to 
clarify the relationships.  Technological 
developments suggest that ecosystem 
moorings can be used to obtain the needed 
data set.  Many of the required sensors exist 
and others are under development that could 
be mounted on a moored buoy.  As a start 
moorings should be deployed near the centers 
of the eastern (near Station P) and western 
(east of Kamchatka Peninsula) subarctic gyres. 
 
2. East Kamchatka Current transport cable 
measurement.  The general circulation of the 
subarctic Pacific is thought to consist of two 
clearly separated cyclonic gyres with the 
Alaskan Stream flowing westward south of the 
Aleutians.  Flow into the Bering Sea occurs 
through a series of passages in the Aleutian 
Arc.  The primary Bering Sea outflow occurs 
through the Kamchatka Strait (East 
Kamchatka Current) and is the source of water 
in the Oyashio Current.  Variations of 
transport of Pacific water into the Bering Sea 
can be monitored by measuring East 
Kamchatka Current transport flucuations.  
Long-term measurements of East Kamchatka 
Current transport can be economically 
measured by means of an undersea cable laid 
across the Kamchatka Strait. 
 
3. CTD measurements along eastern boundary.  
Gargett (1997) has proposed that survival of 
young salmon may be related to changes in the 
stability (vertical mixing) of eastern subarctic 
boundary coastal water.  These changes may 
be related to atmospheric forcing (movement 
and strength of the Aleutian Low).  A 
coordinated series of long-term CTD sections 
should be initiated to measure the stability of 
the coastal regime.  Some elements of the 
needed measurements already exist. 
 
 Enhancement of existing programs 
 
1. Surface measurements from VOS.  At present 
there is a joint Japan-Canada ship-of-
opportunity program in the North Pacific 
measuring surface values of temperature, 
salinity, pCO
2
, pH, Chl a, NO
3
, SiO
4
, and total 
 24
CO
2
.  These valuable zonal measurements 
should be extended to include north-south 
sections as well as selected subsurface 
measurements (XBT and XCTD) along the 
tracks. 
 
2. Heat and freshwater content.  XBT coverage 
of the subarctic Pacific has dropped by 50% 
over the last five years.  Sampling of the 
region is below the density required to map 
the thermal field, and should be enhanced.  
Appropriate new techniques, such as the 
PALACE float, should be employed as soon 
as possible to provide adequate coverage of 
temperature as well as provide badly-needed 
salinity measurements. 
 
References 
Gargett, A.E.  1997.  The optimum stability 
'window': a mechanism underlying decadal 
flucuations in North Pacific salmon stocks.  
Fish. Oceanogr. 6(2): 109-117. 
Riser, S.C.  1995.  Space and time scales of 
variability in the subarctic N. Pacific: 
implications to monitoring the system. PICES 
Scientific Report No. 3, 41-65. 
 
 
 
II. COMPONENTS OF MONITORING SYSTEM 
 
 
Physical Oceanography Monitoring Systems 
 
Phyllis J. Stabeno 
Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory, NOAA, U.S.A. 
 
 
Ocean monitoring of the physical forcing falls into 
four categories:  (1) satellite measurements;  (2) 
shipboard measurements;  (3) Lagrangian 
(drifting) measurements;  and (4) Eulerian 
(moored) measurements. 
 
Satellite measurements 
Satellites provide a variety of surface variables 
including sea-surface temperature, ocean color and 
sea-surface height.  Data is collected along track 
lines of the satellite and provides information on 
the horizontal variability of a variety of 
parameters.  Satellite data are invaluable in placing 
data collected from ships or moorings in a large-
scale context, although direct observations are 
necessary for calibration.  For satellite data to be 
used as a monitoring tool, it is necessary that it be 
carefully archived and stored for future use.  
Historically, this has not always been done and 
significant portions of older data have been lost. 
 
 
 
Shipboard measurements 
Oceanographic research vessels provide both a 
platform for deployment of moorings and 
measurement of many physical parameters 
(temperature, salinity, currents, atmospheric 
variables).  In addition, ships-of-opportunity have 
been used extensively to measure both 
atmospheric and oceanic variables.  The number of 
long-term monitoring locations or lines in the 
Northeast Pacific and Bering Sea is limited.  The 
most intensely measured location is Ocean Station 
Papa, where measurements of a variety of ocean 
and atmospheric variables have been made 
regularly over the last 40+ years.  There are also a 
number of locations where conductivity-
temperature-salinity (CTD) sections have been 
repeated more sporadically.  The longest record 
(>20 years) is at GAK-1 maintained by the 
University of Alaska off Seward, Alaska.  In 
addition a line of seven CTD stations has been 
repeated about three times a year between Kodiak 
Island and the Seward Peninsula for the last 15 
years.  Data have been collected in the Bering 
Strait sporadically over the last two decades.  
 25
These data provide information on transport, water 
properties (particularly changes in temperature and 
salinity) and atmospheric variables.  While 
acoustic Doppler current profilers (ADCP) have 
been mounted on ships for more than 20 years, 
regular processing of this data has not been 
common.  To obtain currents from the shipboard 
ADCP requires removal of ship motion which 
requires careful processing.  Changes in heading 
cause oscillations in the compass heading that 
impair ability to measure currents.  In addition, 
success has been limited in removing tidal currents 
from the records to look at low-frequency flow, 
especially in regions where the tidal currents are 
strong and the low-frequency currents are weak. 
 
Lagrangian measurements 
Most Lagrangian measurements are done via 
satellite-tracked drifters.  These instruments are 
easily deployed from ships or even from aircraft.  
They consist of a surface float with transmitter that 
communicates its location to a satellite or a 
receiver aboard a ship or on land.  There is a long 
tether beneath the buoy with a large drogue 
attached at its termination.  The drag upon the 
drogue should be sufficient so that the drifter 
follows the current at drogue depth.  The most 
common drogue design at the moment is a "holey 
sock".  There is considerable stress put on the 
tether connecting the drogue to the surface float 
and the tether often fails.  Most drifters test for this 
and indicate drogue loss in the data stream.  
Presently, there are drifters designed to measure a 
variety of variables including temperature, 
salinity, and chlorophyll a in addition to providing 
drifter position.  Large numbers of drifters have 
been deployed in the North Pacific and Bering Sea 
to measure open-ocean currents and cross-shelf 
flows.  New technology in the form of PALACE 
floats is promising.  These floats are designed to 
operate in a mode that differs from surface drifters.  
After deployment they sink to a depth of 800-1500 
m where they remain for a week or longer.  They 
then rise to the surface, measuring temperature and 
conductivity (salinity).  At the surface they 
transmit, via ARGOS, their location and the 
temperature and conductivity measured on ascent.  
They then sink to begin the cycle again.  These 
instruments have been deployed extensively in the 
Atlantic and to a lesser degree in the North Pacific.  
The conductivity cells on the earlier instruments 
fouled, but newly designed floats have not had this 
problem and appear to measure temperature and 
conductivity reliably.  There are plans to deploy a 
large number of PALACE floats in the world 
ocean, and the data then will be assimilated into 
models.  These are the type of measurements that 
traditionally have required a ship or a mooring;  
the ability to do so with floats will markedly 
change monitoring techniques.  A drawback for all 
types of Lagrangian measurements is that it is very 
difficult to calibrate the instrument performance 
after deployment. 
 
Moored measurements 
Moorings have played an important role in 
understanding ocean dynamics.  While a single 
mooring can provide information on temporal 
variability at a given site, several moorings 
together are needed to differentiate between spatial 
and temporal variability.  The most extensive 
mooring array today is in the equatorial Pacific 
(TOGA-TAO).  More than 70 moorings have been 
deployed and provide data that have led to the 
diagnosis of the dynamics of ENSO.  Current 
meters and thermistors are the most common 
instruments deployed on moorings.  Modern 
current meters often use acoustics to measure 
currents over a depth range (Acoustic Doppler 
profilers).  Currents can typically be resolved to 2 
cm/s and 5 degrees in direction.  A wide range of 
temperature recorders are available that provide 
high quality data. 
 
Salinity continues to be a problem, especially in 
regions of high biological activity.  Conductivity 
cells in such regions often foul within a month of 
deployment.  Calibration by visiting ships in 
regions of high biological activity is very useful in 
resolving drift.  Surface moorings typically 
measure a variety of atmospheric variables 
including wind, solar radiation, rainfall and 
barometric pressure.  A major problem that 
continues to plague wind measurements in heavy 
seas is that the surface buoy spends a significant 
time in the troughs and so that the wind speed is 
underestimated.  Ocean technology has now 
advanced to the point where many measurements 
 26
can be made remotely.  This technology will 
continue to develop and provide scientists with 
needed tools to resolve a variety of oceanographic 
measurement needs. 
 
 
 
Pacific CO
2
 Monitoring 
 
C.S. Wong 
Institute of Ocean Sciences, Sidney, Canada 
 
 
Pacific CO
2
 monitoring activities are being carried 
out mainly in the North Pacific Ocean.  The time-
series approaches are:  (1) ship-of-opportunity;  
(2) time-series stations and sections; and (3) bio-
optics moorings.  The cruise tracks (1) are shown 
in Fig. 1 and the locations of (2) and (3) are shown 
in Fig. 2. 
 
 
Fig. 9 Cruise tracks of the ship-of-opportunity, 
M/V Skaugran, from March 1995 to April 1997. 
 
Ship-of-opportunity 
A ship-of-opportunity program is being conducted 
as a bilateral cooperation between Canada's 
Climate Chemistry Laboratory at the Institute of 
Ocean Sciences (IOS) and Japan's Global 
Warming Mechanism Laboratory of the National 
Institute of Environmental Studies (NIES).  The 
program was started in March 1995, using the 
lumber/cargo carrier M/V Skaugran running 
between Vancouver, B.C., Canada, and ports near 
Tokyo, Japan.  The objective is to monitor the CO
2
 
parameters in the surface ocean and physical, 
chemical and biological parameters necessary to 
describe the seasonal and interannual changes.  
Continuous measurements, conducted by NIES 
personnel on board, include (a) surface seawater 
pCO
2
, i.e. partial pressure of CO
2
 in seawater, (b) 
atmospheric pCO
2
, (c) sea-surface temperature 
(SST), (d) conductivity from a CTD and (e) 
fluorescence.  The sea-water sampling program is 
being conducted by the Climate Chemistry 
Laboratory at IOS.  Seawater samples are 
collected three times a day from a seawater loop 
for measurement of (f) DIC, dissolved inorganic 
carbon, (g) chlorophyll a, (h) TA, total alkalinity, 
(i) dissolved nitrate, phosphate and silicate and (j) 
salinity. 
 
The west-bound routes from Vancouver always 
follow the great-circle route and are quite 
consistent over the year whereas the east-bound 
routes from Tokyo shift south in winter to avoid 
storms, or to transport cars from Japan and Korea 
to California and Oregon.  This ship-of-
opportunity program produces important data sets 
for the description of seasonal and interannual 
changes of CO
2
, nutrients and pigments (Chl a), as 
well as other oceanographic properties in the 
subarctic waters of the Alaskan Gyre, Central 
Bering Sea, east of of the Kamchatka Peninsula 
and coastal region off the Kuril Islands.  Other 
products are seasonal maps between 35ºN and 
55ºN for the above parameters. 
 
Time-series stations 
Ocean Station P started as a weathership program, 
occupied in the beginning by naval ships (1956-
1967), with the emphasis on physical 
measurements, then by weatherships (1967-1981), 
with the addition of chemical measurements 
(nutrients, Chl a and atmospheric CO
2
 and surface 
water pCO
2
).  Since the termination of the 
 27
weathership program, Station P has been occupied 
six times a year, now decreasing to three times a 
year, with short periods (3 days) on station.  In 
recent years since 1990, full oceanographic 
profiles were obtained for DIC, TA, 
13
C, nutrients 
and freons, so that penetration of anthropogenic 
CO
2
 into the interior of the subarctic Pacific can be 
assessed. 
 
M
 
Fig. 10 Long-term monitoring stations and 
sections and bio-optics moorings superimposed on 
the general circulation in the North Pacific Ocean. 
 
Japan initiated another subarctic time-series 
station, Station KNOT (Kyodo North Pacific 
Ocean Time-Series), in June 1998, at 44°N, 155°E 
as a joint effort of Japanese national institutes and 
universities, coordinated by Dr. Y. Nojiri of NIES.  
Research ships from institutions will visit KNOT 
during survey cruises in the western North Pacific.  
The core measurements include underway pCO
2
 
measurements of air and surface seawater, DIC, 
TA, nutrients, pH, pigments and productivity. 
 
The U.S.A. initiated a subtropical time-series 
station, ALOHA (22°45'N, 158°00'W) in October 
1988 as the open ocean time-series station HOTS 
(Hawaii Ocean Time Series).  The emphases of 
HOTS are on the seasonal and interannual 
variability in the rate of primary and new 
production and particle export from the upper 
ocean, nutrient input and recycling, and the time-
varying concentrations of CO
2
 in the upper water 
column and the estimation of annual air-sea gas 
flux.  CO
2
 parameters DIC, TA and pH were 
measured in the water column (0-4800 m) on 
cruises at approximately monthly intervals. 
 
Bio-optics moorings and sediment traps 
Bio-optics moorings have been initiated or 
planned at several sites in the North Pacific:  
Station P; KNOT; and Monterey Bay (coastal).  
Sensors mounted on weather buoys provide 
continuous measurements of pCO
2
, SST, air 
temperature, PAR, fluorescence and nitrate. 
 
Sediment traps moored in the deep ocean is a way 
to assess the amount of CO
2
 in the upper ocean 
being removed by biological processes.  Long 
time-series have been established at Station P 
(since 1982) at 3,800 m, and Station ALOHA at 
5,000 m (since 1992).  At KNOT, sediment traps 
at 1,000, 3,000 and 5,000 m were deployed by the 
Japan Marine Science and Technolocogy Center 
(JAMSTEC) in November 1997.  Moored traps are 
powerful tools to assess the biogenic fluxes of C, 
N, Si and CaCO
3
 raining down into the deep ocean 
and provide a record of climate events, such as the 
El Niño, on CO
2
 uptake. 
 
Calibration of CO
2
 measurements 
The measurements of DIC and TA are all traceable 
to the reference seawater from the calibration 
laboratory at the Scripps Institution of 
Oceanography (Andrew Dickson), maintained as 
part of JGOFS’ effort to ensure compatibility of 
data for the Global CO
2
 Survey on WOCE cruises.  
The atmospheric CO
2
 measurements are traceable 
to the WMO primary standard calibrated to the 
global scale determined by manometer at the CO
2
 
laboratory at the Scripps Institution of 
Oceanography (Charles Keeling). 
 
CO
2
 and carbon flux monitoring in the North 
Pacific is being developed as a national and 
international effort, under the guidance of the 
JGOFS North Pacific Task Team (NPTT) and 
PICES.  These activities will form the important 
building blocks for LMR-GOOS in the future. 
 
 
 28
Phytoplankton Monitoring in the Western Subarctic North Pacific - Present Status and 
Recommendations 
 
Kazuaki Tadokoro
1
 and Kaoru Nakata
2
 
1
 National Research Institute of Far Seas Fisheries, Shimizu, Japan 
2
 National Research Institute of Fisheries Sciences, Yokohama, Japan 
 
 
Phytoplankton monitoring is essential to clarify 
the effects of climate change on the marine 
ecosystem because phytoplankton is the main 
primary producer in the system.  In the eastern 
subarctic Pacific, plankton monitoring at Station P 
and Line P began in 1956.  This data set, including 
phytoplankton biomass, is one of the few time 
series which is of sufficient quality and length that 
it is suitable for study of low-frequency variability 
in the ocean.  There are no time series in the 
western Pacific of comparable length.  In this 
study, we describe the present status of 
phytoplankton monitoring in the western subarctic 
North Pacific and consider aspects of the design of 
a program to measure subarctic phytoplankton 
variability on climate-change time scales. 
 
Present status of phytoplankton monitoring in 
the subarctic western North Pacific 
Chlorophyll-a concentration, an index of 
phytoplankton biomass, has been measured in the 
open ocean since the fluorometric method 
(Yentsch and Menzel, 1963) was introduced.  In 
the subarctic western North Pacific, Japan  
Meteorological Agency (JMA) started 
phytoplankton monitoring in 1972 at stations 
along PH Line (41°30 N, 142-147°E).  Since 1972 
JMA has conducted four monitoring cruises per 
year along the line; the data collected include 
vertical distribution of chlorophyll-a and cell 
abundance of the key phytoplankton species 
specific to the water masses of the region.  Japan 
Ocean Data Center (JODC) has archived these 
data and members of institutes contributing data to 
JODC can download these data sets from the 
JODC web site. 
 
Hokkaido University established three transects in 
the central North Pacific in 1979; along 180ºE 
(between 35°N and 50°N), and 175°E and 155°E 
(between 38°N and 50°N).  Chlorophyll a data 
have been collected in summer, using the two 
training ships Oshoro Maru and Hokusei Maru.  
These data were published in the Data Record of 
Oceanographic Observations and Exploratory 
Fishing (No. 23-41).   
 
In the 1990s, the Japanese Fisheries Agency 
started phytoplankton monitoring in the subarctic 
North Pacific.  The National Institute of Far Seas 
Fisheries has been accumulating summer surface 
chlorophyll a data at two transects: along 
175°30'W between 38°30'N and 58°30'N (21 
stations) and 155°E between 41°N and 51°N (11 
stations).  The Hokkaido National Research 
Institute of Fisheries occupied the A-line between 
43°N, 145°E and 39°N, 147°E in 1990, and they 
have conducted 7 cruises per year to investigate 
changes in hydrography and plankton in the 
Oyashio Current in relation to climate change.  On 
these cruises transparency, total and size 
fractionated chlorophyll a and profiling 
reflectance radiometer measurements of spectral 
distributions of upward and downward irradiance 
have been measured routinely. 
 
Aspects of the design of a program to measure 
subarctic phytoplankton variability 
According to Furuya and Marumo (1983), the 
biomass level of smaller size phytoplankton 
(smaller than 8 micrometer) is relatively uniform, 
about 10 mgC m
-3
, in the Pacific Ocean.  In 
contrast, the biomass of the larger size 
phytoplankton is highly variable and therefore 
most of the changes in the biomass of 
phytoplankton are due to variations of larger 
species.  There are differences in the physiological 
response to light, nutrients, temperature and 
fundamental factors between the nano- and the 
micro-phytoplantkon which influence primary 
productivity.  For example, the light and nutrient 
levels at which growth rates of larger size 
 29
phytoplankton saturate are higher than those for 
nano- and micro-flagellates (Parsons and 
Takahashi, 1973).  A high growth rate of diatoms 
can be found at relatively low temperatures, but 
growth rates of nano-flagellates are often 
positively related with temperature (Malone and 
Neale, 1981). 
 
Environmental factors have probably influenced 
the biomass level through size or taxonomic 
composition of the phytoplankton.  In the marine 
ecosystem, the body size of zooplankton predators 
is larger than their prey (Mullin, 1963; Hargrave 
and Geen, 1970) and zooplankton tend to select 
larger available prey (Sheldon et al., 1977).  In an 
ecosystem where the primary producers are mainly 
pico- and nanno-phytoplankton, the number of 
trophic levels from the primary producers to fish is 
larger than those in the systems where larger 
phytoplankton such as diatoms are dominant.  
Accordingly, size or species composition of the 
primary producer is one of the important factors 
determining not only the biomass level of 
phytoplankton but also the ecosystem structure 
and the fish resources carrying capacity.  Data on 
size or taxonomic composition of phytoplankton 
as well as total chlorophyll a are needed to clarify 
mechanisms of changes in the ecosystem structure 
in relation to climate change.  To measure size-
fractionated chlorophyll a, water is generally 
filtered through a sequence of nucleopore filters 
with adequate pore size (for example, 0.2, 2.0, 10 
and 20 micrometer), and then chlorophyll a 
concentration on the filters is measured by the 
fluorometric method.  Although this method 
involves errors due to the covering of the pores by 
phytoplankton cells, information about size-
fractionated phytoplankton biomass can be 
measured easily. 
 
All phytoplankton have chlorophyll a, beta 
carotene, and other photosynthetic pigments, 
called antenna pigments which are specific to 
taxonomic classes of algae.  For example, diatoms 
have chlorophyll-c and focoxanthin and 
dinophyceae have chlorophyll-c and peridinin as 
antenna pigments. Pigment compositions can 
provide taxonomic composition information, and 
the pigment compositions of in-situ water can be 
measured with HPLC.  Recently, the profiling 
reflectance radiometer, which can clarify the 
vertical distributions of upward and downward 
irradiance at various wave lengths, has been 
developed.  In the future, taxonomic composition 
data may be taken automatically and easily by 
collecting data on the vertical distribution of 
pigment composition and patterns of absorption 
spectrum obtained by the profiling reflectance 
radiometer and constructing algorithms. 
 
Measurement of primary productivity is another 
kind of data to be incorporated into ecosystem 
models. Because usage of the 
14
C isotope is 
seriously limited in Japan, monitoring programs 
mentioned above have not included primary 
productivity data.  Chamberlain et al. (1990) 
measured vertical distribution of natural 
fluorescence in the sea, which is solar stimulated 
emission of chlorophyll a in a narrow band 
centered at 683 nm, by profiling natural 
fluorometer, and revealed the relationship between 
the natural fluorescence of chlorophyll-a and 
primary productivity measured with 
13
C.  
Measurement of natural fluorescence is 
instantaneous and can be performed without 
incubating a water sample, therefore natural 
fluorescence might prove useful in mapping 
photosynthetic rates during hydrocasts or in 
continuous monitoring from moorings and drifters 
(Chamberlin et al., 1990).  The technique is 
promising for future monitoring of phytoplankton. 
 
References 
Chamberlin, W.S., C.R. Booth, D.A. Kiefer, J.H. 
Morrow, and R.C. Murphy.  1990.  Evidence 
for a simple relationship between natural 
fluorescence, photosynthesis and chlorophyll 
in the sea. Deep-Sea Res. 37: 951-973. 
Furuya, K. and R. Marumo.  1983.  The structure 
of the phytoplankton community in the 
subsurface chlorophyll maxima in the western 
North Pacific Ocean. J. Plankton Res. 5: 393-
406. 
Hargrave, B.T. and G.H. Geen.  1970.  Effects of 
copepods grazing on two natural 
phytoplankton populations (A. tonsa).  J. Fish. 
Res. Bd. Can. 27: 1395-1403. 
 
 30
Malone, T.C. and P.J. Neale.  1981.  Parameters of 
light-dependent photosynthesis for 
phytoplankton size fractions in temperate 
estuaries and coastal environments.  Mar. Biol. 
61: 289-297. 
Mullin, M.M.  1963.  Some factors affecting the 
feeding of marine copepods of the genus 
Calanus. Limnol. Oceanogr. 8: 239-250. 
Parsons, T.R. and M. Takahashi.  1973.  
Environmental control of phytoplankton cell 
size. Limnol Oceanogr. 18: 511-515. 
 
Sheldon, R.W., W.H. Sutcliffe Jr., and K. 
Drinkwater.  1977.  Structure of pelagic food 
chain and relationship between plankton and 
fish production. J. Fish. Res. Bd. Can. 34: 
2344-2353. 
Yentsch, C.S. and D.W. Menzel.  1963.  A method 
for the determination of phytoplankton 
chlorophyll and pheophytin by fluorescence. 
Deep-Sea Res.10: 221-231. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Zooplankton Monitoring for the PICES Climate Change and Carrying Capacity (CCCC) 
Program 
 
Jeffrey M. Napp 
Alaska Fisheries Science Center, Seattle, U.S.A. 
 
 
Rationale 
There are many well-documented cases that 
demonstrate zooplankton biomass and species 
composition response to large-scale changes in the 
physical environment (e.g. Russell Cycles;  
Cushing, 1982).  The CCCC Program 
acknowledges that long-period changes occur in 
the PICES region and assumes that changes in 
zooplankton biomass, productivity and species 
composition will lead to changes in the carrying 
capacity of the subarctic Pacific.  For this reason, 
zooplankton have been chosen as one element of 
the ecosystem to be monitored as part of the 
CCCC Program.  Monitoring zooplankton during 
periods of large-scale change in the ecosystem 
may provide PICES scientists increased 
understanding of the mechanisms by which change 
occurs, and a way to predict changes in carrying 
capacity. 
 
Building zooplankton monitoring systems 
The PICES CCCC Program proposes comparative 
studies among coastal regions (REX) and between 
the open ocean subarctic gyres (BASS).  These 
studies require comparable zooplankton sampling 
and analysis methodologies.  Data archival 
systems that allow easy access and exchange are 
also necessary.  National CCCC-type programs are 
encouraged to design and build zooplankton 
monitoring systems that address these elements so 
that comparative studies are possible. 
 
Target organisms 
PICES Scientific Report No.4 (1996) states that 
the CCCC Program will examine how secondary 
producers respond in productivity, biomass, and 
species composition to climate variability in 
different ecosystems of the subarctic Pacific.  
Secondary producers are found among three 
different size groups of the zooplankton 
community:  microzooplankton (2-200 µm);  
mesozooplankton (200-2000 µm);  and 
macrozooplankton (>2000 µm).  CCCC 
monitoring studies should include key taxa or 
functional groups. 
 
Program scope 
Two critical elements of monitoring programs are 
duration and frequency of sampling.  The North 
Pacific Ocean and Bering Sea ecosystems are 
known to exhibit decadal and longer-term 
oscillations (e.g. Chelton et al., 1982;  Brodeur 
 31
and Ware, 1992;  Hare and Francis 1995; Mantua 
et al., 1997;  Sugimoto and Tadokoro, 1997).  In 
addition, recent attention has been given to slow 
secular changes in the North Pacific Ocean 
(Roemmich and McGowan, 1995;  Veit et al., 
1997).  To resolve long-period periodicities and 
slow secular change in ecosystem form or function 
requires a sustained effort with secure funding (i.e. 
long-term observations).  Sustained, long-term 
observation must be a priority of the PICES CCCC 
Program. 
 
At the other end of the temporal spectrum are 
events that determine year-class strength of living 
marine resources.  Sampling must be matched to 
the life history of the target species.  For example, 
many fisheries target long-lived species (e.g. 
pollock or crab).  In these populations the success 
of a single year-class may carry the fishery for 
many years.  Therefore sampling must also be 
frequent enough to detect when recruitment-
favorable or recruitment-unfavorable events occur.  
Another example is shifts in the timing of 
particular events (analagous to match/mismatch 
hypothesis of Cushing, 1990).  For example, the 
timing of the biomass maximum of zooplankton 
(dominated by a single species) at Ocean Station 
Papa has become increasingly earlier over the last 
15 years (Mackas et al., 1998).  This demonstrates 
that sampling must be frequent enough so that 
changes in the timing of events do not alias the 
data leading to false conclusions (in this case that 
the zooplankton biomass is changing). 
 
To design optimal sampling strategies for opposite 
ends of the temporal spectrum will be difficult.  
Observational programs often have tight financial 
constraints – CCCC-type programs from 
individual member countries must remain simple, 
using equipment with a high degree of reliability.  
Selection of target taxa must be judicious, relying 
on taxa that have demonstrated or suspected 
sensitivity to environmental change.  Lastly, the 
CCCC Program assumes that zooplankton are 
responding to their physical and biological 
environment, therefore measurement of 
environmental variability is also necessary 
compounding the complexity and cost of these 
programs. 
Adequacy of present technology 
An exhaustive treatment of the technology 
available for measurement systems is beyond the 
scope of this report.  The following discussion will 
highlight only a few aspects of this problem.  In 
general, measurement of zooplankton biomass and 
species composition is more sophisticated (and 
applied more often) than measurement of 
zooplankton productivity.  Recent advances in 
digital and optical technology are being applied to 
zooplankton measurement systems.  Carrying 
capacity implies a system's ability to sustain and 
support production.  Adequate measurements of 
secondary production are therefore also necessary.  
Reviews of accepted methods in zooplankton 
ecology can be found in Omori and Ikeda (1984) 
and the forthcoming ICES Manual on 
Zooplankton Methods (Harris, in press). 
 
Ocean Observatories -At present, mooring systems 
are often stand-alone platforms that must be 
visited frequently for instrument servicing and 
data retrieval.  This is because of instrument 
biofouling and because the band width/data 
transfer rates of satellite systems are limited (and 
expensive).  Future ocean observatories envision 
single moorings, mooring arrays or sea-floor 
platforms connected to the shore via fiber optic 
cables.  While this improves the spatial coverage 
and data transmission problems, more 
development is required to improve the suite of 
available sensors appropriate for long-term 
deployments with infrequent instrument service. 
 
Biomass and species composition- Sample 
collection once meant retrieval of a physical 
sample of organisms from the sea for later analysis 
in the laboratory.  Today it is possible to 
determine much (but not all) of the same 
information by collecting optical or acoustical data 
in situ (U.S. GLOBEC, 1991).  Instrument 
development is taking advantage of the revolution 
in digital and optical technology.  Instruments 
such as the Video Plankton Recorder (VPR; Davis 
et al., 1992; 1996), Flow Cytometer (Sieracki et 
al., 1998), Optical Particle Counter (OPC; 
Herman, 1992), and Tracor Acoustic Profiling 
System (TAPS; Holliday and Pieper, 1995; Barans 
et al., 1997) are good examples.  The instruments 
 32
have demonstrated their utility in process-oriented 
research.  Adaptations of these instruments for 
long-term observations are possible. 
 
Secondary production - There are no instruments 
to directly measure secondary production.  This 
quantity often must be calculated from 
physiological measurements made on 
experimental animals removed from their 
environment.  Thus it presents a greater challenge 
for CCCC scientists.  Two new promising 
techniques employ calculations of population 
dynamics parameters.  Recently biomass spectrum 
theory has been developed to provide individual 
and population growth rates from closely spaced 
(in time) surveys using OPCs (Zhou and Huntley, 
1997).  Another technique, Vertical Life Tables 
(Asknes and Ohman, 1996), provides a method to 
estimate mortality without repeated sampling of a 
distinct population. 
 
Conclusion 
"The reason a lot of people do not recognize 
opportunity is because it usually goes around 
wearing overalls and looking like hard work."  
Thomas Edison 
 
The PICES CCCC MONITOR Task Team has a 
difficult job.  Our role is to offer advice to PICES 
member countries on direction and techniques.  
We can only advise, and have no authority to 
require that our advice be adopted into programs 
under the BASS or REX umbrella.  The rewards, 
however, for implementing a cohesive, efficient, 
trans-North Pacific Ocean, long-term 
observational program are great.  A well designed 
system will increase our understanding of natural 
system variations, describe important forcing 
functions and mechanisms, and may potentially 
allow accurate prediction of events that have a 
socio-economic impact on countries that rim the 
North Pacific Ocean. 
 
References 
Aksnes, D.L. and M.D. Ohman.  1996.  A vertical 
life table approach to zooplankton mortality 
estimation.  Limnol. Oceanogr. 41: 1461-
1469. 
Barans, C.A., B.W. Stender, D.V. Holliday, and 
C.F. Greenlaw.  1997.  Variations in the 
vertical distribution of zooplankton and fine 
particles in an estuarine inlet of South 
Carolina.  Estuaries 20: 467-482. 
Brodeur, R.D. and D.M. Ware.  1992.  Interannual 
and interdecadal changes in zooplankton 
biomass in the subarctic Pacific Ocean.  Fish. 
Oceanogr. 1: 32-38. 
Chelton, D.B., P.A. Bernal, and J.A. McGowan.  
1982.  Large-scale interannual physical and 
biological interaction in the California 
Current. J. Mar. Res.  40: 1095-1125. 
Cushing, D.H.  1982.  Climate and fisheries.  
Academic Press, London, UK, 387 pp. 
Cushing, D.H.  1990.  Plankton production and 
year-class strength in fish populations: an 
update of the match/mismatch hypothesis.  
Adv. Mar. Biol. 26: 249-293. 
Davis, C.S.; S.M. Gallager, M.S. Berman, L.R. 
Haury, and J.R. Strickler.  1992.  The Video 
Plankton Recorder (VPR): Design and initial 
results. Ergeb. Limnol. Adv. Limnol. 36: 67-
81. 
Davis, C.S., S.M. Gallager, M. Marra, and W.K. 
Stewart.  1996.  Rapid visualization of 
plankton abundance and taxonomic 
composition using the video plankton 
recorder.  Deep-Sea Res. (Part 2) 43: 1947-
1970. 
Hare, S.R. and R.C. Francis.  1995.  Climate 
change and salmon production in the 
Northeast Pacific Ocean, pp. 357-372.  In:  
R.J. Beamish [ed. Climate Change and 
Northern Fish Populations.  Can. Spec. Publ. 
Fish. Aquat. Sci. 121. 
Harris, R.P. [ed.]  1999.  ICES Manual on 
Zooplankton Methodology.  In press. 
Herman,  A.W.  1992.  Design and calibration of a 
new optical plankton counter capable of sizing 
small zooplankton.  Deep-Sea Res. 39: 395-
415. 
Holliday, D.V. and R.E. Pieper.  1995.  
Bioacoustical oceanography at high 
frequencies.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 52: 279-296. 
Mackas, D.L., R. Goldblatt, and A.G. Lewis.  
1998.  Interdecadal variation in development 
timing of Neocalanus plumchrus populations 
at Ocean Station P in the subarctic North 
 33
Pacific.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 55: 1-16. 
Mantua, N.J., S.R. Hare, Y. Zhang, J.M. 
Wallace, and R.C. Francis.  1997.  A Pacific 
interdecadal oscillation with impacts on 
salmon production.  Bull. Amer. Meterol. Soc. 
78: 1069-1079. 
Omori, M. and T. Ikeda.  1984.  Methods in 
Marine Zooplankton Ecology.  J. Wiley & 
Sons, New York, 332 pp. 
PICES. 1996.  Report of the PICES-GLOBEC 
International Program on Climate Change 
and Carrying Capacity, Scientific Report No. 
4, North Pacific Marine Science Organization, 
64 pp. 
Roemmich, D and J.A. McGowan.  1995.  
Climatic warming and the decline of 
zooplankton in the California Current.  
Science  267: 1324-1326. 
Sieracki, C.K., M.E. Sieracki, and C.S. Yentsch.  
1998.  An imaging-in-flow system for 
automated analysis of marine microplankton.  
Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 168: 285-296. 
Sugimoto, T. and K. Tadokoro.  1997.  Interannual 
and interdecadal variations in zooplankton 
biomass, chlorophyll concentration and 
physical environment in the subarctic Pacific 
and Bering Sea. Fish. Oceanogr. 6: 74-93. 
U.S. GLOBEC.  1991.  GLOBEC Workshop on 
Acoustical Technology and the Integration of 
Acoustical and Optical Sampling Methods.  
Rept. No. 4, Joint Oceanographic Institutions 
Inc., Washington, D.C., 58 pp. 
Veit, R.R.; J.A. McGowan, D.G. Ainley, T.R. 
Wahl, and P. Pyle.  1997.  Apex marine 
predator declines ninety percent in association 
with changing oceanic climate.  Global 
Change Biol. 3: 23-28. 
Zhou, M. and M.E. Huntley.  1997.  Population 
dynamics theory of plankton based on biomass 
spectra.  Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 159: 61-73.
 34
Potential use of the Continuous Plankton Recorder in the subarctic Pacific 
 
Sonia D. Batten 
Sir Alister Hardy Foundation for Ocean Science, Plymouth, United Kingdom 
 
 
Introduction 
The Continuous Plankton Recorder (CPR) has 
been deployed in the North Atlantic and North Sea 
since the 1930s providing a multi-decadal time- 
series of plankton abundance and distribution data.  
Correlations have recently been described between 
the plankton recorded by the CPR and indices of 
climatic variability in these regions.  The CPR 
could be a potential monitoring tool for the 
plankton (particularly mesozooplankton) in the 
subarctic Pacific Ocean.  A trial tow was 
conducted in the summer of 1997 to demonstrate 
the feasibility of operating such a survey from the 
CPR base at the Sir Alister Hardy Foundation for 
Ocean Science (SAHFOS) in the United Kingdom.  
Strengths and limitations of the CPR 
methodology, results from the trial tow in 1997 
and examples of the climatic relationships 
recorded in the North Atlantic were presented to 
allow discussion of its application in the North 
Pacific. 
 
CPR methodology 
CPRs are towed in the surface mixed layer at a 
depth of about 7 m (Hays and Warner, 1993) by 
commercial ‘ships of opportunity’ on their regular 
routes of passage.  The use of commercial ships is 
economical and ensures that sampling is evenly 
spread throughout the year and is not biased 
towards the more clement months, as is often the 
case with research ship programmes.  Water enters 
the front of the CPR through a 1.27 cm square 
aperture, passes along a tunnel and through a silk 
filtering mesh (mesh size 270 micrometer) before 
exiting at the back of the machine.  The movement 
of the CPR through the water turns an external 
propeller which, via a drive shaft and gear-box, 
moves the filtering silk across the tunnel at a rate 
of approximately 10 cm per 18 km of tow.  As the 
filtering silk leaves the tunnel it is covered by a 
second band of silk so that the plankton are 
sandwiched between these two layers.  The silk 
and plankton are then wound on into a storage 
chamber containing formaldehyde.  On return to 
the laboratory, the silks are processed in a set 
manner (Colebrook, 1960).  The deployment and 
recovery positions of the recorder are used to 
determine and mark the 18 km samples and 
alternate samples are analysed for the presence of 
plankton. 
 
Phytoplankton colour, a visual estimate of the 
greenness of the sample (a proxy for chlorophyll), 
is first assessed by reference to standard colour 
charts.  Phytoplankton are then semi-quantitatively 
determined by viewing 20 fields of view and 
recording the presence of all taxa in each field.  
Small zooplankton are identified and enumerated 
into categories of abundance from a subsample 
(1/50 of the sample) whilst all zooplankton larger 
than about 2 mm are counted with no 
subsampling.  Identification is carried out to the 
highest practicable taxonomic level.  Although 
CPR sampling is continuous, individual samples 
are allocated a position according to the latitude 
and longitude of the mid-point of the sample. 
 
The most limiting factor regarding CPR data is 
that it is collected from a fixed depth.  Diel 
vertical migration of zooplankton means that for 
some species true abundances are not recorded in 
day collected samples.  Comparisons between 
zooplankton biomass derived from CPR samples 
and from the depth resolving. 
 
Longhurst-Hardy Plankton Recorder have shown, 
however, that depth-integrated samples from the 
surface mixed layer and down to 200 m are not 
significantly different between the two devices, at 
least in the Celtic Sea (Batten et al., 1999).  
Development of an undulating plankton recorder 
(the U-Tow) is underway, however, it has not yet 
been proven to undulate at the high speeds a ship-
of-opportunity programme requires.  Both the 
existing CPR and the proposed undulator can carry 
instrumentation to record the physico-chemical 
 35
environment as an invaluable supplement to the 
biological data.  Temperature sensors are routinely 
fitted to several CPR routes and selected tows 
carry a CTD and fluorescence instrumentation 
package.  Satellite images, which have a similar 
synoptic coverage, can also provide data to place 
the plankton information into hydrographic 
context. 
 
 
Fig. 11 The location of the CPR tows in the 
North Pacific Ocean, together with the dates of 
each tow. 
Trial Pacific tow 
In July and August 1997, a 3600 km tow was 
undertaken from Valdez, Alaska, to Long Beach, 
California (Figure 1), on the ARCO Alaska.  This 
tow utilised four CPR internal mechanisms and 
resulted in 194 samples, of which every fourth 
(and always the first and last sample) were 
analysed for plankton abundance to give a total of 
54 analysed samples.  Excellent cooperation was 
achieved with the ship’s Master and operating 
company (ARCO Marine Inc). 
 
References 
Batten, S.D., A.G. Hirst, J. Hunter, and R.S. 
Lampitt.  1999.  Mesozooplankton biomass in 
the Celtic Sea; a first approach to comparing 
and combining CPR and LHPR data. J. Mar. 
Biol. Assoc. U. K., in press. 
Colebrook, J.M.  1960.  Continuous plankton 
records: methods of analysis 1950-1959. Bull. 
Mar. Ecology 5: 51-64. 
Hays, G.C., and A.J. Warner.  1993.  Consistency 
of towing speed and sampling depth for the 
Continuous Plankton Recorder. J. Mar. Biol. 
Assoc. U.K. 73: 967-970. 
 
 
 
Monitoring of Changes in Spawning Sites of Ommastrephid Squid Todarodes pacificus 
Related to Stock Fluctuations and Climate Change 
 
Yasunori Sakurai 
Laboratory of Marine Ecology-Hokkaido University, Hakodate, Japan 
 
 
Most commercially exploited squid live for a year 
or less.  Reproductive success will depend on the 
physical and biological environment at the 
spawning and nursery grounds.  Possible causes of 
the "failures" of Todarodes pacificus (Steenstrup, 
1880) and Illex illecebrosus (Lesueur, 1821) 
fisheries in the 1980s include changing 
environmental conditions and heavy fishing 
pressure (Lipinski et al., in press). 
 
T. Pacificus migrates seasonally near Japan and 
Korea and spawns at the southern end of its 
distribution (Murata, 1989).  Three spawning 
groups (winter, fall and summer) occur with 
 36
overlapping spawning grounds.  Catches have 
fluctuated during the 20th century; during 1986-
96, annual catches near Japan have increased from 
99,000 to 444,000 tons. Episodic "regime shift" 
changes involving entire biological community 
structures occur worldwide (Lluch-Belda et al., 
1992).  In the western North Pacific, interdecadal 
regime shifts in water temperature have occurred 
from a warm regime beginning in the late 1940s, 
to a cool regime in the late 1970s, and back to a 
warm regime in the late 1980s (e.g. Kodama et al., 
1995).  These regime shifts appear to affect the 
catches of T. pacificus, in particular, the early 
1980s’ catch decreased and the late 1980s’ catch 
increased. Fall paralarval abundances since the late 
1980s have been higher than during the late 1970s 
to the mid-1980s. This increase corresponds to the 
increase in adult squid catch that has occurred 
since the late 1980s (Goto and Kidokoro, pers. 
comm.).  These stock fluctuations may be related 
to the effects of regime shifts on spawning and 
paralarval survival. 
 
A possible scenario is proposed for this recent 
stock increase based on changing environmental 
conditions.  First, trends in the annual variations of 
stock and larval catches are reviewed, and possible 
spawning sites around Japan are inferred, 
assuming that egg masses and hatchlings occur at 
temperatures between 15 and 23°C, and above the 
continental shelf (JODC, 1978;  Sakurai et al., 
1996;  Bower and Sakurai, 1996).  Possible 
changes in the spawning sites of T. pacificus 
during 1984-95 are inferred based on GIS data.  
The conclusion is that as stock size has increased 
since the late 1980s, the fall and winter spawning 
sites have overlapped in the Tsushima Strait and 
near the Goto Isands, and that winter spawning 
sites have expanded above the continental shelf 
and slope in the East China Sea.  However, the 
inferred spawning sites varied annually (e.g. 1992 
in a warm regime), which might be a cause of the 
historical catch fluctuations of T. pacificus. 
 
It has been shown that GIS can be used to monitor 
and forecast the stock fluctuations of T. pacificus 
related to climatic regime shift, by examining 
temporal and spatial distributions of the optimum 
spawning sites.  GIS will become an important 
tool in future monitoring studies of stock 
fluctuations in exploited squid species. 
 
References 
Bower, J.R. and Y. Sakurai.  1996.  Laboratory 
observations on Todarodes Pacifica 
(Cephalopoda: Ommastrephidae) egg masses. 
Amer. Malacol. Bull. 13: 65-71. 
Japan Oceanographic Data Center (JODC).  1978.  
Marine Environmental Atlas, Northwestern 
Pacific Ocean  (Seasonal and Monthly). Japan 
Hydrography Association, Tokyo, 147 pp. (in 
Japanese with English abstract). 
Kodama, J., H. Nagashima, and Y. Izumi.  1995. 
Long-term variations in the "Mangoku 
herring", Clupea pallasi valenciennes 
resources in relation to the ocean 
environments in the waters off Sanriku and 
Joban. Bull. Miyagi Prefect. Fisheries Res. 
Center 14: 17-36 (in Japanese). 
Lipinski, M.R., C.J. Augustyn, J.K.T. Brodziak, 
D.S. Butterworth, G. Christy, S. des Clers, 
G.D. Jackson, R.K. O’Dor, B.A. Roel, Y. 
Sakurai, and W.H. Sauer.  1998.  Cephalopod 
fisheries: a future global upside to past over-
exploitaion of living marine resources?  S. 
African J. Mar. Science. (in press). 
Lluch-Belda, D., R.A. Schwartzlose, R. Serra, R. 
Parrish, T. Kawasaki, D. Hedgecock, and 
R.J.M. Crowford.  1992.  Sardine and anchovy 
regime fluctuations of abundance in four 
regions of the world ocean: a workshop report. 
Fish. Oceanogr. 1: 339-347. 
Murata, M.  1989.  Population assessment, 
management and fishery forecasting for the 
Japanese common squid, Todarodes pacificus. 
In: Marine Invertebrate Fisheries: Their 
Assessment and Management, J. R. Caddy 
(ed.), pp. 613-636, John Wiley and Sons, New 
York. 
Sakurai, Y., J.R. Bower, Y. Nakamura, S. 
Yamamoto, and K. Watanabe.  1996.  Effect 
of temperature on development and survival of 
Todarodes pacificus embryos and paralarvae. 
Amer. Malacol. Bull. 13: 89-95. 
 
 37
Monitoring Fish Responses to Ocean Climate 
 
David W. Welch 
Pacific Biological Station, Nanaimo, Canada 
 
 
Pacific salmon are an especially tractable animal 
for use in monitoring ocean conditions, because 
they return with very high fidelity to their natal 
river.  As a result, it is possible to consider all 
adult animals collected on their return to 
freshwater as being from a particular source 
population, with individual animals being replicate 
observations, and to consider differences between 
populations as measuring differences in the 
average conditions each population was exposed 
to. 
 
The general conclusion from the overview 
presented below was that it was important to 
distinguish between effects of the ocean on 
survival from effects on growth.  In general, 
oceanographic influences on survival and growth 
are likely not the same.  Overall, survival is likely 
largely determined during the first year of life in 
the ocean (during the coastal phase of the life 
history).  Size is likely determined later in the life 
history (during the second or later years of life, 
during the offshore, pelagic, phase of the life 
history).  As a result, studies of how Pacific 
salmon growth and survival change over time are 
likely to provide information about a wide range 
of ocean regions. 
 
The ocean distribution of Pacific salmon differs 
between species, but primarily in terms of the 
extent of their ocean migrations.  In general, those 
species of salmon that have the most extended life 
histories in the ocean also have the most extensive 
ocean distributions.  Sockeye (Fig. 1) have an 
intermediate level of distribution, with fish from 
different source regions being found about as far 
as half-way across the Pacific Ocean.  Depending 
on the source population being studied, salmon 
returning from the ocean will therefore have 
sampled different parts of the ocean. 
 
Fig. 1 Known limits of ocean distribution of sockeye salmon as determined by tag 
recoveries from 1956-1989. Broken lines indicate uncertain boundaries due to lack of data. 
 38
 
 
 
Fig. 2 Migration pathways of juvenile salmon along the west coast of North America (Hart and Dell 
1986).  The offshore migration paths in the fall were hypothesized, but not established by sampling. 
 
AGE .0+ SALMON
 
Fig. 3 Results of Canadian surveys of the migration pathways.  Juvenile salmon were restricted to 
continental shelf waters until early December, and to migrate much greater distances along the shelf 
before moving to the offshore. 
 39
The migratory pathways of juvenile salmon in the 
first summer and fall after entry into the ocean are 
apparently the same for the different species of 
salmon (steelhead being the single possible 
exception).  The general pattern of movement was 
established from work completed in the 1960s 
(Hartt and Dell, 1986).  After leaving North 
American rivers in the spring, the juveniles turn 
right and move rapidly north and west along the 
coast (Fig. 2). 
 
A striking feature of recent ocean surveys from 
1995-97 is that even as late as the beginning of 
December no juvenile salmon have been found off 
the continental shelf (Fig. 3).  Given the rapid 
rates of measured movement and the confinement 
of the young salmon to the surface waters over the 
shelf as far as the start of the Aleutians in early 
December, it is clear that the growth and survival 
of the vast majority is determined in the coastal 
zone, as opposed to the pelagic offshore. 
 
These same surveys show an equally remarkable 
demarcation in the distribution of immature 
salmon, with no salmon in their second or later 
years of ocean life being found in continental shelf 
waters.  (One species, chum salmon, is found in 
appreciable numbers in the slope region as 
immature individuals, but not in waters shallower 
than roughly 200 m). 
 
As a result, there is a sharply delineated 
geographic and temporal separation between the 
ocean environments salmon are exposed to.  
During their first year of life in the ocean, juvenile 
salmon growth and survival is determined by 
conditions experienced in the coastal ocean off 
North America, while it is conditions prevailing in 
the offshore, open ocean, region that determine 
growth and survival during subsequent years of 
life in the ocean.  This allows a relatively sharp 
delineation of the impacts of growth on salmon 
over their life in the sea, because the extensive 
archives of salmon scales that have been collected 
since the 1950s allow us to build up a picture of 
growth for different calendar years. 
 
The next question that must be answered in 
assessing the use of fish such as Pacific salmon as 
useful monitors of ocean conditions is whether or 
not there is useful variation in the measured 
growth rates that can be used as indications of 
oceanographic change.  The answer is that there is.  
The interannual variation in measured growth by 
year at sea is much larger than the variability 
between individuals (Fig. 4), indicating that 
changes affecting growth in the ocean can be 
reliably identified.  Furthermore, as this particular 
example indicates, there is a qualitative difference 
in the nature of the growth response.  The first 
(M1) and last (M3) years of life in the sea, when 
sockeye transit the continental shelf zone, show a 
significant trend to smaller average size since 
1977.  In contrast, growth during the exclusively 
open ocean phase (M2), when sockeye do not 
forage on the continental shelf region, shows no 
systematic decline in mean growth rate. 
 
 
Fig. 4 Patterns of growth of Skeena River 
(B.C.) sockeye salmon. 
 
The survival of all species of Pacific salmon also 
seems to have been negatively affected as a 
consequence of these climatic changes.  Starting in 
1990, one year after the drop in mean size of adult 
salmon was observed, the survival of juvenile 
 40
salmon entering the ocean off southern and central 
British Columbia also decreased.  Direct 
measurements of the ocean survival of several 
stocks of coho showed this drop (Beamish et al., 
1999), and the ocean survival of steelhead trout 
 
1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000
Return Year
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
mean standardized length
3
Fraser Sockeye Size
Females Only
 
Fig. 5 Changes in adult size of Fraser River 
sockeye salmon. 
 
The ability to identify the spatial and temporal 
location of these changes in growth is important, 
because there is good evidence that large changes 
in the ocean are now occurring.  Beginning in 
1989, the average size of adult British Columbia 
salmon returning from the sea dropped quite 
sharply (Fig. 5).  This was also the year when a 
large-scale change in the northern hemisphere’s 
atmospheric circulation occurred (Watanabe and 
Nitta 1998; 1999; submitted). 
 
collapsed from roughly 16% to less than 4% 
(Welch et al., 1988, 1999).  More recent findings 
support these direct observations of changes in 
marine survival.  Once lagged back to the year of 
ocean entry as juveniles, all species of salmon in 
British Columbia show that a sharp reduction in 
adult recruitment began in 1990 (Fig. 6). 
 
1980 1985 1990 1995
0
10
20
30
Sockeye
1980 1985 1990 1995
0
10
20
30
40
Pink
1980 1985 1990 1995
0
4
8
12
 Chum
1980 1985 1990 1995
0
2
4
6
Coho
1980 1985 1990 1995
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Chinook
Ocean Entry Year
Population Size (millions of fish)
 
Fig. 6 Changes in total salmon returns to British 
Columbia.  After 1989/90 all species show sharp 
declines. 
 
 
Summary 
Although relevance to fisheries has often been 
cited as one important reason for running 
oceanographic monitoring programs, the changes 
in the fish population themselves may be novel 
candidates relevant to studying the oceans.  The 
rather detailed knowledge of the life history of 
Pacific salmon that has developed in the last few 
decades make them a particularly attractive 
example.  Individual populations return with 
strong site fidelity to their rivers, making it 
possible to identify individuals from a range of 
populations.  Large archival scale collections 
already exist for many of these populations.  And 
as I have demonstrated with the examples above, 
both the growth variations contained in the scales 
and the survival trends reflected in the recruitment 
data indicate that large-scale impacts of changes in 
the ocean environment are affecting these records 
and likely have consistent and reliable 
interpretations. 
 
 41
The changes in fish populations may then be as 
relevant to oceanography as the changes recorded 
in glacial ice cores in reconstructing past climates.  
Although ice cores are capable of reconstructing 
aspects of past climates going back much farther 
in time than can modern fish records, detailed 
reconstructions breaking out coastal from offshore 
processes on an annual basis for salmon 
populations situated at different locations along 
the West Coast may make up for the relatively 
short (50 yr) time series that are available.  
Changes in Pacific salmon growth and survival 
may therefore make attractive candidates for part 
of a Pacific monitoring program. 
 
 
References 
Beamish, R.J., D. Noakes, G. McFarlane, W. 
Pinnix, R. Sweeting, and J. King.  1999.  
Trends in coho marine survival in relation to 
the regime concept.  Fish. Oceanogr. 
Hartt, A.C., and M.B. Dell.  1986.  Early Oceanic 
Migrations and Growth of Juvenile Pacific 
Salmon and Steelhead Trout.  Int. North 
Pacific Fish. Comm. 46: 1-105. 
Watanabe, M., and T. Nitta.  1998.  Relative 
impacts of snow and sea-surface temperature 
anomalies on an extreme phase in the winter 
atmospheric circulation.  J. Climate 11: 2837-
2857. 
Watanabe, M., and T. Nitta.  1999.  Decadal 
changes in the atmospheric circulation and 
associated surface climate variations in the 
Northern Hemisphere winter.  J. Climate 12: 
494-510. 
Watanabe, M., and T. Nitta.  (Submitted).  Abrupt 
shifts in the atmospheric circulation and 
associated decadal climate variations in the 
northern hemisphere winter: A diagnostic 
study.  J. Climate. 
Welch, D.W., B.R. Ward, B.D. Smith, and J.P. 
Eveson.  1998.  Influence of the 1990 ocean 
climate shift on British Columbia steelhead 
(O. mykiss) and coho (O. kisutch) populations. 
In: 'Aha Huliko'a Hawaiian Winter Workshop 
on Biotic Impacts of Extratropical Climate 
Variability in the Pacific.  G. Holloway, P. 
Muller, and D. Henderson [eds.]  University of 
Hawaii, Honolulu, 77-87. 
Welch, D.W., B.R. Ward, B.D. Smith, and J.P. 
Eveson.  1999.  Influence of the 1990 ocean 
climate shift on British Columbia steelhead 
(O. mykiss) populations. Fish. Oceanogr., in 
press. 
 
 42
III. INTERNATIONAL PLANNING FOR OCEAN CLIMATE 
MONITORING 
 
 
Status of Monitoring Discussion in LMR Module of GOOS 
 
Warren S. Wooster 
School of Marine Affairs, University of Washington, U.S.A. 
  
The Living Marine Resources Panel of the Global 
Ocean Observing System (LMR GOOS) held its 
first meeting at UNESCO, Paris, on March 23-25, 
1998. 
 
Agreement was reached on the following 
statement of goals and objectives.  The goal of 
LMR GOOS is to provide operationally useful 
information on changes in the state of living 
marine resources and ecosystems.  The objectives 
are to obtain from various sources relevant 
oceanographic and climatic data, along with 
biological, fisheries, and other information on the 
marine ecosystems, to compile and analyze these 
data, to describe the varying state of the 
ecosystems, and to predict future states of the 
ecosystems, including exploited species, on useful 
time scales.  A consequence of these efforts should 
be the identification and development of the more 
powerful and cost-effective means for monitoring 
marine ecosystems required to meet the LMR 
GOOS goal. 
 
GOOS also has a Coastal Panel, with which there 
is potential for overlap.  Initially the LMR Panel 
will focus on deep ocean and shelf sea conditions 
dominated by oceanic processes.  Eventually the 
panels may be merged. 
 
After a review of existing international monitoring 
programs, the Panel decided that its assessment 
was incomplete and therefore directed the 
following request to IOC:  Several national, 
regional, and other international organizations 
have conducted, or now conduct, repeated 
observations designed to monitor the status of 
marine ecosystems or selected biological or 
physical components thereof.  While some of these 
programs are well known, e.g., California 
Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries Investigations 
(CalCOFI), others are known only locally.  In 
addition, some programs periodically assess the 
changing state of local ecosystems.  An integrated 
set of these assessments could improve the 
understanding of marine ecosystems globally, as 
well as indicating areas whose present monitoring 
is inadequate.  The Panel therefore requests that 
IOC compile and make available information on 
significant monitoring and assessment programs of 
its member states. 
 
An analogous request was made to FAO:  A 
number of national and regional bodies collect and 
analyze fishery statistics and make fishery 
assessments.  An aggregation of these analyses 
would be invaluable in assessing population 
changes in the upper trophic levels of marine 
ecosystems.  The Panel therefore requests FAO, 
the global centre for fishery statistics, to identify 
on a global scale the existing fishery analyses that 
could contribute to the desired meta-assessment 
and to advise on how it could best be organized 
and carried out. 
 
A generic table was prepared of the ecosystem 
components and conditions for which information 
is desired:  
 
Ecosystem components:  Top predators, 
commercial finfish, forage and nekton, 
benthos, zooplankton, phytoplankton.  Desired 
information:  Abundance and distribution, 
reproduction, recruitment, growth, ecosystem 
role, causes of mortality.   
Ecosystem conditions:  Nutrient chemistry, 
temperature, salinity, dissolved oxygen, ocean 
velocity field, atmospheric forcing.  Desired 
 43
information:  Magnitude and distribution, 
causes of variations. 
 
The scope of an actual monitoring program will 
depend on which of these classes are already 
adequately monitored regionally, which are most 
salient for the recognized problems of the region 
or system, and which can be incorporated in a 
designed monitoring program at acceptable cost 
and using available technology.  A vital 
monitoring base should be in place in all coastal 
states to which selected measurements can be 
added as appropriate.  This base should include:  
coastal station measurement of sea level, surface 
temperature and salinity, winds, and atmospheric 
pressure, general knowledge of occurrence and life 
history of major marine species measures of catch, 
effort, and size frequency distribution of major 
commercial species. 
 
Panelists are to provide more detailed specification 
of monitoring needs in regions with which they are 
most familiar. 
It was proposed to test the concept of monitoring, 
analysis, and prediction in several well-sampled 
regions where significant ecosystem changes such 
as regime shifts have been observed.  In such 
regions one could ask to what extent ecosystem 
changes could have been predicted from the 
observed variables.  Could predictability have 
been improved if additional or different variables 
had been monitored?  Was inadequate 
predictability a consequence of inadequate 
monitoring, inadequate analysis, or inadequate 
understanding?  Proposed locations for these 
retrospective experiments include: Baltic Sea, 
CalCOFI area, Japan Sea/East Sea, Northwest 
Atlantic demersal stocks, Northeast Atlantic, 
Benguela Current, Black Sea. 
 
The Panel will meet again in Montpellier in March 
22-23, 1999.  Members from the PICES area 
include Michael Laurs (Hawaii), Daniel Lluch-
Belda (Mexico), Takashige Sugimoto (Japan), 
Chang-Ik Zhang (Korea) and Warren Wooster 
(U.S.A.). 
 
 
 
 
GLOBEC International - Perspectives on Monitoring 
 
Patricia Livingston 
Alaska Fisheries Science Center, Seattle, U.S.A. 
 
 
The PICES CCCC Program is a regional 
contribution to the international GLOBEC effort.  
The GLOBEC International planning focus is on 
the completion of an implementation plan.  
Aspects of monitoring are discussed in the draft 
implementation plan.  The purpose of this paper is 
to provide an overview of monitoring activities 
outlined in the implementation plan, particularly 
those types of activities that regional programs 
would most likely undertake. 
 
The GLOBEC International implementation plan 
has four research foci (retrospective analyses and 
time series studies; process studies;  predictive and 
modelling capabilities;  and feedback from 
changes in marine ecosystem structure), various 
activities defined under each research focus, and 
particular tasks identified within an activity.  
Extracted below from the implementation plan are 
the foci activities and tasks that most relate to 
monitoring. 
 
FOCUS 1.  Retrospective analyses and time series 
studies.  The objective of this focus is to identify 
and understand the characteristic, natural modes of 
physical forcing and marine ecosystem variability 
over a range of temporal scales (interannual and 
longer) and including spatial scales from large 
marine ecosystems, to basins, and global systems.  
The approach is to develop and examine historical 
information on marine ecosystems from a variety 
of sources (including other global change 
 44
programs) and the outputs will be the foundation 
for the structure and parameter estimates of 
ecosystem models, process studies, comparative 
ecosystem analyses, and future time series and 
monitoring programs. 
 
Two activities under this focus that particularly 
relate to monitoring are:  (a) the preservation of 
existing long time series data;  and (b) the 
development of new data sets for future 
comparisons. 
 
The tasks that are envisioned under (a) are: 
evaluate existing long time series data collection 
activities to determine if they are in the best 
locations and sampling the key variables at 
appropriate frequencies using the best available 
techniques;  recommend continuation and/or 
modifications to time series to improve their utility 
to future monitoring, while ensuring continuity 
with past measurements and broad spatial 
distribution of monitoring sites;  analyze, preserve, 
and disseminate samples and data collected in 
existing and previous time series studies but that 
are not widely available or are in danger of being 
lost. 
 
Tasks to be accomplished under (b) are:  develop 
new long-term time series study locations and 
variables based on results from present GLOBEC 
and other programs, in order to supplement and 
complement existing long-time series data 
collection activities; and coordinate and 
collaborate closely with GOOS in the continuation 
and development of these time series activities. 
 
FOCUS 3.  Predictive and modeling capabilities.  
The approach under this focus is to develop 
models that interface with interdisciplinary 
observational systems such that the coupled 
model-observation system has the capability to 
examine the responses of selected marine 
ecosystems, up to the level of zooplankton and 
fish populations, to physical forcing and biological 
interactions. 
 
Key activities important to monitoring are:  (a) the 
design and testing of relevant sampling and 
observational systems and (b) the development of 
coupled modeling-observational capabilities and 
applications. 
 
Important tasks under activity (a) are:  design 
testbed experiments to compare performance of 
new instruments and to intercalibrate existing 
technologies;  capitalize on new technologies and 
modeling capabilities for the experiments;  and 
establish optimal sampling designs for each 
region. 
 
In order to make progress under activity (b), the 
following tasks have been identified:  coupled 
model/observational systems need to be developed 
using testbeds (comprehensive arrays of sampling 
platforms, including in situ and remote systems);  
observational system simulation experiments 
should be conducted prior to process studies and 
deployment of large-scale sampling arrays;  and 
observational and modeling methodologies should 
be made available for development of the Global 
Ocean Observing System. 
 
Summary 
Clearly, there are many monitoring activities 
envisioned in the GLOBEC International 
implementation plan that a regional program such 
as the CCCC should be undertaking.  The tasks 
above give us direction to focus our attention.  
These tasks must be undertaken in order to ensure 
that a global synthesis of the results from the 
regional studies and national programs can be 
performed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 45
Long-Term Observations Carried out off the Washington, Oregon and Northern 
California Coasts 
 
William T. Peterson 
Hatfield Marine Science Center, Newport, U.S.A. 
 
 
A number of monitoring activities are focused on 
the ocean off the west coast of the U.S. through 
funding from the National Marine Fisheries 
Service, the U.S. GLOBEC program, the 
Bonneville Power Administration and the Office 
of Naval Research.  This report summarizes these 
activities. 
 
1. Bi-weekly cruises off Newport, Oregon 
(44º40'N).  W.T. Peterson conducts cruises 
twice each month along the Newport 
Hydrographic Line from a small research 
vessel (40 foot).  Sampling stations are located 
at offshore distances of 1, 3, 5, 10 and 15 
miles (2, 5, 9, 18 and 28 km).  The sampling 
routine includes a CTD profile at each station 
using a Seabird SBE-19 CTD, secchi disk 
measurement, continuous sea-surface 
temperature measured with an internally 
recording Onset Stowaway thermistor, surface 
seawater sample with a bucket for 
measurement of chlorophyll and nutrients, a 
vertical zooplankton tow with a 0.5 m mouth 
diameter net fitted with a 200 micrometer 
mesh net towed from near the bottom to the 
surface and an oblique tow over the upper 20 
m with a 1 m mouth diameter and 333 
micrometer mesh net.  Cruises have been 
conducted since May 1996 and are supported 
by the National Marine Fisheries Service and 
the Office of Naval Research.  Point of contact 
for this work is Bill Peterson: 
bpeterso@sable.nwfsc-hc.noaa.gov;  phone 
(541) 867-0201;  fax (541) 867-0389. 
 
2. Bi-monthly cruises along four transect lines.  
The lines intersect the coast at Newport, 
Oregon (44°40’N), Coos Bay, Oregon 
(43°13'N), Crescent City, California (41°53'N) 
and Eureka, California (40°53'N).  These 
cruises are part of the U.S. GLOBEC Long-
Term Observation Program and are conducted 
by oceanographers from Oregon State 
University and NOAA.  Principal 
Investigators include Bob Smith, Jane Huyer, 
Mike Kosro, Jack Barth, Pat Wheeler and Bill 
Peterson.  Stations extend 156 km offshore off 
Newport, 63 km off Coos Bay, 93 km off 
Crescent City and 100 km off Eureka.  
Measurements taken at each station include 
profiles of CTD (Seabird 9/11), fluorometer, 
transmissometer and dissolved oxygen, 
particulate organic carbon and nitrogen, 
chlorophyll and nutrients from the euphotic 
zone from rosette samples, zooplankton by 
vertical tows over the upper 100 m with a 0.5 
m diameter, 200 micrometer mesh net, oblique 
tows over the upper 20 m with 1 m diameter, 
333 micrometer mesh net, neuston tows with a 
333 micrometer mesh nets and oblique bongo 
tows (70 cm diameter, 505 micrometer mesh 
nets).  Satellite-tracked WOCE drifters are 
launched at five stations; continuous underway 
measurements are made of fluorescence, 
temperature and current profile (acoustic 
doppler current profiler).  Cruises are made in 
February, April, June, August, September and 
November.  The program was initiated in July 
1997, and will continue through 2002.  Point 
of contact for this work is Bob Smith:  
rsmith@oce.orst.edu;  phone (541) 737-2926;  
fax (541) 737-2064. 
 
3. Rope trawl stations.  Three times per year 
(May, June and September), pelagic nekton 
are sampled with a rope trawl (20 m x 30 m 
mouth, 185 m length) that is fitted with light 
foam-filled doors such that the net samples the 
upper 10-15 m of the water column.  The 
purpose of this work is to monitor the 
abundance of juvenile salmonids in the 
vicinity of the Columbia River off the 
Washington and Oregon coasts.  A total of 40-
50 stations are sampled during the eight day 
 46
cruises, from nearshore to just beyond the 
shelf break, along eight transect lines 
extending from Gray's Harbor, Washington 
(47°N) to just south of Newport, Oregon 
(44°10'N).  Ancillary data taken at each station 
include CTD profiles using a Seabird SBE-19, 
surface chlorophyll and nutrients, Secchi 
depth, and zooplankton tows with 0.5 m 
diameter, 200 x 10
-6
m  mesh net (vertical tow), 
1 m 333 x 10
-6
m mesh net (oblique tow over 
the upper 20 m) and a neuston tow.  Support 
for this work is provided by the Bonneville 
Power Administration. 
 
4. Moorings.  Currents are measured at a 
mooring 10 miles off Newport from an 
upward-looking acoustic doppler current 
profiler that is mounted on the sea floor.  The 
mooring has been in place for approximately 
one year and is retrieved at six month 
intervals.  In addition, hourly observations on 
sea-surface meteorology and sea-surface 
temperature are available from NOAA Buoy 
46050, located 17 miles off Newport. 
 
5. Coastal Radar.  A coastal radar array 
(CODAR) is operated by oceanographers at 
Oregon State University off the central 
Oregon coast.  The system is still in the testing 
phase but will soon be operational and will 
produce hourly charts of surface currents in 1 
km bins out to 40 km to sea.  Point of Contact 
for the radar and mooring work is Mike 
Kosro:  kosro@oce.orst.edu;  phone (541) 
737-3079;  fax (541) 737-2064. 
 
 
Ecosystem Monitoring on On-going and Planned Programs in Russia 
 
Vyacheslav B. Lobanov 
Pacific Oceanological Institute, Vladivostok, Russia 
 
 
The Russian national GLOBEC plan is not 
completely designed and approved yet, however 
GLOBEC-like ecosystem studies of various 
agencies are included in the list of priority science 
and development programs adopted by the 
Ministry of Science and Technologies for the post-
perestroika period.  One of the major programs is 
the Ecosystem Dynamics project that is being 
implemented mostly by the institutes of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences.  Other agencies, 
such as the Hydrometeorological Committee, 
Committee on Fisheries, Naval Hydrographic 
Service and Ministry of Education (universities) 
carry on ecosystem studies in accordance with 
their ministry programs.  Because of insufficient 
and unstable funding, the number of monitoring 
programs decreased considerably over the last few 
years, in particular those funded by the last two 
agencies. 
 
The Hydrometeorological Committee is officially 
responsible for monitoring and assessment of 
environment quality including marine 
environment.  It maintains a net of meteorological 
stations and observations along standard 
hydrographic sections located in the Okhotsk and 
Japan Seas.  Field work and preliminary analyses 
in the Pacific area are carried out by Primorye, 
Khabarovsk, Kolyma, Sakhalin and Kamchatka 
Regional Hydrometeorological Administrations.  
Data holding and methodological support is 
provided by the Far Eastern Regional 
Hydrometeorological Research Institute (FERHRI) 
(contact - Dr. Yuriy Volkov, Director, 
hydromet@online.ru).  The Hydrometeorological 
system provides data on physical forcing related to 
the oceanic and atmospheric conditions.  
Observations of temperature, salinity, 
hydrochemistry at standard levels from the surface 
down to 1000-1500 m and marine meteorology 
were repeated along the fixed sections since the 
late 50s, however, by the end of the 90s, the 
number of operational coastal stations was reduced 
and the hydrographic sections program is 
practically canceled because of funding 
limitations. 
 47
Ecosystem studies by the Committee on Fisheries 
are focused mostly on higher trophic level 
organisms and physical forcing.  The main 
organizations dealing with monitoring programs in 
the North Pacific are Pacific Research Fisheries 
Center (TINRO-Center), Sakhalin Research 
Institute of Fisheries and Oceanography 
(SakhNIRO) and Kamchatka Research Institute of 
Fisheries and Oceanography (KamchatNIRO). 
Since the 80s, TINRO-Center (contact - Dr. Lev 
Bocharov, Director - root@tinro.marine.su) started 
regular assessment of demersal/pelagic fishes and 
invertebrates, zooplankton and ichthyioplankton 
distribution as well as hydrographic and 
hydrochemical conditions in the Bering, Okhotsk 
and Japan Seas and the Kuril Islands area.  Some 
cruises also sample nekton, primary production, 
bacteria and protozoa. CTD measurements are 
typically done down to 500 m, trawl and acoustic 
sampling is used to obtain fish distribution data at 
a 30-mile spacing.  The surveys cover quite large 
areas and are repeated annually at particular 
seasons:  March-May - northwestern shelf of the 
Okhotsk Sea (pollock survey); May-July - western 
Kamchatka shelf (crab survey);  July-September - 
western Bering Sea (pollock survey);  and July-
October- Okhotsk Sea (salmon survey).  
Hydrographic observations are carried out along 
fixed sections through the Japan Sea (0-200 m) 
and along a section across the Kamchatka Strait 
(0-1500 m). 
 
Observations and sampling by SakhNIRO (contact 
- Dr. Felix Rukhlov, Director - 
okhotsk@tinro.sakhalin.ru) are similar to those 
done by TINRO.  The principal area of monitoring 
covers waters within 100 miles of Sakhalin Island 
in the Okhotsk Sea and Tatar Strait.  Hydrography 
and plankton are observed two times a year along 
the standard sections down to 500-1500 m depth.  
A once-a-year survey of fishery resources includes 
observations of juvenile distributions of pollock, 
herring and cod.  Monitoring of salmon is also 
implemented at fishery plants. 
 
At least three institutes of the Russian Academy of 
Sciences are engaged in the ecosystem monitoring: 
the Pacific Oceanological Institute (POI), Institute 
of Marine Biology (IMB) and Institute of 
Automation and Control Processes (IACP).  POI 
(contact - Prof. Victor Akulichev, Director - 
poi@eastnet.febras.ru) conducts studies of 
physical forcing and lower trophic levels in 
various areas of the North Pacific.  Long-term 
monitoring of the water mass and current structure 
of the western boundary of the subarctic gyre 
(Kuril-Kamchatka area) began in 1990 as the 
INPOC project and then was followed by joint 
surveys with TINRO (1994) and SakhNIRO 
(1996).  The results indicate a tendency of 
circulation changes in the area over the 90s which 
should cause notable response of higher level 
organisms.  The survey will be expected to 
continue on an annual basis. 
 
Another area of planned monitoring is the Peter 
the Great Bay and adjacent northwestern part of 
the Japan Sea. Circulation and water exchange at 
the coastal area, mesoscale eddies and their effect 
on fluxes and ecosystem dynamics are main topics 
of the POI studies that are to be conducted as a 
part of the CREAMS-II program. 
 
Institute of Marine Biology (contact - Dr. Vladimir 
Kasiyanov, Director -inmarbio@mail.primorye.ru) 
conducts monitoring of both lower and higher 
trophic levels of the Peter the Great Bay 
ecosystem.  This study is limited to the Tuman 
river mouth areas (Tumangan project) and 
Amursky Bay. 
 
The Inter-Institute Center for Satellite Monitoring 
of Environment has been recently established by 
IACP (contact - Dr. Emil Herbeck - 
herbeck@iapu2.marine.su), POI and TINRO.  This 
center maintains monitoring of the Japan and 
Okhotsk seas based on the NOAA AVHRR and 
SeaWiFS thermal and ocean color imagery. 
 
In relation to Russian plans for ecosystem 
monitoring the following items should also be 
discussed:  feasibility of implementation, methods 
of observations, quality control and data 
accessibility.  In many cases, even when the 
project is approved and judged to be feasible, its 
implementation depends on funding availability 
and the economic situation in the country.  Even if 
the allocated fund does not allow the project in full 
 48
to be completed it may be implemented partially. 
Special attention should be given to the methods 
of measurement, sampling, analysis and data 
quality control.  This is especially critical in 
constructing long time series.  Data availability for 
the international oceanographic community may 
also be a serious question.  Information on 
physical and hydrochemical variables of some 
areas of marginal seas may be restricted for 
international exchange. 
 
Besides national plans Russia is already involved 
in international projects related to monitoring of 
the North Pacific such as NEAR-GOOS and 
NOWPAP (contact - water@unep.org).  The 
NEAR-GOOS project is a North-East Asian 
Regional component of the Global Ocean 
Observing System (GOOS) initiated by the IOC 
Sub-Commission for Western Pacific 
(WESTPAC).  Participating countries are China, 
Japan, Korea and Russia.  The area of interest 
covers Japan, East-China and Yellow Seas.  The 
scope of the project is to facilitate the exchange of 
marine environmental data through a system of 
real-time and delayed-mode data bases that would 
provide free access through the Internet.  The 
environmental parameters included in the system 
are so far focused on some physical 
characteristics, in order to ensure the successful 
initiation of the operation.  With the operation of 
the system well underway and given the 
requirements of the user community, it is 
necessary to extend the system to a wider range, in 
particular to include chemical and biological 
parameters. 
 
At the present stage, the Russian contribution to 
the NEAR-GOOS data exchange system includes 
marine meteorological data which are being 
contributed to the Real Time Data Base by 
FERHRI.  POI has made available previously 
classified data from 13,628 oceanographic stations 
for international data exchange under the 
IODE/GODAR project.  These data may now be 
contributed to the NEAR-GOOS Delayed Mode 
Data Base.  For further development of the NEAR-
GOOS program in Russia, it is required (a) to 
determine the regulations for international data 
exchange for the NEAR-GOOS program at the 
national level;  (b) to provide necessary funds for 
the NEAR-GOOS activities;  and (c) to improve 
telecommunication system in the country.  The last 
one is extremely important in order to involve 
more users and contributors to the NEAR-GOOS 
data base.  (NEAR-GOOS contact 
http://www.unesco.org/ioc/goos/ neargoos.htm). 
 
Another international project which has similar 
objectives as NEAR-GOOS, covering a similar 
geographic area and involving the same countries, 
but covering a much wider range of marine, 
coastal and associated fresh water environments, is 
the Action Plan for Protection, Management and 
Development of the Marine and Coastal 
Environment of the Northwest Pacific Region 
(Northwest Pacific Action Plan - NOWPAP).  It 
was established in 1994 under the United Nations 
Environment Program as one of the components of 
its Regional Seas Program.  NOWPAP includes a 
sub-project focused on establishment of a 
collaborative, regional monitoring program which 
is developed jointly with IOC/WESTPAC.  The 
last Inter-governmental Meeting on NOWPAP 
suggested the establishment of a regional 
monitoring center to coordinate activity of 
participating countries (contact - 
water@unep.org). 
 
In conclusion, it should be pointed that Russia still 
has plans for a large-scale ecosystem monitoring 
of the North West Pacific and marginal seas.  Its 
feasibility, which depends on the economic 
situation in Russia, will be determined by the 
availability of national research funds.  Russia has 
a high potential for cooperation with the 
international community because of the experience 
of its research groups and individual scientists as 
well as a large fleet of research vessels which are 
available for cooperative studies. 
 
Contributions to this report by Drs. Yury Zuenko 
and Gennady Khen of TINRO, and Gennady 
Kantakov of SakhNIRO, are gratefully 
acknowledged. 
 
 
 49
North Pacific GLOBEC Monitoring South Korea 
 
Chul Park 
Department of Oceanography-Chungnam National University, Taejon, Republic of Korea 
 
 
The Korean GLOBEC Science committee was 
formally set up in the fall of 1998.  Experts in the 
field of marine ecology, fisheries, and 
meteorology take part in the preparation of the 
science program mainly controlled by the Korean 
Ocean Research and Development Institute 
(KORDI).  This program, composed of six sub-
programs, is going to be funded by the Korean 
Ministry of Maritime Affairs and Fisheries for 
three years (Nov. 1998 - Oct. 2001). 
 
1. The sub-program “Climate change, 
methodology, and data management”, will be 
in charge of overall control of the science 
program and international cooperation.  The 
principal investigator is Dr. Suam Kim of 
KORDI.  Subsequent research programs and 
fund raising will also be done by this team. 
 
2. The project entitled “Pattern of climate change 
around the Korean Peninsula”, will analyze 
past climate data.  Spatial and temporal scales 
of climate change and underlying mechanisms 
of the changes will be studied by this team 
under the leadership of Dr. J.H. Oh of the 
Korean Meteorological Research Institute. 
 
3. The sub-program “Impact of climate change 
on physical properties of the marginal seas” 
will address long-term variations in physical 
properties such as seawater temperature, 
salinity, dissolved oxygen, etc., as well as sea 
level.  Prof. Im Sang Oh of the Seoul National 
University is the leader of this project. 
 
4. The impact of climate changes on marine 
ecosystem of the marginal seas will be 
investigated by the team led by Dr. Sinjae Yoo 
from KORDI.  This will include the studies on 
long-term variations in plankton biomass and 
planktonic production.  The microbial loop is 
one of the major themes of this sub-program. 
 
5. The project “Impact of climate changes on 
fisheries of the marginal seas” led by Dr. J.Y. 
Kim from National Fisheries Research and 
Development Agency (NFRDA), will cover 
the population dynamics of the major fish 
stocks around the Korean Peninsula. 
 
6. The last project is “Impact of climate changes 
on the interactions among the components of 
the marine ecosystem”.  Trophodynamics will 
be the major concern of this team led by Dr. 
Chang-Ik Zhang of Pukyong National 
University. 
 
Provided funding is not held up, the proposed 
research plan will be in progress soon with 
governmental funding of about $400,000 for three 
years although the amount of money is somewhat 
uncertain at this moment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 50
North Pacific Monitoring in Japan GLOBEC 
 
Takashige Sugimoto 
Ocean Research Institute-University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan 
 
 
Japan GLOBEC has been organized through the 
coordination of university and national institution 
scientists, to contribute to the SCOR/IOC 
International GLOBEC since 1992 and the CCCC 
(Subarctic Pacific regional program under PICES) 
since 1993.  The major emphases of Japan 
GLOBEC are the following aspects of the 
ecosystem dynamics of the Kuroshio and Oyashio 
regions: 
 
1. Dynamics of the food chain through 
zooplankton and micronekton; 
2. Dynamics of marine ecosystems in response to 
climate change; 
3. Development and application of new 
technologies for measurement and modeling in 
marine ecosystems. 
 
Funding has been proposed to the MESCS 
(Japanese Ministry of Education, Science, Culture 
and Sport) and STA (Science and Technology 
Agency).  The MESCS funding of individuals for 
preliminary scientific studies and bilateral 
international cooperative research has begun.  
Details of the MESCS university program may be 
found in PICES Scientific Report No. 7 (1997). 
 
The STA program was funded in 1997 for a six-
year period under the Agriculture, Forestry and 
Fisheries Agency Research Council (AFFRC).  
The title of the program is “Multidisciplinary 
study of the environmental variation influencing 
the fisheries resources in the northwestern 
Pacific”.  The Japanese government is responsible 
for regulating the available catch based on 
scientific information, and managing and 
sustaining the fisheries resources in the 200 
nautical mile Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) 
around Japan.  The variability of the fishery 
resource has been forecast mainly from historical 
catch and body length data.  Accurate forecasts 
could not be made because of the large interannual 
variations.  Recent studies have demonstrated that 
the abundance of saury and walleye pollock 
depends on the biomass variations of zooplankton 
and phytoplankton, which depend on oceanic 
environmental fluctuations.  Therefore the 
ecosystem dynamic approach must be taken to 
accurately forecast the stock size of important 
commercial fish species.  The Kuroshio/Oyashio 
and the Transition Area south and east of Japan 
have been selected for study because they are the 
regions where the large fishery grounds of 
commercially important fish occur.  The 
representative target species are saury and walleye 
pollock.  The program goal is to clarify the 
influence of the oceanic environment and 
phytoplankton and zooplankton abundance on 
stock size of these two fish species by developing 
ecosystem dynamic models. 
 
 51
IV. TASK TEAM RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
 
Geographic Coverage 
In general, sampling in the northwestern Pacific is 
more dense than in the northeastern North Pacific.  
Much of the sampling in the west is carried out by 
Japan and it appears that this sampling will 
continue to be supported.  The first priority is to 
increase coverage in the eastern North Pacific 
while maintaining the present level of sampling in 
the west.  A number of valuable sampling 
programs have been initiated under the GLOBEC 
banner and it will be important to make a strong 
case for their continuation into the future to 
contribute to the description of climate change 
variability. 
 
Action (inter-sessional):  Construct up-to-date 
time (monthly) and space coverage of shipboard 
observations to clearly reveal gaps in the 
monitoring.  Resulting document will be used to 
guide the MONITOR Task Team in designing an 
improved subarctic Pacific monitoring system. 
 
Recommendation:  Present time series in PICES 
area must be maintained.  Their scientific value 
increases dramatically with increased duration.  
For example, the vital central Pacific sampling 
lines now occupied by the research ships Oshoru 
Maru and Hokusei Maru must be continued with 
replacement ships, if these ships are pulled out of 
the program. 
 
Continuous Plankton Recorder 
There are very few large-scale zooplankton data 
sets being collected in the PICES area.  The 
resulting gap in our knowledge of climate 
variability of zooplankton abundance and species 
composition can be addressed by initiating a ship-
of-opportunity (SOP) continuous plankton 
recorder (CPR) observation in the subarctic 
Pacific.  Measurements in the North Atlantic have 
demonstrated that the SOP/CPR is capable of 
measuring the annual cycle by sampling long 
tracks in the summer and winter and that it 
efficiently samples a part of the zooplankton 
community that responds to climate variability. 
Action (inter-sessional):  Prepare a white paper on 
the design of a SOP/CPR program in the PICES 
region. 
 
PALACE float array 
The U.S.A. is planning to deploy an array of 
PALACE floats (ARGO) in the North Pacific as 
part of a global measurement program.  These 
floats will measure temperature and salinity 
profiles in the upper kilometer of the water column 
and horizontal velocity at 1,000 m. 
 
The resolution is 300 km in space and 10 days in 
time.  Deployments are planned to commence in 
late 2000.  The ARGO temperature/salinity 
profiles will provide a vital data set in describing 
the long-term, large-scale variability of the thermal 
and haline structure in the subarctic.  At present 
neither the temperature nor salinity variations are 
being measured adequately.  In the past the 
thermal structure was measured by the SOP XBT 
program but that program has been drastically cut 
back so that it no longer resolves the thermal 
variability. 
 
Recommendation:  PICES must strongly support 
the ARGO plan to begin Subarctic Pacific float 
deployment in 2000. 
 
Zooplankton time series 
Many types of sampling gear have been used to 
collect zooplankton data in the subarctic Pacific.  
Adequate intercalibration data for many of these 
sampling systems do not exist and time series are 
seriously flawed by systematic errors. 
 
Action (inter-sessional):  Prepare a report on 
sampling gear used in the North Pacific and the 
status of the calibration data.  Develop a plan for 
obtaining needed calibration. 
 
Biophysical mooring observations 
In September 1998, an ATLAS mooring, modified 
for long-term deployment in the subarctic, was 
deployed at staion PAPA to test its survivability in 
the harsh environment at PAPA.  It will be 
 52
replaced in September 1999.  The test mooring has 
only meteorological and subsurface physical 
sensors.  A well-instrumented mooring will 
provide vital data on the response of the subarctic 
biological systems to physical forcing. 
  
Action (inter-sessional):  Prepare for a discussion 
of the optimum set of biological and chemical 
sensors that should be deployed on subsequent 
monitoring moorings. 
 
Recommendation:  At the completion of the 
engineering studies, moorings with a complete 
suite of state-of-the art meteorological, biological, 
chemical and physical sensors should be designed 
and deployed near the centers of the Alaska 
Subarctic Gyre and the Western Pacific Subarctic 
Gyre. 
 
Zooplankton production 
At the present time there is very little subarctic 
Pacific data being collected on the variability of 
zooplankton production. 
 
Action (inter-sessional):  Prepare for a discussion 
of the need for an expanded measurement program 
of zooplankton production in the subarctic Pacific.  
Specific suggestions for the design of a monitoring 
system will be addressed. 
 
Regime-shift description 
There was a substantial delay between the timing 
of the 1976-1977 regime shift and its recognition 
by scientists and assessments of its impact.  An 
interesting question is whether there were 
precursors of the shift that were overlooked.  
Analysis of the data preceding and during the 
1976-77 shift will provide insight into what type 
of monitoring will improve our description of 
future regime shifts. 
 
Recommendation:  PICES should sponsor a 
workshop to review physical and biological 
characteristics of regime shifts and the extent to 
which various elements of the ecosystem were 
affected. 
 
Next Task Team meeting 
The 1999 meeting of the Task Team will address 
the above items as well as others that will be 
suggested during the year.  The venue would 
ideally be in Hakodate, Japan, before the Eighth 
Annual Meeting.  Hakodate is an attractive choice 
because it will avoid the divided loyalty syndrome 
which occurs if it is held immediately prior to the 
Annual Meeting.  In addition it will allow the Task 
Team to interact in the meeting with many 
Japanese scientists outside the Task Team who are 
working on subarctic climate change research.  
Funds will be solicited from PICES to bring an 
outside expert to the meeting to extend the 
scientific expertise of the participants. (The 
location of the 1999 MONITOR Task Team 
meeting was changed to Vladivostok, to be held 
just prior to the Eighth Annual Meeting.) 
 53
 
APPENDIX A:  A PLAN FOR USE OF THE HARDY CONTINUOUS PLANKTON 
RECORDER IN MONITORING THE SUBARCTIC PACIFIC OCEAN 
 
David W. Welch
1
 and Sonia D. Batten
2 
1
Pacific Biological Station, Nanaimo, Canada 
2
Sir Alastair Hardy Foundation, Plymouth, United Kingdom 
 
 
Preamble 
The Hardy Continuous Plankton Recorder (CPR) 
is a device that is designed to be deployed from 
ships-of-opportunity to obtain long-term 
information on the changes in the abundance and 
species composition of the animal plankton.  The 
CPR works by slowly drawing a silk mesh through 
a small column of seawater flowing through the 
device while it is towed behind a ship.  Use of the 
CPR would provide a broad-scale measure of the 
plankton distribution across the North Pacific in 
regions where it is deployed. 
 
Statement of priorities 
The PICES MONITOR Task Team (October 
1998) discussed several possible routes for 
deployment of a CPR for long-term monitoring of 
zooplankton in the North Pacific.  These routes 
were: 
 
a. Deployment on ships of opportunity running 
an east-west route between Vancouver and 
Tokyo. 
b. Deployment on ships of opportunity running 
an east-west route between San Francisco and 
Tokyo. 
c. Deployment on ships of opportunity running a 
north-south route between Prince William 
Sound and Hawaii. 
d. Deployment on ships of opportunity running a 
north-south route between Prince William 
Sound and San Francisco. 
 
The Task Team preferred the east-west route from 
Vancouver to Japan over the route starting in San 
Francisco, because it passes near the existing long-
term monitoring station (Station P), and because 
the cruise track would run parallel to Line P.  For 
similar reasons, the north-south route from Prince 
William Sound to Hawaii was preferred because 
that line would run close to Station P.  In the case 
that only one route could be funded, the route 
from PWS to Hawaii is probably preferable 
because some limited east-west sampling is 
possible along Line P and near the Japanese coast. 
 
Issues 
The early stages of the deployment of the 
Hardy CPR should be considered as a 
scientific experiment, the results of which will 
determine the final decision on the sampling 
strategy to be used for the long-term 
monitoring program.  There is a need to 
establish the correct sampling frequency on 
each route, because over-sampling will limit 
the extent of the region that can be surveyed.  
A team should be identified in the early stages 
to work with the experts at the Sir Alister 
Hardy Foundation to design this initial survey 
and to identify the appropriate sampling 
frequency (Table A1).  In essence, this will be 
an experiment to determine the spatial 
decorrelation length scale for different species 
of zooplankton, and the temporal frequency 
needed to resolve important aspects of the 
annual production cycle.  Based on these 
results and the financial resources devoted to 
the program, appropriate sampling frequencies 
for the large-scale monitoring program will 
need to be determined. 
 
Value of a Pacific survey 
The multi-decadal survey in the North Atlantic 
demonstrates convincing correlations between 
climatic indices and changes in the plankton.  A 
regime shift in the late 1980s in the North Sea is 
also evident for CPR data and is revealed in both 
changes in abundance of both the phytoplankton 
and zooplankton, as well as the species 
composition. 
 
54
We advocate one north-south and one east-west 
route (as indicated under the priorities section) 6 
times annually for a period of three years as the 
experimental phase of the Pacific survey. 
 
Prior uses of the Hardy CPR 
Hardy CPRs were used to routinely monitor the 
Irish Sea where the Sea Empress went aground, 
causing a major oil spill.  The plankton data 
collected formed an essential baseline which was 
used to compare the plankton community after the 
oil spill (Batten et al 1998).  In addition, the 
results from long-term CPR monitoring programs 
in the North Atlantic provide convincing evidence 
for the effects of decadal scale climate forcing of 
the plankton communities in the ocean, 
information which would otherwise simply be 
unavailable (Gamble 1994;  Planque and Taylor, 
in press;  Reid et al 1998; Reid et al, 1999). 
 
 
 
 
References 
Batten, S.D., R.J.S. Allen, and C.O.M. Wotton.  
1998.  The effects of the Sea Empress Oil 
Spill on the plankton of the Southern Irish 
Sea.  Marine Pollution Bulletin (In press). 
 
Gamble, J.C.  1994.  Long-term planktonic time 
series as monitors of marine environmental 
change.  In: Long term Experiments in 
Agriculture and Ecological Sciences.  R.A. 
Leigh and A.E. Johnston (eds).  CAB 
International, p. 365-386. 
 
Planque, B., and A.H. Taylor.  1998.  Long-term 
changes in plankton and the climate of the 
North Atlantic.  ICES J. of Marine Science.  
(In press) 
 
Reid, P.C., M.E. Edwards, H. Hunt, and A.E. 
Warner.  1998.  Phytoplankton change in the 
North Atlantic.  Nature 391: 546. 
 
Reid, P.C., B. Plangue, and M. Edwards.  1999.  
Are plankton changes observed in the long-
term results of the CPR survey a response to 
climate change?  Fish. Oceanogr.  (In Press).
 
 
55
Table 1. Approximate budget (in pounds Sterling) for the cost of deploying the Hardy Plankton Recorder for a single tow, and the annual cost.  Annual 
costs have been estimated by multiplying by the assumed number of tows per year, which is likely to be on the order of 6 (assuming bi-monthly 
sampling).  Costs per tow are based on the assumption that every second sample is counted.  Fixed costs per tow (see footnote) do not vary with 
the number of samples analyzed, so overall costs per tow when assuming different sampling frequencies are only approximate.  Note that the 
costs of including a towed CTD package on the CPR are not included, but should be considered an essential part of the sampling program.  
Electronic flow meters could also be fitted. 
 
 
LINE 
Distance 
(D, kms) 
# Samples 
(D/18 kms) 
Cost per 
Sample 
Sampling Frequency
a
 
 
Total Costs 
per Year
b
 
 
    18 KMS 
(ALL) 
36 kms 
(Every 2
nd
) 
56 kms 
(Every 3
rd
) 
72 kms 
(Every 4
th
) 
 
Alaska-  
Hawaii 
4,000 kms 222 £100 £22,200 £11,500 £7,500 £5,700 
 
Annual Cost (6 tows) 
  
 
£133,000 £69,000 £45,000 £35,000 £83,800 
Vancouver-
Japan 
6,000 kms 333 £100 £33,300 £17,000 £11,100 £8,500 
 
Annual Cost (6 tows) 
  
 
£200,000 £100,000 £66,000 £51,000 £115,800 
£ - Pounds Sterling 
                                                 
a
 Hardy CPR costs have to be divided into fixed costs invariant with the number of samples analyzed, and labour costs associated with analyzing each 
sample.  The initial set-up on the vessel requires installation of a davit (ca. £5,000) plus fixed costs associated with each tow.  These include: Rental of 
Hardy CPR (£500), Silk rolls (£112//800 km unit), crew gratuity (£40), and freight charges to and from the UK (£1,000). 
 
b
 Includes Fixed Costs, assuming every second sample is enumerated (36 km spacing), and a total of 6 tows analyzed per year. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
57
REX TASK TEAM REPORT 
 
 
The REX Task Team is concerned with 
intercomparisons of regional scale studies, as 
proposed in the PICES/GLOBEC CCCC 
Implementation Plan. 
 
Activities in 1997/98 
 
1. The PICES Climate Change and Carrying 
Capacity Workshop on “The Development 
of Cooperative Research in Coastal Regions 
of the North Pacific” was published as 
PICES Scientific Report No. 9 in 1998. 
 
2. A workshop on climate effects on small 
pelagic species was convened prior to the 
Seventh Annual Meeting in Fairbanks, 
Alaska. 
 
3. A scientific session highlighting 
research findings of GLOBEC and 
GLOBEC-like programs was convened 
in the Seventh Annual Meeting. 
 
Task Team Recommendations 
 
Short-term 
 
1. REX recommends that Dr. W. Peterson 
replace Dr. A. Hollowed as REX Co-
Chairman. 
 
2. REX recommends the collation and 
synthesis of small pelagic species data for 
comparative studies.  Initially, this could 
involve the exchange of scientists (or open 
workshop), data assembly, and development 
and application of analysis tools.  The 
purpose of exchanging scientists is to 
facilitate a comparative analysis of larval 
and juvenile vital rates of Pacific herring 
from different regions of the North Pacific 
and its adjacent seas, and to facilitate 
comparative studies of the life pattern of 
dominant zooplankton species (especially 
euphausiids and calanoids (Calanus, 
Neocalanus)). 
 
 REX proposes to conduct a two-day workshop 
for these purposes at the Eighth Annual Meeting 
in Vladivostok, Russia (See Appendix A).  We 
anticipate that 12-15 scientists would participate 
in the workshop.  We expect that PICES will 
provide funds (for 2 scientists from North 
America, 1 from China, 1 from Korea, and 1 
from Japan) to facilitate this exchange. 
 
3. REX recommends that the report of REX 
workshop “Small Pelagic Species and Climate 
Change” should be published in the PICES 
Scientific Report Series. 
 
4. Compile a summary of the sampling strategies 
and methods used to assess the stocks of small 
pelagic species. 
 
5. Continue to encourage discussions of small 
pelagic species through REX Task Team.  
Conduct a CCCC symposium on small pelagic 
species for the year 2000. 
 
6. REX endorses the proposal for an inter-sessional 
meeting to review the 1976/77 and 1988/89 
regime shifts.  We will assist in preparing for 
this symposium. 
 
7. REX encourages a review of the relationship 
between El Niño events and regime shifts. 
 
Long-term 
 
1. PICES Scientific Report No. 9 provides long-
term research questions and activities. 
 
2. REX highlights the recommendation for 
compiling a catalogue of historical samples and 
data sets, which are not yet analyzed or readily 
available as a high priority activity.  Initially, 
this could be done for egg and ichthyoplankton 
samples and catch data by research vessels.
 
58
 
I. WORKSHOP ON SMALL PELAGICS AND CLIMATE CHANGE IN 
THE NORTH PACIFIC OCEAN, OCTOBER 16-17, 1998 (Convenors: D. 
Hay, Q. Tang, T. Wada, J. Kim, V. Radchenko and L. Jacobson) 
 
Objectives 
 
1. To compare the present findings on the response of small pelagic species to ocean climate 
changes in the PICES areas. 
 
2. To encourage research collaboration among member countries through identifying key 
hypotheses and research methods suitable for testing the hypotheses. 
 
Summary of papers 
 
A Population Dynamic Model for Japanese Sardine - Why does the Sardine Show Such a 
Large Population Fluctuation 
 
Tokio Wada and Yoshioki Oozeki 
National Research Institute of Fisheries Science, Yokohama, Japan 
 
 
In the population fluctuation of Japanese sardine, 
Sardinops melanostictus, periods of high and low 
abundance last for several decades, respectively.  
With the fluctuation of population, various 
ecological changes have been observed such as 
shift of spawning ground, expansion or reduction 
of the geographical area of nursery ground, and 
changes in the relative fecundity, or fecundity per 
unit of biomass.  In addition, a significant 
relationship has been pointed out between the 
survival rate from egg to one-year-old fish and the 
SST of the Kuroshio Extension in winter.  As a 
mechanism of the fluctuation, we supposed a 
positive feedback loop and that was driven by 
density-dependent changes in the range of 
distribution and food availability under the 
observed ocean climate change, and we tested the 
hypothesis by developing a simple population 
dynamic model.  Assumptions for modeling are as 
follows: 
 
1. the life history of sardine is divided into egg, 
juvenile, and adult stages; 
2. egg production is linearly proportional to the 
number of adults, but the regression 
coefficient increases during the high 
abundance period; 
3. survival rate from egg to juvenile is 
proportional to the food availability (food 
density x feeding efficiency x area of nursery 
ground / egg production), and the feeding 
efficiency is proportional to the food density; 
4. area of nursery grounds approaches 
asymptotically to the maximum with 
increasing egg production; 
5. food density in nursery ground fluctuates 
periodically corresponding to the SST of the 
Kuroshio Extension in winter. 
 
Under these assumptions, model outputs showed 
cyclic changes in the numbers of recruits and 
adults and an abrupt increase and decrease of the 
survival rate.  The relationship between egg 
production and number of recruits corresponded 
well to the observed stock-recruitment 
relationship.  These results suggest that changes in 
food availability cause the recruitment success or 
failure, and a positive feed back loop sustains the 
population abundance at either high or low levels. 
 
59
Biological Production, Variability, and Standards for Sustainable Yield in the Great 
Sardine and Anchovy Stocks 
 
Larry Jacobson (presented by Tokio Wada) 
Southeast Fisheries Science Center, La Jolla, U.S.A. 
 
 
Introduction 
This study is a part of the first co-operative work 
under the GLOBEC-SPACC (small pelagic fishes 
and climate change) program.  A total of 14 
scientists from 12 countries contributed data for 
catch, biomass, and area of spawning grounds for 
9 stocks of 5 sardines and 7 stocks of 5 anchovies.  
The purpose of this work is to measure annual 
surplus production in sardine and anchovy stocks 
using only biomass and catch data, and then to 
compare the characteristics of population 
fluctuation between stocks, species groups 
(anchovies vs. sardines) over time based on the 
annual surplus production.  The purpose also was 
to link climate research and fisheries management. 
 
Methods 
Calculations are very simple.  Annual surplus 
production in year t (P
t
) is calculated as the 
difference in biomass between successive years 
with a correction for catch: 
 
P
t 
= B
t+1 
+ δC
t 
 - B
t
 
 
where B
t
 is biomass at the beginning of year t, C
t
 
is catch in year t, and δ adjusts catch in year t to 
the corresponding biomass at the beginning of 
year t+1 if there had been no fishing.  The annual 
instantaneous production rate ρ
t
 = ln[(B
t+1
+δC
t
)/ 
B
t
], and production per unit spawning area is 
calculated as P
t
/A
t
 where A
t
 is the area of 
spawning grounds in year t. 
 
Results 
Production rates respond more quickly to climate 
change than biomass, catch or production.  Results 
for Japanese sardine and other stocks with regime 
shifts show that changes in catch, biomass and 
production lag changes in production rates by 5 to 
10 years.  Where the regime shift means 
discontinuous changes in production rate or 
reproduction rate with climate change.  This 
suggests that we should not use catch, biomass or 
production to identify onset of climate effect.  We 
should use production rates. 
 
Other interesting results 
Many years of data (i.e. long time series of data) 
are required to measure variation in production 
and production rates.  Plots of CV for annual 
production to Years of Data show a positive 
correlation.  Extreme (maximum and minimum) 
production rates measure how fast a stock can 
increase or decrease in abundance.  The minimum 
and maximum production rates were more extreme 
for five anchovy stocks than for nine sardine 
stocks although mean production rates for two 
groups were similar. 
 
Production rates in consecutive years are 
positively correlated for long lived sardines and 
uncorrelated or negatively correlated for shorter 
lived (mostly anchovy) species. 
 
Natural mortality rate is negatively correlated to 
life span.  Thus, biological effects on favorable 
and unfavorable conditions last longer in sardine 
and effects of environmental variation appear to be 
mediated by longevity. 
 
Average annual production per unit spawning area 
ranged from 1.2 to 16 mt/km
2
 for four anchovy 
and six sardine stocks and the median was 3.8 
mt/km
2
.  The range and median of production per 
unit spawning area for sardine and anchovy are 
similar in both species. 
 
Comparisons of production rate and production 
per unit area between stocks suggests temporal 
differences in the effect of environmental 
variation.  For instance, production per area of 
California sardine was much smaller than Japanese 
 
60
sardine in the Pacific Ocean although they had 
similar ranges and medians of production rate.  
This corresponds to actual observations of changes 
in spawning and nursery grounds of both species.  
The spawning ground expands along the coast 
with population increase in California sardine.  On 
the contrary, changes in the area of spawning 
ground are relatively small but nursery grounds 
expand extremely with population abundance in 
Japanese sardine.  Therefore the result of the 
comparison suggests that California sardine will 
be more sensitive to local (and probably short-
term) environmental fluctuation in earlier life 
stages than Japanese sardine. 
 
This approach is very simple.  However it gives 
valuable information about the range and 
variability of biological production and fishery 
yield in small pelagic stocks.  It may be useful to 
expand the approach to consider other small 
pelagics in the North pacific as a standard method 
for comparative retrospective studies in the CCCC 
Program. 
 
 
Carrying Capacity Changes of Oyashio Shelf Ecosystem with the Disappearance of 
Japanese Sardine 
 
Makoto Kashiwai
1
, Tokio Wada
2
, Dan Ware
3
, C. Robinson
4
 and Orio Yamamura
1 
1 
Hokkaido National Fisheries Research Institute, Kushiro, Japan 
2 
National Research Institute of Fisheries Science, Yokohama, Japan 
3 
Pacific Biological Station, Nanaimo, Canada 
4 
Parks Canada Agency, Vancouver, Canada 
 
 
Introduction 
Ecosystem models sometimes are referred to as 
works of art or fiction.  Models, however, can 
assist with understanding a system as a whole.  
Important matters for ecosystem models are 
validation and analysis of model behavior.  In this 
paper, we develop a method to analyze behavior of 
an ecosystem and natural populations from field 
data. 
 
Scientific question 
How does the large biomass of Japanese Sardine 
that migrates into the Oyashio Shelf Region 
change the structure and function of the 
ecosystem? 
 
Model 
We use a Trophodynamic Model developed for the 
Oyashio Shelf Region through collaboration with 
the Pacific Biological Station, Fisheries and 
Oceans, Canada and Hokkaido National Fisheries 
Research Institute, Japan.  The main components 
of the model are phytoplankton (diatoms), 
zooplankton (copepods), euphausiids, Japanese 
sardine, pollock and the pollock fishery.  The 
model is driven by nutrient supply, depth change 
of the surface mixed layer and mixing and by 
excretion by animals.  In this model, zooplankton 
and euphausiids make seasonal or ontogenetic 
vertical migrations and sardines make seasonal 
horizontal migrations.  The eco-physiological 
parameters for each ecosystem component are 
tuned within the range of values appearing in 
published literature.  Initial biomass levels are 
determined from the results of time course 
observation of model output, including sudden 
termination of sardine migration. 
 
Method for analysis 
We use the relation between P/B ratio and 
Biomass, derived by Wada and Kashiwai (1989) 
from Nicholson-Bailey type host-parasite or 
predation model for analysis of individual growth 
of Japanese sardine from field data, as follows: 
 
P/B = EgC (at/A){1-(at/A) (B/2)}, 
 
where P = growth (production), B = biomass, Eg = 
growth efficiency, C = food abundance, a =  area 
 
61
searched during unit time, t = searching time, and 
A = habitat area.  
 
This relationship describes the density effect on 
individual growth under given food abundance, or 
the carrying capacity for the population for a given 
structure of the ecosystem. 
 
Results 
The transient responses of the model diminish 
within 2 or 3 years.  After the disappearance of 
sardine migration, the biomass level of 
euphausiids exceeded the biomass level of 
copepods, but when sardine migrate, copepods 
decrease while diatom increase.  A similar 
phenomenon appears in the La Perouse Bank 
ecosystem with change in Hake biomass 
(Robinson, 1994).  The P/B - B relation for 
copepods, euphausiids and pollock show linear 
relation with negative slope within initial biomass 
change of ± 20 %.  EgC (at/A), i.e. the maximum 
P/B ratio when B=0, show linear decrease with 
trophic level.  The relative size of individual 
habitat (at/A), or relative share of food resources, 
decreases with trophic level. 
 
The P/B - B relation for sardine shows that the 
historical maximum biomass is the limiting level 
beyond which density effect increase significantly 
and causes decrease in individual growth. 
 
Conclusions 
1. The P/B - B relationship is important in the 
analysis of ecosystem function  (i.e., change in 
carrying capacity); 
2. The P/B - B relationship depends on the 
structure of the ecosystem.  If a major 
ecosystem element changes its biomass level 
drastically, the P/B - B relationship has 
different characteristics. 
3. The P/B - B relation for Japanese sardine 
shows that the historical high biomass level is 
the limiting level of biomass that cause 
structural change on ecosystem. 
 
 
Acoustic Estimation of Biomass of the Small Pelagic Fishes in the East China Sea 
 
Seiji Ohshimo 
Seikai National Fisheries Research Institute, Nagasaki, Japan 
 
 
Introduction 
In the East China Sea, biological productivities are 
considered to be very high.  The high productivity 
in this region supports various fisheries of China, 
Korea and Japan.  Japanese fisheries caught over 
300,000 tons of demersal fishes such as yellow 
croaker (Larimichthys polyactis) by bottom trawl 
net in 1960s, but landings of these fishes landing 
has decreased because of overfishing (Tokimura 
1998).  Tokimura (1998) also suggested the 
necessity of cooperative resource management of 
demersal fishes by China, Korea and Japan. 
 
On the other hand, commercial landings of pelagic 
fishes by the Japanese (large powered) purse seine 
fleet were kept at a level of about 500,000 t from 
the 1970s to the 1990s.  However, these pelagic 
fish stocks may be overfished, because their body 
size became smaller and the age of the beginning 
of reproduction shifted to younger ages.  
Therefore, pelagic fishes in the East China Sea 
also should be managed cooperatively by China, 
Korea and Japan.  For rational management of the 
pelagic fish stocks, knowledge of the basic 
biological characteristics, including stock structure 
or distribution pattern of subpopulations, stock 
assessment and population dynamics are essential.  
However, for a variety of economic, political and 
biological reasons, much basic biological 
knowledge is not available.  In addition to these 
commercially important species, it is important to 
understand the biological information of non-
commercial animals, because they have a very 
large biomass and play important roles in the 
ocean ecosystem.  However, stock assessment of 
non-commercial fishes is very difficult from the 
commercial fishery’s data.  Therefore, research 
vessel surveys, such as acoustic surveys, are 
 
62
necessary to understand the ecosystem in the 
ocean.  In the present study, I show the biomass 
estimation not only for commercial fishes but also 
for non-commercial fishes using acoustic method 
in the East China Sea and adjacent seas. 
 
Methods 
1. Acoustical instruments 
We used two acoustical instruments: the Furuno 
FQ-70 (50kHz) and the Simrad EK500 (38kHz).  
The biomass of anchovy (Engraulis japonicus) in 
the East China Sea and Yellow Sea, micronekton 
(Maurolicus muelleri) in the Sea of Japan and 
Japanese sardine (Sardinops melanostictus) 
spawners in the waters off western coast of 
Kyushu were estimated by the FQ-70.  The 
biomass of several pelagic fishes in the outer rim 
of continental shelf, and several fishes in the 
waters off western coast of Kyushu were estimated 
using an EK500. 
 
2. Fish identification 
We used midwater trawling, Issacs-Kidd midwater 
trawling (IKMT), and fisheries statistics for fish 
identification.  A cover net (20 mm mesh) was 
attached to the midwater trawl on outside of cod 
end (60 mm mesh).  The midwater trawl net was 
towed for from 30 minutes to 1 hour.  The warp 
length of the trawl net and towing speed were 
adjusted in order to aim the net opening at the 
strata of fish schools.  The towing speed ranged 
from 2 to 3 knots during trawling.  Trawl catches 
were frozen immediately on the vessel.  When the 
catch was numerous, about 30 kg subsamples were 
picked up after the measurement of total weights 
of the catch.  Samples were weighed by species at 
land laboratory after the survey.  We used IKMT 
trawls (2 mm mesh) for identifying the organisms 
in deep scattering layers.   The IKMT trawls were 
towed for 10 minutes, and towing speed was about 
2 knots during trawling.  All of samples were fixed 
in 10% formaldehyde.  Annual landing data of the 
pelagic fishes were quoted from the fisheries 
statistics of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, 
and Fisheries, Government of Japan. 
 
 
3. Biomass estimation 
3.1 Furuno FQ-70 
Biomass (S) was calculated with the mean of 
volume back-scattering strength in each 
integration interval value (SV: dB), target strength 
value (TS: dB) and water volume (m
3
) in the each 
integration interval, as follows: 
 
S=VΣ10
(SV-TS)/10 
 
The SV values were logged on computer for each 
0.5 mile.  The TS value for anchovy and Japanese 
sardine was -31.4 dB/kg and -31.5 dB/kg, 
respectively.  The TS value for Maurolicus 
muelleri was calculated as TS=17.4BL-69.6 
(Hamano, 1993), where BL is body length in cm. 
 
3.2 Simrad EK500 
The SA (m
2
/nm
2
) values were logged on the 
workstation computer (software: BI-500) for each 
5 nautical mile, and given by the equation. 
 
SA=σ 1852
2
/(ψz
2
) 
 
where σ is the back-scattering cross-section of the 
target, z (m) is the sphere depth, and ψ is the solid 
angle covering the equivalent beam.  For biomass 
estimation, the area density (ρ) is calculated as 
ρ=SA/<σ>, where <σ> is the mean of σ.   The 
relationship between TS and σ is calculated as 
σ=4π10
(TS/10)
.  We estimated the biomass using the 
target strength of fishes as follows: 
 
Jack mackerel (Trachurus japonicus): 
TS=20logBL-71.70 
Round scad (Decapterus maruadsi): 
TS=20logBL-67.50 
Chub mackerel (Scomber japonicus): 
TS=20logBL-71.90 
Anchovy:  
TS=20logBL-71.90 
Round herring (Etrumeus teres): 
TS=20logBL-71.90, 
Black Scrapper (Thamnaconus septentrionalis): 
TS=20logBL-65.80, 
Lanternfish (Myctophidae): 
TS=20logBL-67.50, and 
Maurolicus muelleri:  
TS=17.4BL-69.60. 
The equations of the target strength of jack 
mackerel, chub mackerel and black scrapper were 
 
63
quoted from Mukai et al. (1993), and anchovy, 
round herring and lantern fish were recommended 
by Simrad. 
 
Results and discussion 
Five acoustic surveys we carried out for biomass 
estimation of small pelagic fishes in the East 
China Sea and adjacent seas.  They were as 
follows: 
1. anchovy in the East China Sea; 
2. micronekton in the Japan Sea; 
3. Japanese sardine spawners of western Kyushu; 
4. several different species of fishes in the edge 
of continental shelf; 
5. several different species of fishes of western 
Kyushu. 
 
The biomass of anchovy was estimated as about 
two million tons in the East China Sea and Yellow 
Sea (Ohshimo, 1996). A China-Norway 
cooperative acoustic surveys also indicated about 
three million tons of anchovy in the East China 
Sea, Yellow Sea and Bohai Sea (Iversen et al., 
1993).  The biomass estimates of both surveys in 
the East China Sea  (Iversen et al., 1993;  
Ohshimo, 1996) are similar.  However, Japanese 
fisheries have not caught the anchovy in this 
region, because the price of anchovy is lower than 
other species.  Therefore, fishery catch statistics 
may not be accurate as indicators of biomass for 
this species.  In contrast, the acoustic survey is 
useful for estimating anchovy’s biomass.  This 
estimate also is important, because anchovy is a 
key species in the midwater ecosystem in the East 
China Sea. 
 
The mesopelagic fish (Maurolicus muelleri) in the 
Japan Sea is also a key species in the midwater 
ecosystem.  Maurolicus muelleri feeds on the 
zooplankton (Ikeda et al., 1994), and are preyed 
upon by larger carnivorous animals such as 
mackerel, tuna and squid (Nishimura, 1959).  It is 
generally believed that the biomass of 
micronekton such as Maurolicus muelleri is very 
large, but there are few studies on biomass 
estimation of micronekton in the East China Sea 
and adjacent sea.  Ohshimo (1998) estimated the 
density of Maurolicus muelleri in the southwestern 
part of the Japan Sea as about 30g/m
2
.  This value 
is nearly equal to previous papers in Japan Sea 
(Hamano, 1993), and that in fjords (Gjøsæter, 
1978;  Lopes, 1979), but larger than that in the 
Red Sea (Armstrong and Prosch, 1991).  The 
biomass estimation of micronekton like this study 
would be helpful for understanding of the 
midwater ecosystem, because it has been difficult 
to estimate the abundance of these non-
commercial fishes. 
 
The acoustic survey of Japanese sardine spawners 
has been carried out since 1984 in the waters off 
west of Kyushu.  Temporal variation in biomass 
from these surveys (Ohshimo et al., 1998) was 
similar to the stock fluctuation calculated from 
VPA methods (Hiyama et al., 1995).  Therefore 
the acoustic survey is also an important method for 
assessing the stock level of small pelagic fishes, 
and it also can be useful for monitoring changes of 
distribution pattern with stock fluctuation 
(Ohshimo et al., 1998). 
 
With the development of the post-processing 
software (Simrad BI-500; Foote et al., 1991), we 
could estimate the biomass of multi-species on 
computer.  We estimated the biomass of anchovy 
(96,000 t), black scrapper (199,000 t), jack 
mackerel (392,000 t) and round scad (163,000 t) in 
the offshore area of continental shelf in the East 
China Sea.  Many pelagic fishes are found in the 
East China Sea and the productivities of pelagic 
fishes is very high in this area.  The acoustical 
survey was suggested to be a powerful method to 
estimate the biomass in this area, and should be 
continued for rational management and prediction 
of population dynamics. 
 
Four acoustic surveys were conducted, two in the 
summer and two in the winter, in the waters off 
western coast of Kyushu.  We estimated the 
biomass of seven species of pelagic fishes: 
anchovy, round herring, jack mackerel, round 
scad, chub mackerel, lantern fish and Maurolicus 
muelleri.  All biomass estimates in winter were 
smaller than those in summer.  The largest 
biomass was anchovy, at about 20,000 t in summer 
in 1997 and 1998.  Lanternfish biomass was also 
large, and the ranged from 3,000-18,000 t in 1997 
and 1998. 
 
64
We conclude that the acoustic survey is a useful 
method for biomass estimation in the midwater 
habitat.  However, there are major two problems to 
be solved in the future.  One is fish identification, 
and the other is target strength.  Since there are 
over 600 species of fishes in the East China Sea, 
fish identification on echogram is difficult.  In the 
present study, midwater trawlings were mainly 
used for fish identification.  However, there are 
some problems of midwater sampling, because 
vulnerability to midwater trawl nets varies with 
species and extensive midwater sampling require a 
lot of time.  The problems of target strength are 
also caused from fish species diversity in the East 
China Sea.  The target strengths of many fishes 
have not yet been measured.  These measurements 
should be made and the results made available on 
the internet. 
 
Generally speaking, the population size of pelagic 
fishes has fluctuated from both overfishing and 
environmental factors.  However, the population 
decline of Japanese sardine was caused by 
recruitment failures, not by overfishing (Watanabe 
et al., 1995).  This was demonstrated by research 
vessel surveys, so we should use the data from 
such research vessel surveys, such as egg surveys 
and acoustic surveys, for predicting the population 
dynamics of small pelagic fishes.  In addition, 
acoustic surveys can estimate the biomass of non-
commercial fishes such as lantern fish and 
micronekton which have important roles in the 
ecosystem.  So, acoustic surveys should be used 
for studying the midwater ecosystem in the future.  
Since the abundance of zooplankton could be 
estimated by IKMT nets combined with and high 
frequency echo sounder (unpublished data), entire 
mid-water ecosystems, from zooplankton to fishes, 
might be clarified in the future. 
 
References 
Armstrong, M.J., and R.M. Prosch.  1991.  
Abundance and distribution of the 
mesopelagic fish Maurolicus muelleri in the 
southern Benguela system. South African 
Journal of Marine Science, 10: 13-28. 
Foote, K.G., H.P. Knudsen, R.J. Korneliussen, 
P.E. Nordbø, and K. Røang.  1991.  
Postprocessing system for echo sounder data. 
J. Acoust. Soc. Ame., 90: 37-47. 
Gjøsæter, J.  1978.  Resource study of 
mesopelagic fish. Ph.D thesis, University of 
Bergen, pp203. 
Hamano, A. 1993. Studies on the acoustic method 
for estimating biomass of micronektonic fish. 
J. Shimonoseki Univ. Fish., 41: 85-165 (in 
Japanese). 
Hiyama, Y., H. Nishida, and T. Goto.  1995.  
Interannual fluctuations in recruitment and 
growth of the sardine, Sardinops 
melanostictus, in the Sea of Japan and 
adjacent waters. Res. Popul. Ecol., 37: 177-
183. 
Ikeda, T., K. Hirakawa, and N. Kajihara.  1994.  
Diet composition and prey size of the 
mesopelagic fish Maurolicus muelleri 
(Sternoptycidae) in the Japan Sea. Bull. 
Plankton Soc. Jpn., 41: 105-116. 
Iversen, S. A., Zhu, D., Johannessen, A., and 
Toresen, R. 1993. Stock size, distribution and 
biology of anchovy in the Yellow Sea and 
East China Sea. Fisheries Research, 16: 147-
163. 
Lopes, P. C. 1979. Eggs and larvae of Maurolicus 
muelleri (Gonostomatidae) and other fish eggs 
and larvae from two fjords in western Norway. 
Sarsia, 64: 199-210. 
Mukai, T., Sano, N., IIda, K., and Sasaki, S. 1993. 
Studies on dorsal aspect target strength of ten 
species of fish collected in the East China Sea. 
Nippon Suisan Gakkaishi, 59: 1515-1525 (in 
Japanese). 
Nishimura, S. 1959. Observations on the spawning 
and the early life history of the pearlsides in 
the adjacent waters to Noto peninsula in the 
Japan Sea. Ann. Rept. Jap. Sea Reg. Fish. Res. 
Lab., 5: 61-75 (in Japanese). 
Ohshimo, S. 1996. Acoustic estimation of biomass 
and school character of anchovy, Engraulis 
japonicus, in the East China Sea and the 
Yellow Sea. Fisheries Science, 62:  
Ohshimo, S. 1998. Distribution and stomach 
contents of Maurolicus muelleri in the Sea of 
Japan (East Sea). Journal of Korean Society of 
Fisheries Resource, 1: 168-175. 
Ohshimo, S., Mitani, T., and Honda, S. 1998. 
Acoustic surveys of spawning Japanese 
 
65
sardine, Sardinops melanostictus, in the waters off 
western and southern of Kyushu. Fisheries 
Science, 64: 665-672. 
Tokimura, M. 1998. Groundfish stocks in the East 
China Sea and Yellow Seas. in “Aiming at the 
establishment of fisheries management 
technology (ed. by Kitahara, T.)” Kouseisha-
Kouseikaku, Tokyo (in Japanese). 
Watanabe, Y., Zenitani, H., and Kimura, R. 1995. 
Population decline of the Japanese sardine, 
Sardinops melanostictus owing to the 
recruitment failures. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci., 
52: 1609-1616. 
 
 
General Observations of Changes in Abundance of Small Pelagics and Specific Observations 
on Changes in Timing and Distribution of Herring Spawn in British Columbia: Impacts of 
Climate Change? 
 
Douglas E. Hay and Bruce McCarter 
Pacific Biological Station, Nanaimo, Canada 
 
 
OVERVIEW 
In the 1990s several small pelagic species 
increased in abundance in British Columbia.  
Sardines, mackerel, capelin, anchovy are now 
commonly encountered in local waters but two of 
these species (sardines and capelin) were rare or 
unknown in the previous decade, although both 
were present in the 1940s and 1950s.  Except for 
herring, biomass estimates are not available, but 
the high incidental capture rate in commercial 
catches and research fishing samples is strong 
evidence of a widespread increase in abundance of 
these small pelagic species.  Herring abundance is 
estimated annually and in most areas of the BC 
coast herring abundance is high, and at historically 
high levels in some areas.  Remarkably however, 
the spatial range and temporal duration of 
spawning of herring has decreased.  Further, the 
size at age of herring has decreased.  There is 
another observation that may have relevance: that 
is, in contrast to the apparent increases in pelagic 
species, the abundance of many demersal species 
has declined in recent years.  We cannot 
demonstrate that these interspecific changes are 
related, nor can we prove that any of the changes 
are caused by, or related to, concurrent changes in 
ocean climate, although we take it for granted that 
climate change does occur and can be described  
(e.g. Wooster and Hollowed 1995).  On the other 
hand, we have no evidence to falsify the 
hypothesis that these changes, either the increases 
in small pelagics or decreases in demersal fishes, 
are caused by climate change.  There are many 
examples of probable effects of climate change in 
fish populations and communities (see Beamish 
1995) but few where the linkage between climate 
change and biological impact are shown 
definitively.  This conundrum has been discussed 
by Bakun (1996), mainly with respect to the 
dilemma of correlation analyses between 
biological indices and environmental signals, such 
as sea-surface temperature.  Probably, the solution 
will require the elucidation of some of the 
complex bio-physical process and may new inter-
national and inter-disciplinary studies are in 
progress, many with PICES connections.  In the 
meantime, the documentation of biological 
observations is important, and that is the objective 
of this brief report. 
 
OBSERVATIONS ON SMALL PELAGICS 
Sardines  ( Sardinops sagax) are common on the 
BC coast in the late 1990’s, but they were 
unknown from the mid-1950’s to the late 1980’s.  
This change is part of a major change in sardines 
that occurred mainly in more southern waters off 
the USA and Mexico (Lluch-Belda et al. 1992).  
Sardines were common in BC during the 1930’s 
and 1940’s although spawning was thought to be 
limited to southern waters (Hart 1973).  In general, 
sardines in BC consisted mainly of larger, older 
fish moved north in the summer to feed in BC 
waters (Hart 1973).  There were suggestions that 
there was a spawning population in an inlet in the 
 
66
west coast of Vancouver Island, but that was not 
confirmed.  In recent years, however, some sardine 
has been captured in the winter and some juvenile 
sardines also have been captured.  
 
Mackerel (Scomber japonicus) abundance in BC 
waters fluctuates with long periods when it is rare 
and other times when it is common (Hart 1973).  
In the last several years, mackerel have been 
noticed more frequently and there have been 
concerns about the impact of these piscivores on 
juvenile salmon.  In the last 2 years, their 
abundance has increased to the point where 
commercial fisheries have been initiated (A. 
Thomson, Pacific Biological Station, Nanaimo 
BC, personal communication). 
 
Anchovy ( Engraulis mordax) have always been 
present in southern BC waters, and there are 
indications that in some years they are more 
abundant than others, but there are no biomass 
estimates available.  Mainly anchovy are found in 
more southern waters (Richardson 1981).  
Anchovy are known to spawn in inshore waters 
during mid-summer in southern Vancouver, and 
perhaps elsewhere.  It is uncertain if their 
abundance has increased substantially in recent 
years, but it is known that they are now commonly 
found as part of the incidental capture of fishing 
efforts directed at other species.  For instance, 
anchovy were captured incidentally in 1998 in 
Georgia Strait during surveys for juvenile herring 
(Haegele and Armstrong, ms 1999). 
 
Although capelin ( Mallotus villosus) are not and 
have never been abundant in BC waters, they were 
known to spawn every year, in the fall, at a 
number of different areas on the southern BC 
coast.  Their spawning sites, in inter-tidal pebble 
beaches, were well known to local people and 
supported small recreational fisheries in certain 
areas (Hay 1998).  Total catches were small, 
however, and would not have accounted for the 
apparent disappearance of capelin about 20 years 
ago, in the mid- to late 1970’s.  In 1993 and 1994, 
capelin reappeared in BC, mainly as spawning 
aggregations at the heads of inlets joining to the 
Strait of Georgia.  In 1998 capelin were captured 
in research seine hauls in the northern part of the 
Strait of Georgia (Haegele and Armstrong 1999). 
In the north Atlantic the distributions of capelin 
are known to change over time, presumably in 
response to some sort of environmental change 
(Vilhjalmsson, 1994) but this has not been 
described before for the eastern Pacific. 
 
Herring ( Clupea pallasi) have been fished 
commercially since the turn of the century.  
Annual estimates of abundance are made, based on 
analyses of age and estimates of spawning biomass 
based on egg deposition.  Herring stocks collapsed 
in the mid-1960’s following a period of intense 
fisheries with high annual catches.  In the 1970’s 
the spawning stocks appeared to recover and a 
new fishery for roe was opened.  Since then, 
biomass estimates are made on 5 different 
components, or stocks, on the BC coast 
Schweigert et al. 1998).  Although all vary in time, 
and not always in synchrony, nearly all of the 5 
major stock groupings are at historical high levels 
in the late 1990’s (compared over the period from 
1930 to 1998). 
 
Herring spawning has been documented in BC 
since the 1930’s.  Over that time over 26,000 
records have been collected on the location, date 
and approximate size of the spawn, from which 
indices of egg abundance have been estimated 
(Hay and Kronlund 1987, Hay and McCarter 
1998).  Probably, most of the spawning has been 
documented.  Records of the timing and 
distribution of spawning areas of in BC have been 
collected since the 1930’s.  Major changes have 
occurred in the last two decades (Hay and 
McCarter 1997, 1998).  In all locations the total 
amount of spawn has fluctuated throughout the 
last 65 years, but total spawn deposition, which is 
a function of abundance, is very high in the 
1990’s.  In many areas, however, the distribution 
of spawning sites has changed. In general, present 
spawning areas are more spatially concentrated, 
with fewer, larger spawning sites especially in the 
Strait of Georgia and the west coast of Vancouver 
Island.  Within parts of the BC coast, spawning 
has stopped in some areas and started in others.  
Also, the duration of the spawning season has 
decreased in all areas since 1970.  The first spawns 
 
67
are later and the last spawns are earlier, although 
the mean time has not changed. 
 
Another recent change has been noted in pacific 
herring: size at age is decreasing in recent years.  
Recruiting herring are smaller and the sizes of the 
oldest herring also smaller.  The sizes are not 
unprecedented but size at age is now the smallest, 
for all age groups, since the 1930’s.  (Tanasichuk 
and Schweigert 1998). 
 
Other observations: low abundance of demersal 
species 
The recent changes – or increases - in theses 5 
pelagic species, all of which are usually found in 
near-surface waters during some period within the 
diurnal cycle, are in contrast to what appears to be 
a general decline in many demersal species.  This 
is especially apparent in a small species smelt, the 
eulachon (Thaleichtys pacificus) which, like 
capelin, herring and anchovy, is a small silver fish, 
but it is found mainly in benthic habitats, often in 
close proximity to shrimps (Pandalus sp) (Hay et 
al. 1997).  The abundance of a number of other 
demersal species has declined in recent years, 
including some rockfish species (Sebastes), Pacific 
cod (Gadus macrocephalus) and others. 
 
Implications: what is happening and what is the 
explanation? 
Is there a ‘pelagic outburst’?  If the observations 
above are accurate, then the present relationship 
between pelagic and demersal fishes in BC, and 
perhaps in other parts of the northeast Pacific is 
almost the opposite of that described by Cushing 
(1979) for the North Sea.  At that time Cushing 
showed that the abundance of North Sea herring 
and mackerel was low whereas the abundance of 
gadoid species (i.e. cod and haddock species) was 
high.  He referred to the situation as a ‘gadoid 
outburst’.  Gadoids are demersal species but 
herring and mackerel are pelagic species.  Cushing 
reviewed several potential explanations for the 
gadoid outburst, and climate change was one of 
them.  He suggested that if climate were affecting 
gadoids, it may have been a trophic effect, by an 
effect on zooplankton availability as food.  At the 
present time in British Columbia, and perhaps 
elsewhere in the North Pacific, we appear to have 
an ecosystem that favors small pelagics, which 
may be a sort of ‘pelagic outburst’.  Although this 
is the antithesis of the Cushing’s observations, 
similar mechanisms may be operational (perhaps 
trophic impacts from climate change. 
 
Changes in herring spawn.  For the purposes of 
herring management, the BC coast is divided into 
108 small geographic units called sections, of 
approximately equal size.  In the last decade, the 
numbers of sections receiving spawn declined 
(Hay and McCarter 1998).  This indicates that the 
geographic spawning range of herring has 
concentrated into a fewer number of larger 
spawning sites, that are distributed in all parts of 
the BC coast.  Further, the duration of the 
spawning season is now shorter in all areas.  In 
general, in the 1990’s, compared to previous 
decades, the first spawns are later and the last 
spawns are earlier, although the mean spawning 
time has not changed.  These changes have 
occurred during a period when total spawn 
deposition is relatively high in most areas.  
Therefore it seems counter-intuitive to observe 
decreases in spawning range and duration when 
total spawning is increasing.  Ordinarily, we 
would probably expect that both the geographic 
range of spawning areas, and the duration of 
spawning times to expand, as a function of 
increasing spawning biomass.  The simple 
observation presented here, however, does not 
appear to support this.  Rather, the increase in 
herring biomass is associated with a concurrent 
reduction in spawning range, spawning duration 
and decreasing size at age.  (Note: during later 
discussions in the PICES workshop, Evelyn Brown 
noted that the same pattern appears to have 
occurred in Pacific herring spawning in Prince 
William Sound Alaska.  Also Tokio Wada 
indicated the spawning range of Japanese sardine 
seems to be decreasing as the stock is increasing.)  
It is interesting to speculate that the Baltic herring 
(Clupea harengus membras ) have also decreased 
their spawning duration, by the loss of fall 
spawners, during the same period that total 
biomass has increased sharply.  There are, 
however, other interpretations for the changes in 
Baltic herring (Aneer 1985, Anon 1996). 
 
68
The main point of the observations on spawning, 
however, is to point out that if they are related to 
biomass, and if biomass is affected by changes in 
ocean climate, then we can see that the impact of 
climate change is far reaching, affecting all aspects 
of the biology of herring.  In the instance of BC 
herring populations, the changes in spawning 
populations have been a source of great concern to 
many local communities and environmental 
groups.  Specifically there are concerns that he 
reductions of spawning areas represent losses of 
discrete herring stocks.  This point is under 
investigation and new research initiatives have 
been launched to examine this.  Perhaps these 
concerns will be shown to be correct, and we 
should know within a few years, but in the 
meantime fishery management has been difficult.  
On the other hand, the results may also show that 
the changes in spawning distribution are not 
associated with loss of discrete stocks, or any loss 
of genetic variation.  If so, we probably will 
conclude that the changes in spawning duration 
and geographic ranges are related to stock 
abundance, but in a complex way that we do not 
fully understand.  If climate change is a causative 
factor for changes in abundance, then will then 
understand that the ramifications on other aspects 
of herring biology – specifically spawning biology 
– also is affected. 
 
Climate change – and other explanations.  Most of 
the observations in species abundance, and the 
changes in herring spawning patterns coincide 
with changes in sea-surface temperature or other 
indices of climate change.  Such covariance, 
however, cannot be considered as proof of the role 
of climate, or even strong evidence, because other 
factors may be involved.  The sardine fluctuations 
in California are well documented, and it is not 
clear that temperature or climate change can be 
identified as a prime causal factor regulating these 
changes.  Similarly, throughout their entire 
northern circumpolar range, capelin are known to 
have occasional excursions into southern waters, 
and it is not clear if these are related to climate 
change.  It is interesting, though, that the new 
appearance of capelin in the Pacific seems to 
coincide with a movement of capelin to the south 
in Atlantic Canadian waters. 
Summary 
We observed a general increase in the abundance 
of 5 pelagic species, decreases in a number of 
demersal species and changes in ocean climate.  If 
climate change is the causative agent for observed 
changes in the fish populations, we acknowledge 
that we do not understand the mechanisms.  Also, 
we recognize that there are other possible 
explanations, including effects of fishing, or other 
factors, usually of anthropogenic origin that could 
produce some of these changes.  These other 
factors, however, may not necessarily result in 
synchronous changes in fish populations, 
especially in a number of different species.  
Therefore we tentatively conclude that the 
synchrony of change among different populations, 
specifically the increase in abundance of 5 
different small pelagic species in BC in the 
1990’s, is an important observation that constitutes 
evidence of broad effects on marine ecosystems.  
These changes are consistent with the hypothesis 
that climate changes is a major causative agent 
affecting the distribution, abundance and biology 
of the 5 small pelagics species discussed in this 
report. 
 
References 
Anon. 1996. Report of the working group on 
multispecies assessments of Baltic fish. ICES 
C.M. 1996/Assess:1. 
Anner, G.  Some speculations about the Baltic 
herring (Clupea harengus membras) in 
connection with the eutrophication of the Baltic 
Sea.  Can J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 42: 83:90. 
Bakun, A. 1996.  Patterns in the oceans: ocean 
processes and marine population dynamics.  
California Sea Grant College System. 323 p. 
Beamish, R.J. 1975.  [ed.].  Climate change and 
northern fish populations.  1995.  Can. Spec. 
Publ. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 121: 739 p. 
Cushing, D.H. 1979.  The decline of the herring 
stocks and the gadoid outburst.  J. Cons. Int. 
Explor. Mer. 39:70-81. 
Haegele C.W. and R. Armstrong. 1999.  Juvenile 
herring survey of the Strait of Georgia and 
Johnstone Strait.  MS.  Unpublished report of 
the BC Herring Research and Conservation 
Society. 81pp. 
 
69
Hart, J.L. 1973.  Pacific Fishes of Canada. Bull. 
180. Fish. Res. Bd. Can. 740 p.  
Hay, D.E. 1998.  Historic changes in eulachon and 
capelin populations in the Strait of Georgia. Pp 
42-44.  In Pauly, Pitcher and Preikshot [eds.]. 
Back to the Future: reconstructing the Strait of 
Georgia ecosystem. University of BC Fisheries 
Centre.  
Hay, D. E. and A. R. Kronlund. 1987. Factors 
affecting the distribution, abundance, and 
measurement of Pacific herring (Clupea 
harengus pallasi) spawn. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. 
Sci. 44: 1181-1194. 
Hay, D.E. and P.B. McCarter. 1997. Variation in the 
timing and distribution of herring spawn in 
Georgia Strait. PSARC Working paper H97-7. 
Hay, D.E. and P.B. McCarter. 1998. Distribution 
and timing of herring spawning in British 
Columbia.  PSARC Working Paper H98-5. 
44pp 
Hay, D.E., J. Boutillier, M. Joyce and G. 
Langford.  1997.  The eulachon (Thaleichthys 
pacificus) as an indicator species in the North 
Pacific.  Wakefield Fisheries Symposium.  
Alaska Sea Grant College Program 97-01: p 
509-530. 
Lluch-Belda, D., R.A. Schwartzlose, R. Serra, 
R.H. Parrish, T. Kawasaki, D. Hedgecock and 
R.J.M. Crawford.  1992.  Sardine and 
Anchovy regime fluctuations of abundance in 
four regions of the world oceans: A workshop 
report.  Fish. Oceanography.  1:339-347. 
Richardson, S.L. 1981.  Spawning biomass and 
early life history of northern anchovy, 
Engraulis mordax, in the northern sub-
population off Oregon and Washington.  Fish. 
Bull. 78:855-876. 
Schweigert, J.F., C. Fort and L. Hamer. 1998.  
Stock assessment for British Columbia herring 
in 1997 and forecasts of the potential catch in 
1998.  Can. Tech. Rep. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 2217. 
64 p.  
Tanasichuk, R. W. and J.F. Schweigert.  1998.  
Variation in size at age of Pacific herring and 
its implications for quatoa recommendations 
and fisheries management.  Herring PSARC 
Working paper H98-3. 23pp.  
Wooster, W. S. and A.B. Hollowed. 1995. 
Decadal-scale variations in the eastern 
subarctic Pacific.  I. Winter ocean conditions, 
p81-85.  In R.J. Beamish [ed.]  Climate change 
and northern fish populations.  Can. Spec.  
Publ. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 121.  
Vilhjalmsson, H. 1994.  The Icelandic capelin 
stock.  Journal Marine Institute, Reykjavik: 
12: 1-279. 
 
 
Scale and Causes of Growth of the Pacific Herring Abundance in the Western Bering Sea 
in the 1990s 
 
Vladimir I. Radchenko 
Pacific Research Institute of Fisheries and Oceanography, Vladivostok, Russia 
 
 
The Korf-Karaginsky population is a basic 
component of the herring stock structure in the 
western Bering Sea.  Several small groupings 
(so called "lake herrings") dwell the 
northwestern region.  During summer some 
herring migrate there from the eastern Bering 
Sea. 
In the early 1990s, a drastic decrease of walleye 
pollock biomass and growth of herring 
population took place in the western Bering Sea 
in conditions of regime shift.  The Korf-
Karaginsky herring exploitable biomass doubled 
by 1996 (up to 420,000 t) compared to estimations 
in 1986-1987.  This stock has further opportunities 
to increase due to high recruitment of the 1993 and 
1994 brood years.  The success of these brood years 
was determined at under-yearling stage.  Survival 
rates have likely increased for early life stages. 
 
Herring distribution during feeding migrations, in 
particular terms of eastward migration behind the 
Olyutorsky Cape depend from water circulation 
pattern features and intensity of water inflow on the 
shelf.  Eastward from the Olyutorsky Cape herring 
 
70
are mostly aggregated near the Central Bering 
Sea Current (CBSC) divergence.  In the 1990s 
the area suitable for the herring feeding route 
was expanded due to a northeastern shift of the 
CBSC divergence zone. 
 
Environmental changes were favourable for 
survival of early stages as for feeding route of 
adult herring in the western Bering Sea.  Opposite 
trends of herring and walleye pollock stock 
dynamics are determined by distinctions in ecology 
and feeding habits of these species.  Decline of 
zooplankton biomass in the offshore waters effects 
herring to a lesser degree since fish feed mostly on 
plankton concentrations at ocean fronts. 
 
 
Forage Fishes in the Bering Sea:  Distribution, Species Associations and Biomass Trends 
 
Richard D. Brodeur
1
, Matthew T. Wilson
2
, Gary E. Walters
2
, & Igor V. Melnikov
3
 
1
 Northwest Fisheries Science Center, Newport, U.S.A. 
2
 Alaska Fisheries Science Center, Seattle, U.S.A. 
3
 Pacific Research Institute of Fisheries and Oceanography, Vladivostok, Russia 
 
 
Relatively little is known about distribution 
patterns and species associations of forage fishes 
in the Bering Sea, despite their importance as 
major prey of many higher trophic level 
organisms, such as seabirds, marine mammals, 
and predatory fishes.  In this study, we examined 
survey data on some dominant pelagic forage 
fishes (herring Clupea pallasi, capelin Mallotus 
villosus, and eulachon Thaleichthyes pacificus) 
and the juvenile stages of major commercial 
groundfish species (walleye pollock Theragra 
chalcogramma and Pacific cod Gadus 
macrocephalus).  We analyzed two main data 
sets: 1) a 1987 Russian survey that covered most 
of the Bering Sea, and 2) National Marine 
Fisheries Service (NMFS) summer surveys 
(1982-95) in the eastern Bering Sea which 
sampled the same grid of stations each year.  In 
the Russian survey, age-0 pollock had the highest 
biomass and were the most widely distributed forage 
fish, although jellyfish and age-2+ pollock 
dominated the biomass overall.  Several 
geographically distinct assemblages were recognized 
in both the eastern and western Bering Sea.  Age-0 
pollock were associated with warmer bottom 
temperatures and capelin with colder bottom 
temperatures compared with other species.  
Distributions of all species from the NMFS surveys 
during a cold year (1986) were more widespread and 
overlap among species was greater than during a 
warm year (1987).  Pacific herring showed the most 
dramatic fluctuations in their biomass index over 14 
years of NMFS trawl surveys and was the dominant 
forage fish caught in most years, although when 
their biomass index was low, they were exceeded by 
age-1 pollock, eulachon, and capelin. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
71
Effect of Short-Term Fluctuations of Water Temperature on Fish Catch by Set-Net Fishing 
Around Awa-Shima Island in the Sea Of Japan 
 
Hiroshi Nishida 
National Research Institute of Fisheries Science, Niigata, Japan 
 
 
Background and objective 
During the last 10 years, the catch level of 
yellowtail and jack mackerel migrating in the 
Tsushima Warm Current area of the Sea of Japan 
has increased.  Catch data by coastal set-nets are 
useful for analyzing temporal variation in 
migrations of this species.  Fluctuation in daily 
catch efforts of set-nets among each operating 
days is not as large as other similar fisheries.  
Also, there are many set-nets operating everyday 
along the coastal region of the Sea of Japan side of 
Japan mainland.  However, often unexpectedly 
good catches are found in the set-net catch data.  
This study examined the relationship between 
short-term fluctuation of water temperature and 
these unexpectedly good catches. 
 
Material and methods 
Awa-shima Island is located at the eastern part of 
the Sea of Japan (38°28' N 139°15' E).  This area 
is influenced by the Tsushima Warm Current and 
has a large coastal set-net fishery.  
 
The analysis was made for the data on fish-landing 
by the set-net twice a day in the morning and 
evening and water temperature measured at the 
mouth of set-net at 1-hour interval from May to 
July in three successive years, 1995-1997.  Among 
various fishes landed, the landing records of 
marketable-size tuna, yellowtail, jack mackerel 
and sea bream were compared with fluctuation of 
water temperature. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Each year, the water temperature rose from 11-12 
to 18-20°C by the end of July.  The daily 
fluctuation was small at the beginning, then 
increased about 3°C at the end of May, and again 
became less.  The main observations are: 
 
1. Occasional catches of tuna and constant 
landings of yellowtail start after the water 
temperature exceeds 14°C (Fig. 1). 
2. Good catches of yellowtail, over 1000 
individuals per day, are observed when daily 
fluctuation of water temperature becomes 2-
3°C (Fig. 2). 
3. Catches of spawning adults of both jack 
mackerel and sea bream do not correspond to 
daily change of water temperature.  The results 
on sea bream in 1996 is shown in Figure 3. 
 
Therefore the movement or migration of tuna and 
yellowtail was considered to be under the 
influence of short-term fluctuation in the 
surrounding water condition.  In contrast, the 
movement of spawning adults of jack mackerel 
and sea bream was considered to be a normal part 
of their spawning behavior rather than an effect of 
short-term fluctuation of water temperature.
 
 
72
9
11
13
15
17
19
20-May
24-May
28-May
1-Jun
5-Jun
9-Jun
13-Jun
17-Jun
21-Jun
25-Jun
29-Jun
3-Jul
7-Jul
Max. water temperature (C)
1
10
100
1000
10000
Yellowtail and tuna catch 
(Nos.)
W.T.
yellowtail
tuna
 
Fig. 12 Daily fluctuations in maximum water temperature and catches of yellowtail and tuna. 
 
 
 
 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
20-May
25-May
30-May
4-Jun
9-Jun
14-Jun
19-Jun
24-Jun
29-Jun
4-Jul
9-Jul
Difference between maximum and 
minimum water temperature (C)
1
10
100
1000
10000
Yellowtail catch (Nos.)
difference
yellowtail
 
Fig. 13 Daily fluctuations in water temperature and catch of yellowtail 
 
 
 
 
73
1
10
100
1000
20-May
24-May
28-May
1-Jun
5-Jun
9-Jun
13-Jun
17-Jun
21-Jun
25-Jun
29-Jun
3-Jul
7-Jul
Sea bream catch 
(Nos.)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Female 
gonadal weight (g)
Catch
1 kg-size
2 kg-size
 
Fig. 14 Daily fluctuations in catch of sea bream and monthly change of mean gonadal weight of adult 
females in each kg size category. 
 
 
Which is Responsible for Fluctuating Squid Catch Rates - Fishing or Climate Change? 
 
Yasunori Sakurai
1
, John R. Bower
1
, Jun Yamamoto
1
 & Hiromi Nakao
2
 
1
 Hokkaido University, Hakodate, Japan 
2
 Oshima-Seibu Fisheries Expansion Office, Matsumai, Japan 
 
 
Most exploited squid species have a very short life 
span (annual or sub-annual); thus the only 
manners in which catch levels and the 
reproductive success effected by environmental 
conditions at the spawning grounds in one year 
affect the abundance the following year is through 
the stock-recruitment relationship. We will present 
some examples of recent stock fluctuations for two 
Japanese squids, the ommastrephid Todarodes 
pacificus and the loliginid Loligo bleekeri, in 
relation with climate regime shifts in waters 
around Japan after the 1980s. 
 
Todarodes pacificus catch rates have fluctuated 
during the 20
th 
 century.  It has been suggested that 
the stock reduction that occurred during the 1970s 
and 1980s was caused by both changing 
environmental conditions and fishing pressure.  
However, annual catch rates have gradually 
increased since 1987, despite the lack of catch 
regulations.  In addition, paralarval catch rates 
since 1989 have been higher than during the late 
1970s and the mid-1980s.  On the other hand, 
Loligo bleekeri catch rates in northern Japan have 
fluctuated annually, with a large drop from 1984 
to 1988 and a gradual increase since 1989.  The 
recent stock increases of both species appear to be 
related to a regime shift to warmer temperatures 
around Japan that occurred in the late 1980s.  Both 
squids recruitment were related mainly to the area 
of their spawning grounds.  Recruitment in both 
species may have increased due to a warming and 
resulting expansion of the spawning grounds.
74 
Identifying Seasonal Spatial Scale for the Ecological Analysis of Herring and Other Forage 
Fish in Prince William Sound, Alaska 
 
Evelyn D. Brown
1
, Jia Wang
2
, Shari L.Vaughan
3
, Brenda L. Norcross
1
 
1
 Institute of Marine Science, University of Alaska Fairbanks, U.S.A. 
2
 International Arctic Research Center, University of Alaska Fairbanks, U.S.A. 
3
 Prince William Sound Science Center, U.S.A. 
 
 
Recently there has been increasing interest in the 
distribution, abundance and ecology of forage 
fish because of their role in nearshore and 
pelagic ecosystems.  In Alaska, however, 
relatively little is know about forage fish 
species.  From 1995 to 1997 extensive 
ecosystem studies were conducted in response to 
the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill.  Monthly aerial 
surveys were made to determine the distribution 
and abundance of juvenile Pacific herring 
(Clupea pallasi) and other surface schooling 
forage fish (Brown and Norcross 1997).  
Physical and biological data, useful for 
ecological analyses of forage fishes were also 
gathered concurrently.  Before we could 
comment on ecosystems, we recognized that 
basic descriptive life history parameters and the 
spatial overlap with other ecological parameters 
needed to be documented first.  The first general 
goal of the research was to conduct ecological 
analysis of forage fish distribution and 
abundance using appropriate temporal and 
spatial scales.  The objective of this report is to 
use a Geographic Information System (GIS) to 
identify and define the appropriate seasonal and 
spatial scale. A starting place to define spatial 
scale is to examine processes for each species of 
interest.  A fish such as herring, may be affected 
by one scale during spawning, another during 
the larval stage and yet another during the 
juvenile stage.  Therefore seasonal affects on 
spatial scale should be defined first.  In addition, 
traditional nested quadrat analyses may not truly 
reflect the scale of bottom forcing events.  We 
therefore chose to start by looking at the spatial 
distribution of forcing events.  For this 
examination of scale, we evaluated some of the 
available spatial data by season and removed 
interannual variability by pooling all years for 
which data were available.  In order to gain a better 
understanding of the timing of physical and 
biological processes affecting forage fish, we plotted 
events along a linear time scale pooled over the 
years of data availability (Fig. 1). 
 
Timing of events 
Most of the ecological activity associated with the 
timing of forage fish activities in the surface waters 
(upper 100 m) occurred during the spring and 
summer months from April to August.  In addition, 
we found that biological processes affecting forage 
fish during this period were concentrated in the 
upper 20 m of the water column.  The activity was 
initiated by the formation and strengthening of the 
stratified layer (Data source CLAB Buoy 1991-
1997; Eslinger 1997; Central PWS); this is 
accompanied by a steady increase of temperature in 
the upper 20 m of the water column (Fig.1, panel 1). 
 
The phytoplankton bloom peaked in April during the 
formation of the stratified layer at approximately 20 
m at a temperature of approximately 5°C 
(Chlorophyll a CFOS Buoy and southwestern PWS, 
1994-1997; D. Eslinger, unpublished data, 
University of Alaska, Fairbanks; Eslinger 1997; 
McRoy et al. 1997; Fig.1, panel 2) the offshore 
zooplankton bloom began in April and peaked in 
June (mid-sound and southwestern PWS, 1981 to 
1997; Cooney 1997 and 1998;  T. Cooney, 
unpublished data, University of Alaska, Fairbanks).  
The inshore zooplankton bloom (near the juvenile 
herring rearing sites; Stokesbury et al. 1998) 
followed similar timing to the offshore bloom but 
was apparently more highly concentrated (1996 
data; R. Foy, unpublished data, University of 
Alaska, Fairbanks; Fig. 1, panel 2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1 The timing of key ecological events in Prince William Sound, Alaska including: the formation 
of the stratified layer (depth in m left axis) and ocean temperatures at 20 m depth (C, right axis); primary 
and secondary production (mg/m
2
 or mg/m
3
); herring spawning (cumulative miles of spawn, right axis) 
and larval fish (no. larvae/m
3
, left axis); surface schooling forage fish (total m
2
 school surface areas; 
capelin on right axis, sandlance and herring on the left); and apex predators (total no. of individuals, 
kittiwakes on gulls on left axis, sea lions and seals on the right). 
 
 
Pacific herring spawning commenced after 
temperatures started rising (>4°C) and peaked 
when the stratified layer first formed (15 d 
cumulative estimates of miles of spawn, 1985-
1997; ADF&G, Cordova Office, unpublished 
data; Fig.1, middle panel).  From a single larval 
fish survey in 1989 (Norcross and Frandsen 1996), 
peak densities of larval pollock (Theragra 
chalcogramma) and Pacific herring (the second and 
fourth most abundance larval fish species found in 
PWS) roughly coincided with the peak of the 
zooplankton bloom (Fig. 1, middle panel).  Capelin 
Physics 
Prim. & Sec. 
Productivity 
Embryos and 
Larval Fish 
Surface Schooling 
Forage Fish 
Apex Community 
0
50
100
0
5
10
15
Stratified
Depth (m)
20m
Temp (C)
0
500
1000
1500
2000 Chlorophyll a
(mg/m^2)
Nearshore
Zo o p. ( mg / m^ 3 )
Offshore
Zo o p. ( mg / m^ 3 )
1
10
100
1000
10000
100000
0
50
100
150
Herring
Capelin
Pollock
Herring
Spawn
0
500
1000
1500
0
50
100
150
200
Juvenile
He rring
Juvenile
Sandlance
Adult
Capelin
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
15
45
75
105
135
165
195
225
255
285
315
345
0
200
400
600
Kittiwakes
Gulls
Seals
Sea Lions
 76
(Mallotus villosus; the third most abundant 
larval fish species) showed a bimodal trend in 
abundance peaking later in July and then again 
in early fall, remaining abundant into October. 
 
During 1995-1997, the most abundant surface 
schooling forage fish species observed from the 
air were juvenile Pacific herring, juvenile 
sandlance (Ammodytes hexapterus), and adult 
pre-spawning capelin (Brown 1998) (Fig. 1, 
panel 4).  Juvenile herring (mainly age 1; E. 
Brown, unpublished data) appeared in the 
surface waters beginning in May after the 
stratified layer formed, temperatures had 
increased to at least 5°C, and coinciding with the 
onset of the zooplankton bloom.  Their 
abundance steadily climbed, peaking in July and 
August after the age 0 herring joined the age 1 
juveniles in the nursery bays.  The appearance of 
sandlance in the surface waters coincided with a 
recruiting event (E. Brown, unpublished data) of 
age 0 fish in the nearshore zone in July and 
August well after the peak of the bloom.  The 
occurrence of large pre-spawn schools of capelin 
showed two peaks, one in June and one in 
August (E. Brown, unpublished data) possibly 
indicated bimodal spawning events in PWS. 
 
Information on aggregations of foraging 
predators was collected as auxiliary data during 
aerial surveys from 1995 to 1997.  Those results 
indicated Stellar sea lions and glaucous-winged 
gulls were abundant in aggregations in April, 
coinciding with the herring-spawning event (Fig. 
1, bottom panel).  Black-legged kittiwake and 
sea lion aggregations peaked in June coinciding 
with increases in surface schools of herring and 
capelin.  The appearance of harbor seals peaked 
while sea lions continued to be abundant during 
July and August likely due to the return of large 
numbers of spawning salmon in PWS. 
 
SPATIAL OVERLAYS BY SEASON 
Monthly overlays from April through August of 
physical and biological data were produced 
using a GIS.  In April, the stratified depth is  ~25 
m in the central sound with a mean temperature 
of 4.2°C at a 20 m depth.  Over the 20 year 
hydrographic data set available, the warmest 
regions occurred in northeast, north and northwest 
PWS ( ≥5.7°C); the coolest (2.9°C) occur in the 
central sound associated with anti-cyclonic gyre and 
at the entrances and exits to PWS from the Gulf of 
Alaska (GOA) (Fig. 2).  The densest water was 
associated with the central gyre and the least dense 
water was associated with warmer regions and 
downstream from western glacial-filled fjords.  The 
residual currents were generally low ranging from 
0.001 to 0.210 m·s
-1
 with a mean flow of 0.04 m·s
-1
 
(Fig. 2).  The flow to and from PWS during this 
month was minimal.  Herring spawning regions 
occurring during the 80s were generalized.  
Spawning regions occurred adjacent to, south, north 
and east of the central gyre, but never west; all 
spawning occurred well inside the “oceanographic 
boundaries” of PWS.  During this month all the 
surface schooling fish (all herring), gulls, and 
aggregations of sea lions were associated with the 
herring spawn.  Larval fish abundance was generally 
low and only pollock larvae were observed (1989; 
Fig. 2). 
 
 
Fig. 2 Ecological features within Prince William 
Sound, Alaska during the month of April. 
In May, the stratified depth had increased to 30 m 
with an average temperature at 20 m of 5.5°C.  The 
temperatures all over PWS showed a large increase 
from April (not shown), but the northeastern region 
of PWS remained the warmest (up to 6.9°C) and the 
regions associated with high flow and gyres the 
coolest (down to 4.2°C).  Some of the “hot spots” in 
 77
PWS were now associated with exchange of 
GOA water at the entrance and exits.  The 
overall density of the water was lower during 
May with the least dense water still associated 
with higher temperatures.  Ocean flow increased 
from April to a range of 0.004 to 0.284 m·s
-1
 
with a mean flow of 0.042 m·s
-1
 (Fig. 3). 
 
 
Fig. 3 Ecological features within Prince 
William Sound, Alaska during the month of 
May. 
 
The central gyre intensified, reversed direction 
(now anti-cyclonic) and extended farther north.  
In addition, the net flow into and out of PWS 
greatly increased during this month.  
Topography steered cross sound flow was also 
observed in the north region of PWS.  Larval 
fish peaked in abundance during May and were 
broadly distributed (except capelin that was only 
observed in the northeast region) with and 
outside of the gyre-related currents.  Note that 
herring larvae were as abundant west of the 
spawning regions as well as adjacent to them. 
By June, temperatures at 20 m had risen 
significantly (mean at 7.3°C) with the stratified 
layer depth approaching 50 m.  The 
temperatures during June were more uniform 
over the sound with a range of 5.4 to 9.8°C; 
however, “hot spots” were still observed in the 
eastern sound and adjacent to the GOA. Density 
declined slightly from May, but this time 
apparently in response mainly to changes in salinity 
rather than temperature.  Although the range of 
ocean flow lessened slightly from May (to 0.001 to 
0.204 m·s
-1
), the mean flow was higher at 0.054 m·s
-
1
.  The flow into and out of the sound intensified 
from May with the formation of smaller topography-
steered cyclonic gyres east and west of the inflow; 
overall, the exchange of surface water appeared to 
have increased over May. 
 
Larval fish were still relatively abundant and 
widespread (not shown) with an increase in the 
relative abundance of herring over pollock.  No 
capelin larvae were observed.  The most notable 
feature in June was the increase in appearance of 
surface schooling forage fish (Fig. 4). 
 
 
 
Fig. 4 Ecological features within Prince William 
Sound, Alaska during the month of June. 
The most abundant species was juvenile herring 
inside the sound and adult pre-spawn capelin outside 
the sound.  A small number of sandlance schools 
were also observed inside the sound.  Black-legged 
kittiwakes were highly associated with surface 
schooling forage fish with notably large flocks 
associated with the capelin spawning aggregations.  
Gulls and sea lions (not shown) did not appear to be 
significantly associated with the juvenile herring, 
however there were aggregations of both observed 
near capelin spawning events. In July, temperatures 
at 20 m climbed to 10.1°C but the depth of the  
 78
 
Fig. 5 Ecological features within Prince 
William Sound, Alaska during the month of 
July. 
 
stratified layer was similar to June.  The overall 
temperature range was 6.0 to 13.6°C with the 
warmest regions occurring again in the eastern 
and now northern sound.  The coolest region 
remained in the central sound associated with 
strong currents.  Densities were similar to June.  
The ocean flow was also similar to June ranging 
from 0.0002 to 0.315 m·s
-1
 with a mean flow of 
0.054 m·s
-1
 (Fig. 5).  Larval fish were overall 
less abundant than in June but still widespread 
with a decrease in the occurrence of both 
pollock and herring; the notable feature was the 
occurrence of large numbers of capelin broadly 
distributed within the sound (probably resulting 
from the spawning events observed in June; not 
shown).  The numbers of surface schooling fish 
increased significantly over June largely due to 
an increase in both herring and sandlance (Fig. 
5).  This distribution of herring and sandlance 
extended well west of PWS along the Outer 
Kenai Peninsula.  We believe this increase is due 
to recruiting events of age 0 fish for both species 
(based on unpublished data, E. Brown).  As in 
June, kittiwakes were largely associated with the 
surface schooling fishes while aggregations of 
associated gulls and sea lions were not observed.  
 
 
Fig. 6 Ecological features within Prince William 
Sound, Alaska during the month of August and 
delineation of proposed ecological “regions”. 
 
In August, both the stratified depth (over 50 m) and 
temperatures at 20 m (mean 10.4°C) peaked over 
this five-month period.  Temperatures ranged from 
4.3 to 12.7°C with the same pattern of higher 
temperatures around the “rim” of PWS but cooler 
temperatures associated with presumably ice-melt in 
the northern fjords. Density and salinity remained 
very similar to July.  Although ocean flow peaked 
during this month (over the five month series) with a 
range of 0.0002 to 0.435 and a mean flow of 0.082 
m·s
-1
 (Fig. 6).  The flow into and out of the sound 
remained strong but the central gyre reversed 
direction to generally anti-cyclonic flow.  Winds 
within PWS determined to a great degree the 
strength and directions of the gyres and surface 
currents.  All the biological activity observed in the 
surface waters declined greatly during this month.  
Although capelin larvae were still present, they 
appeared to have migrated or advected out of PWS 
(Fig. 6). 
 
The conclusion of this exercise is that there is 
variability in the seasonal spatial scale of bottom 
driven forcing events in PWS.  In an analysis of 
spatially explicit ecological processes in PWS, there 
appear to be three major regions to be considered 
(Fig. 6). 
 
 79
The eastern portion of the sound is generally 
warmer, but influenced biologically by the 
central gyre and inflow and seasonally highly 
variable.  The northern and northwestern part of 
the sound is generally quieter, less variable and 
less influenced by the inflow.  The central 
region adjacent to the GOA is very dynamic, 
affected by the most intense flows and is very 
likely responding to events outside of PWS to a 
much greater degree than the other two regions.  
This last region is also probably associated with 
greater losses of larval fish (advection of larvae 
out of PWS).  The Outer Kenai may be an 
“overflow” area for biological processes 
occurring within the sound. 
 
References 
Brown, E.D. and B.L. Norcross.  1997. 
Assessment of forage fish distribution and 
abundance using aerial surveys: survey 
design and methodology, Appendix I, 
Chapter 11 in 11 in Cooney, R.T.  1997.  
Sound Ecosystem Assessment (SEA) – an 
integrated science plan for the restoration of 
injured species in Prince William Sound.  
FY96 Annual Report for the Exxon Valdez 
Trustee Council, Anchorage, Alaska.  Pages 
25-53 pp. 
Brown, E.D. 1998.  Preliminary documentation 
of temporal and spatial variability of Pacific 
herring, other forage fish, and seabirds in 
Prince William Sound, Alaska, Appendix II, 
Chapter 10 in Cooney, R.T.  1997.  Sound 
Ecosystem Assessment (SEA) – an 
integrated science plan for the restoration of 
injured species in Prince William Sound.  
FY96 Annual Report for the Exxon Valdez 
Trustee Council, Anchorage, Alaska.  Pages 
44-79 pp. 
Cooney, R.T. 1997.   The Role of Zooplankton 
Restoration Project 97320-H, Chapter 4 in 
Cooney, R.T.  1997.  Sound Ecosystem 
Assessment (SEA) – an integrated science 
plan for the restoration of injured species in 
Prince William Sound.  FY96 Annual 
Report for the Exxon Valdez Trustee 
Council, Anchorage, Alaska.  Pages 35 pp. 
Cooney, R.T. 1998.  The Role of Zooplankton 
Restoration Project 97320-H, Chapter 4 in 
Cooney, R.T.  1998.  Sound Ecosystem 
Assessment (SEA) – an integrated science plan 
for the restoration of injured species in Prince 
William Sound.  FY97 Annual Report for the 
Exxon Valdez Trustee Council, Anchorage, 
Alaska.  22 pp. 
Eslinger, D.L. 1998.  Biophysical modeling and 
validation through remote sensing, Chapter 5 in 
Cooney, R.T.  1998.  Sound Ecosystem 
Assessment (SEA) – an integrated science plan 
for the restoration of injured species in Prince 
William Sound.  FY97 Annual Report for the 
Exxon Valdez Trustee Council, Anchorage, 
Alaska.  37 pp. 
McRoy, C.P., A. Ward, E.P. Simpson, K. 
Tamburello, J. Cameron, S. McCullough, and P. 
Cassidy.  Phytoplankton and Nutrients 
Restoration Project 97320G, Chapter 3 in 
Cooney, R.T.  1998.  Sound Ecosystem 
Assessment (SEA) – an integrated science plan 
for the restoration of injured species in Prince 
William Sound.  FY97 Annual Report for the 
Exxon Valdez Trustee Council, Anchorage, 
Alaska.  85 pp. 
Stokesbury, K.D.E., E.D. Brown, R.J. Foy, and B.L. 
Norcross.  1997.  Juvenile herring growth and 
habitats, Restoration Project 95320T Annual 
Report, Chapter 11 in Cooney, R.T.  1997.  
Sound Ecosystem Assessment (SEA) – an 
integrated science plan for the restoration of 
injured species in Prince William Sound.  FY96 
Annual Report for the Exxon Valdez Trustee 
Council, Anchorage, Alaska, 75p. 
 
II. REVIEW OF THE PRESENT STATUS OF NATIONAL GLOBEC AND 
GLOBEC- LIKE PROGRAMS RELATED TO SMALL PELAGICS 
 
 
On the second day of the REX Workshop, the 
participants considered recruitment prediction, 
spatial studies (nursery/spawning areas), size-at-
age and somatic growth, species alteration, and 
assessment and sampling methods as discussion 
points to identify key questions. 
 
Key questions 
The participants considered the two following 
questions as key questions which were related to 
higher trophic levels and addressed in CCCC 
Implementation plan as the basic key questions. 
 
1. How do life history patterns, 
distributions, vital rates, and population 
dynamics of small pelagic species respond 
directly and indirectly to climate variability? 
(PICES Scientific Report No. 4)? 
2. Do small pelagic species respond to 
climate variability solely as a consequence 
of bottom up forcing?  Are there significant 
intra-trophic level and top down effects on 
small pelagic species?  (PICES Scientific 
Report No. 4)  
 
and addressed the following as key questions 
specific to small pelagic species: 
 
1. Do small pelagic species respond in 
same way between high and low latitude and 
longitude? 
2. Can we distinguish between changes 
induced by climate change and those 
changes related to fishing other 
anthropogenic, or intrinsic biological 
variation? 
3. How does small pelagic fish community 
structure vary with oceanographic 
conditions? 
4. Do small pelagic species in the eastern 
and western Pacific exhibit similar patterns 
of year-class strength? 
5. Does spawning time (duration) and 
spatial range change with stock abundance 
and size structure? 
6. Does size at age change with stock size? 
 
Key Hypotheses 
At the 1997 REX workshop, the mid-water and 
demersal fish group considered the principal 
mechanisms underlying the fish species response to 
climate variability.  Then they addressed key 
hypotheses to correspond to each mechanism.  
Following this approach, participants identified 
starvation, transport, concentration, prey suitability, 
prey type, competition, and predation mortality as 
mechanisms relative to survival of early life stages.  
Participants also considered that changes in 
distribution and growth rate resulting from climate 
changes in adult stages as important factors affecting 
survival of early life stages.  From these discussions, 
the suggested hypotheses linking climate variability 
and the response of small pelagic species are listed 
as follows: 
 
1. STARVATION 
a. Survival of small pelagic fish larvae depends on 
matching hatch dates with the peak zooplankton 
production (i.e. the match miss-match theory).  
Factors that alter the timing of the spring bloom 
can influence “the match miss-match” between 
first feeding larvae and prey availability. 
b. Survival of small pelagic fish larvae and 
juveniles depends on sustained secondary 
production through out the spring and summer 
month. 
 
2. TRANSPORT 
a. Survival of small pelagic fish larvae depends on 
advection to favorable nursery grounds.  
Atmospherically driven shifts in large-scale 
circulation patterns can impact recruitment 
success by changing larval distributions. 
b. Survival of small pelagic fish larvae depends on 
advection to favorable nursery grounds.  Density 
dependent or climatically induced changes in 
spawning grounds can impact recruitment 
success by changing transport condition in time 
and space. 
 
 81
3. CONCENTRATION - Survival of small 
pelagic fish larvae depends on 
mesoscale advection patterns that 
concentrate larvae and their prey.  
Mesoscale features such as eddies or 
frontal systems concentrate prey and 
enhance larval survival. 
 
4. PREY 
SUITABILITY/COMPETITION- 
Survival of small pelagic fish larvae 
depends on the availability of the 
appropriate prey species at suitable size 
for consumption.  Presence of other 
small pelagic species affects the survival 
through the competition for common 
food resources. 
 
5. PREDATION MORTALITY - 
a. ADVECTION:  Survival of small pelagic 
fish depends on advection processes that 
separate larvae and juveniles from their 
predators. 
b. SIZE DEPENDENT MORTALITY:  
Processes that enhance larval and juvenile 
growth rates will reduce predation mortality 
by reducing the time when larval or juvenile 
fish are vulnerable to predation. 
c. PREDATOR / PREY OVERLAP:  
Processes that separate predators from larvae 
and juveniles of small pelagic species 
influences the amount of predation 
mortality. 
 
6. MATERNAL FACTORS - Survival of 
small pelagic fish larvae depends on 
maternal factors, such as fecundity, egg 
quality, mature age, and others, which are 
dependent on the physiological condition of 
adult and that is influenced by climate 
variability. 
 
Workshop Recommendations 
 
To facilitate the research cooperation for testing 
hypotheses, participants made following 
recommendations: 
1. Conduct comparative analysis of larval 
and juvenile vital rates of small pelagic 
species from different regions of the North 
Pacific and its adjacent seas. 
2. Collate and synthesize small pelagic species data 
for comparative studies.  Initially, this could 
involve the exchange of scientists, data 
assembly, and development and application of 
analysis tools.  Hopefully, some or much of this 
could be accomplished in 1999. 
 
3. Choice of scale should be carefully chosen to 
detect mesoscale response. 
 
4. Conduct comparative studies of stock structure 
of small pelagic species in the North Pacific.  
Specifically, we recommend analysis of genetics 
of small pelagic fish stocks to evaluate the 
potential for climate influence on marginal 
populations and stock separation. 
 
5. Define suitable sampling protocols for use in 
assessing the distribution and ecology of 
small pelagic species. 
 
6. Examine sampling characteristics of 
different types of gear, considering factors 
such as availability, selectivity, and 
catchability. 
 
7. Choose sampling methods and technologies 
that are suitable for the temporal and spatial 
scales of the question. 
 
8. Continue to encourage discussions of small 
pelagic species through REX Task Team.  
Conduct a CCCC symposium on small 
pelagic species for the year 2000. 
 
9. Maintain an inventory of scientists active in 
small pelagic species research (perhaps 
activity for TCODE) 
 
10. Consider hake, pollock, and non-commercial 
species (e.g. sandlance, osmerids) in the 
small pelagic species discussions. 
APPENDIX A:  REX WORKSHOP 1999:  HERRING AND EUPHAUSIIDS 
 
 
Background 
 
Herring and euphausiids are key components of 
coastal ecosystems in the sub-arctic region in the 
North Pacific.  Juvenile herring is a predator for 
euphausiids, but it is a competitor for copepods 
such as Calanus and Neocalanus.  Biomass 
fluctuations of euphausiids usually correspond 
closely to fluctuations in primary production, so 
euphausiid biomass fluctuation may be strongly 
affected by climate variability.  Changes in 
euphausiid biomass could affect the growth of 
juvenile herring, and eventually determine the 
degree of winter mortality.  At the same time, 
predation mortality of juveniles by hake or 
pollock, etc. also is changed because these 
predators also feed on euphausiids.  Therefore, 
to examine the ecosystem response, we must 
know the dynamics of the herring - euphausiid 
interactions through the comparative studies among 
areas in the sub-arctic region in the North Pacific. 
 
Proposal 
 
In the workshop, for the major herring populations 
in the Pacific Rim, we will compare the population 
dynamics, then identify the fluctuation patterns and 
changes in life history parameters with climate 
variability.  We also will analyze the food web by 
area, and try to compare the ecosystem response to 
climate change developing a simple trophodynamic 
model. 
 
Venue:  Vladivostok, Russia 
Time:  two days just prior PICES VIII 
Tentative co-conveners:  W.T. Peterson (U.S.A.), 
V.I. Radchenko (Russia), and T. Wada (Japan)
  
 
 
 83
Bass task team Report 
 
 
THE BASS TASK TEAM IS CONCERNED 
WITH THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE BASIN-
SCALE COMPONENT OF THE CCCC 
PROGRAM. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
No formal meeting of BASS was organized at the 
1998 Annual Meeting, however a number of 
informal discussions were held.  This report 
summarizes results of previous meetings, 
describes the activities of the Task Team that were 
conducted in 1998, and presents the 1999 
activities proposed at the 1998 CCCC meeting. 
 
The Basin Studies Task Team will facilitate the 
exchange of scientific data and encourage 
scientific research relating to the implementation 
of the PICES/GLOBEC Science/Implementation 
Plan (PICES 1996).  In general, the oceanography 
and ecology of the eastern and western basins of 
the subarctic Pacific are poorly understood relative 
to the coastal areas.  It is known that the central 
subarctic Pacific is productive as indicated by the 
large abundance of Pacific salmon, squid and other 
important fishes.  Recent studies also suggest that 
the oceanography of the gyres is closely linked to 
the decadal scale changes in climate.  
 
BASS held its first meeting during the Fourth 
Annual PICES Meeting in Qingdao, China, when 
an agreement on organization and general 
objectives was achieved. The task of BASS is to 
facilitate studies of the impacts of climate change 
and climate variability on the physical and 
biological processes in the gyres of the western 
and eastern subarctic Pacific Ocean.  In general, it 
can be considered that these processes drive the 
shelf processes that impact on coastal marine 
resources. 
 
The objective of the CCCC Program is to identify 
the impacts of climate change on the ecosystems 
of the subarctic Pacific.  The scientific questions 
are as follows:  
 
1. Physical forcing:  What are the characteristics 
of climate variability and can interdecadal 
patterns be identified, how and when do they 
arise?  
2. Lower trophic level response:  How do 
primary and secondary producers respond in 
productivity, and in species and size 
composition, to climate variability in different 
ecosystems of the subarctic Pacific? 
3. Higher trophic level response:  How do life 
history patterns, distributions, vital rates, and 
population dynamics of higher trophic level 
species respond directly and indirectly to 
climate variability? 
4. Ecosystem interaction:  How are subarctic 
Pacific ecosystems structured?  Do higher 
trophic levels respond to climate variability 
solely as a consequence of bottom-up forcing?  
Are there significant intra-trophic level and 
top-down effects on lower trophic level 
production and on energy transfer 
efficiencies?  The key research activities were 
identified as (1) retrospective analyses,  (2) 
development of models,  (3) process studies,  
(4) development of observations systems, and 
(5) data management.  
 
At the second meeting of BASS, an action plan 
was developed that was achievable and would 
facilitate the implementation of the CCCC 
Program.  BASS developed a work plan consisting 
of some general, longer–term goals and some 
specific action items.  The plans are ambitious and 
lack specific commitment from the participating 
countries, however they provide background 
information for any group or country planning 
research in the subarctic Pacific. 
 
Details of the plan can be found in PICES 
Scientific Report No. 7, and are summarized here 
for completeness:   
 
Retrospective comparison of lower trophic level 
dynamics in the eastern and western subarctic 
gyres: a link between climate change and 
higher trophic levels.  
 84
Important questions include: 
 
i. Is there sufficient data available from 
representative sites in each gyre for this 
comparison? 
ii. Are there significant differences between the 
gyres in seasonable changes of these 
parameters? 
iii. If so, what are the implications for factors 
controlling total and exportable production at 
each site?  
iv. What are best sites for long-term observations 
and process studies? 
 
Zooplankton standardization 
A major barrier for both retrospective analyses and 
on-going process/monitoring studies is the lack of 
standardization of sampling equipment and 
methodology for zooplankton sampling.  
Differences to be resolved by: 
 
i. Identification of important datasets of 
zooplankton abundance for the eastern and 
western gyre (with assistance of TCODE).  
ii. Documentation of sampling methodologies 
used in these datasets.  
iii. Development of conversion algorithms and 
guidelines for their application.  This may 
involve new sample collections using different 
gear and methods.  
iv. Develop recommendations for common 
sampling equipment and methodologies. 
 
Time series measures of primary 
productivity and zooplankton stocks 
Time-series measurements of primary productivity 
and zooplankton stocks in the open ocean sector of 
the subarctic Pacific are required to better 
understand the relationship between changes in 
plankton populations and changes in the physical-
chemical environment.  A longtime-series (1952-
1981) of weathership data in the eastern subarctic 
Pacific was obtained at Ocean Station P (50°N-
145°W).  The Station P data are suitable for 
demonstrating whether variations in zooplankton 
stocks are related in some direct fashion to 
primary productivity.  There are no comparable 
time series data from the western subarctic Pacific.  
Higher production rates and greater zooplankton 
standing stocks are thought to occur in the western 
subarctic Pacific.  It is anticipated that the 
relationships in the western Pacific will be 
different because the physical conditions there 
differ markedly (deep mixed layer).  
 
The BASS Task Team recommends that PICES 
promote the installation of robust instrumented 
surface moorings in the subarctic Pacific which are 
capable of providing well-calibrated data on 
phytoplankton standing stock, primary 
productivity, dissolved inorganic nutrient 
concentration and zooplankton biomass.  
 
Inventory of higher trophic level species  
It is difficult to consider the impact of physical 
changes in the two gyres because it is not possible 
to identify easily the higher trophic level residents.  
As part of the initial effort of standardizing data 
and building data bases, BASS will identify the 
key higher trophic level species, produce brief life 
histories and provide data from fisheries.  
 
BASS will need to acquire the work or 
science plans of all agencies carrying out 
research in the eastern and western gyres. 
As part of the annual report of BASS, the 
proposed and completed research should be 
identified.  
 
At its second meeting, BASS recommended that a 
series of theme papers on the dynamics of the 
ecosystems in the eastern and western gyres of the 
subarctic Pacific be produced and the results 
presented at a one-day symposium to be held at 
the PICES Annual Meeting in 1997.  The 
symposium examined “Ecosystem Dynamics in 
the Eastern and Western Gyres of the subarctic 
Pacific”.  The theme papers addressed ocean 
responses, climate forcing, nutrients and primary 
production,  remote sensing,  sediment traps,  
microplankton biomass and composition,  
netplankton biomass and composition, a model of 
phytoplankton production dynamics,  salmon,  
common fishes, nekton,  marine mammals and 
birds. 
 
The symposium was held at the PICES Annual 
Meeting in 1997.  All papers were reviewed and 
 85
finalized during 1998.  The symposium 
proceedings will be published (1999) in a special 
issue of Progress in Oceanography.  A paper on 
phytoplankton seasonality in the eastern and 
western subarctic Pacific and western Bering Sea 
which was not presented at the symposium will be 
included in the proceedings. 
 
 
References 
 
PICES. 1996. PICES/GLOBEC Science 
Plan/Implementation Plan. PICES Scientific 
Report No. 4, 64pp 
 
 
TASK TEAM RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Short-term 
 
1. The Co-Chairmen of BASS, R.J. Beamish 
and M. Terazaki, have both asked to be 
replaced.  BASS nominates Gordon A. 
McFarlane (Canada) and Andrei S. Krovnin 
(Russia) as the new Co-Chairmen.  
 
2. In 1999, we propose to (1) identify new 
BASS members to assist in the development 
of a long-term work plan for BASS, and (2) 
hold a special workshop to develop a 
conceptual model of how subarctic gyres work 
and how they change with regime shifts (See 
Appendix A). 
 
3. Assign BASS representative to coordinate 
provision of a list of annual cruises to PICES, 
through contacts in each member country and 
through other organizations such as NPAFC, 
GLOBEC, etc.  
 
4. BASS received a proposal for an iron 
fertilization experiment from C.S. Wong. 
• BASS recognizes iron limitation as an 
important unanswered question in the 
North Pacific and at last year’s meeting 
identified this as an area requiring further 
research 
• BASS recommends that CCCC-IP 
brings this proposed experiment into 
the CCCC Program and provides 
support to meet the goals of the 
experiment by identifying national 
expertise from PICES nations that 
could assist in carrying out the 
experiment. 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX A:  BASS WORKSHOP 1999:  DEVELOPMENT OF A 
CONCEPTUAL MODEL OF THE SUBARCTIC NORTH PACIFIC 
GYRES 
 
 
Objective 
 
Determine how the ecosystems of the subarctic 
North pacific gyres function and how they respond 
to regime shifts.  
 
Outline 
• Workshop format will be similar to the 1997 
REX Workshop.  
• We will use the information brought together 
in the BASS Symposium volume to identify 
research questions and opportunities.  A 
conceptual model comparing the two gyres 
will be developed.  
• The initial focus will be on three areas of 
research: 
- physical structure of the gyres in relation 
to climate change; 
- long-term changes in plankton abundance 
and species composition; 
- trophic relationship; fish, birds, mammals. 
 
 86
PICES-GLOBEC Implementation 
Panel on Climate Change and 
Carrying Capacity Program 
Executive Committee and Task Team 
List 
 
 
Executive Committee: 
Dr. Suam Kim (IP Co-chairman)  e-mail: 
suamkim@sari.kordi.re.kr 
Dr. David W. Welch (IP Co-chairman)  e-mail: 
welchd@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
Dr. Andrei S. Krovnin (BASS Task Team Co-
chairman)  e-mail: akrovnin@mx.iki.rssi.ru 
Dr. Gordon A. McFarlane (BASS Task Team Co-
chairman)  e-mail:  mcfarlanes@pac.dfo-
mpo.gc.ca 
Dr. Michio J. Kishi (MODEL Task Team Co-chairman)  
e-mail: kishi@salmon.fish.hokudai.ac.jp 
Dr. Daniel M. Ware (MODEL Task Team Co-
chairman)  e-mail: wared@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
Dr. Bruce A. Taft (MONITOR Task Team Co-
chairman)  e-mail: bat65@aol.com 
Dr. Yasunori Sakurai (MONITOR Task Team Co-
chairman)  e-mail: 
sakurai@pop.fish.hokudai.ac.jp 
Dr. William T. Peterson (REX Task Team Co-
chairman, U.S.A. GLOBEC)  e-mail: 
bpeterso@sable.nwfsc-hc.noaa.gov 
Dr. Vladimir I. Radchenko (REX Task Team Co-
chairman)  e-mail: root@tinro.marine.su 
Dr. Tokio Wada (REX Task Team Co-chairman)  e-
mail: wadat@s.affrc.go.jp 
Dr. R. Ian Perry (Canada GLOBEC)  e-mail: 
perryi@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
Prof. Qi-Sheng Tang (China GLOBEC)  e-mail: 
ysfri@public.qd.sd.cn 
Dr. Yukimasa Ishida (NPAFC representative)  e-mail: 
ishiday@hnf.affrc.go.jp 
 
 
 
 
*  Task Team Co-chairmen in bold print. 
 
 
BASS Task Team: 
Canada Dr. David L. Mackas
 China 
 mackasd@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 Dr. Gordon A. McFarlane 
 mcfarlanes@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
Japan Dr. Makoto Kashiwai
 Korea
 Dr. Suam Kim 
 kashiwai@ss.hnf.affrc.go.jp 
 suamkim@sari.kordi.re.kr 
 Prof. Makoto Terazaki 
 Dr. Jang-Uk Lee 
 terazaki@ori.u-tokyo.ac.jp 
 julee@haema.nfrda.re.kr 
 Dr. Akihiko Yatsu 
 yatsua@ss.nrifs.affrc.go.jp 
Russia Dr. Alexander I. Boltnev
 U.S.A.
 Dr. Michael L. Dahlberg 
 mail@kamniro.kamchatka.su 
 Mike.Dahlberg@noaa.gov 
 Dr. Andrei S. Krovnin 
 Dr. Bruce W. Frost 
 akrovnin@mx.iki.rssi.ru 
 frost@ocean.washington.edu 
 
 D
r. Bruce A. Taft 
 
 b
at65@aol.com 
  
 Prof. Patricia A. Wheeler 
  
 pwheeler@oce.orst.edu 
 87
MODEL Task Team: 
Canada Dr. R. Ian Perry
 China
 Dr. Da-Ji Huang 
 perryi@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 wyxu@ns2.zgb.com.cn 
 Dr. Daniel M. Ware 
 wared@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
Japan Dr. Masahiro Endoh
 Korea
 Dr. Jae-Hak Lee 
 Endoh@mri-jma.go.jp 
 jhlee@sari.kordi.re.kr 
 Dr. Michio J. Kishi 
 Dr. Sinjae Yoo 
 kishi@salmon.fish.hokudai.ac.jp 
 sjyoo@sari.kordi.re.kr 
Russia Dr. Vadim V. Navrotsky
 U.S.A.
 Dr. Linda Jones 
 navr@online.vladivostok.ru 
 Linda.Jones@noaa.gov 
  Dr. Yury Zuenko 
 Ms. Patricia Livingston 
 root@tinro.marine.su 
 Pat.Livingston@noaa.gov 
  
 Dr. Bernard A. Megrey 
  
 Bern.Megrey@noaa.gov 
 
MONITOR Task Team: 
Canada Dr. David W. Welch
 China
 Dr. Xian-Yong Zhao 
 welchd@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
Japan Dr. Kaouru Nakata
 Korea
 Ms. Young-Jean Choi 
 may31@nrifs.affrc.go.jp 
 yjchoi@iris.metri.re.kr 
 Dr. Yasunori Sakurai 
 Prof. Chul Park 
 sakurai@pop.fish.hokudai.ac.jp 
 chulpark@hanbat.chungnam.ac.kr 
Russia Dr. Vyacheslav B. Lobanov
 U.S.A.
 Dr. Jeffrey M. Napp 
 pacific@online.marine.su 
 Jeff.Napp@noaa.gov 
 Dr. Nikolay A. Rykov 
 Dr. Thomas C. Royer 
 hydromet@online.ru 
 royer@ccpo.odu.edu 
 Dr. Mikhail A. Stepanenko 
 Dr. Bruce A. Taft 
 root@tinro.marine.su 
 bat65@aol.com 
  
 Dr. Warren S. Wooster 
  
 wooster@u.washington.edu 
 
REX Task Team: 
Canada Dr. Richard F. Addison
 China
 Prof. Qi-Sheng Tang 
 addisonr@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 ysfri@public.qd.sd.cn 
 Dr. N. Brent Hargreaves 
 Prof. Rong Wang 
 hargreavesb@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 wangrong@ms.qdio.ac.cn 
Japan Dr. Yasunori Sakurai
 Korea
 Dr. Jin-Yeong Kim 
 sakurai@pop.fish.hokudai.ac.jp 
 jiykim@haema.nfrda.re.kr 
 Prof. Yutaka Nagata 
 Dr. Chang-Ik Zhang 
 nagata@mirc.jha.or.jp 
 cizhang@dolphin.pknu.ac.kr 
 Dr. Tokio Wada 
 wadat@s.affrc.go.jp 
Russia Dr. Vladimir I. Radchenko
 U.S.A.
 Dr. George L. Hunt, Jr. 
 root@tinro.marine.su 
 glhunt@uci.edu 
  
 Prof. Brenda L. Norcross 
  
 norcross@ims.alaska.edu 
  
 Dr. William T. Peterson 
  
 bpeterso@sable.nwfsc-hc.noaa.gov 
 
