 
 
 
 
 
 
PICES Scientific Report No. 18  
2001 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proceedings of the PICES/CoML/IPRC Workshop on 
“Impact of Climate Variability on Observation and Prediction of  
Ecosystem and Biodiversity Changes in the North Pacific” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Edited by 
 
Vera Alexander, Alexander S. Bychkov, 
Patricia Livingston and Stewart (Skip) M. McKinnell 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 2001 
Secretariat / Publisher 
North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES) 
c/o Institute of Ocean Sciences, P.O. Box 6000, Sidney, B.C., Canada.  V8L 4B2 
E-mail:  secretariat@pices.int   Home Page:  http://www.pices.int 

Table of Contents 
 
 
Section I - Presentations and Discussions at Plenary Sessions 
 
Introduction and Overview of Workshop Objectives 3 
 
Plenary Session Presentations 
Cynthia Decker.  The Census of Marine Life:  An update on activities 5 
Julian P. McCreary, Jr.  Decadal climate variability in the Pacific Ocean, and  
theories as to its cause 9 
Warren S. Wooster.  Comments on LMR-GOOS recommendations 14 
Kees Zwanenburg.  Background and objectives of POGO 17 
Kees Zwanenburg.  Plans for a CoML Workshop on Canadian Marine Biodiversity: 
Pacific, Arctic, and Atlantic 19 
David W. Welch.  An appraisal of current Pacific Ocean monitoring efforts existing 
within PICES countries 22 
David W. Welch.  Census of Marine Life - POST (Pacific Ocean Salmon Tagging) 
proposal 23 
 
Reports of the Breakout Group Discussions 
Breakout Group 1:  Physical/Chemical Oceanography and Climate 25 
Breakout Group 2:  Phytoplankton, Zooplankton, Micronekton and Benthos 31 
Breakout Group 3:  Fish, Squid, Crabs and Shrimps 36 
Breakout Group 4:  Highly Migratory Fishes, Seabirds and Marine Mammals 38 
 
Closing Plenary Discussion and Recommendations 41 
 
 
Section II -  Extended Abstracts of Individual Presentations at Breakout 
Group Sessions 
 
Breakout Group 1:  Physical/Chemical Oceanography and Climate  
 
Steven J. Bograd.  CalCOFI hydrographic climatology 47 
Lynn deWitt and Roy Mendelssohn.  Improving access to environmental datasets: 
Data holdings at Pacific Fisheries Environmental Laboratory 49 
Kimio Hanawa.  Japanese repeat hydrographic lines in the North Pacific 54 
Andrei S. Krovnin, Gennady V. Khen, Elena Ustinova and Marat Bogdanov.  
Monitoring of climatic variations in Far Eastern Seas 57 
Vyacheslav B. Lobanov.  On time-series observation programs in the northwestern 
Pacific in Russia 62 
S. Allen Macklin.  Physical and biophysical time-series originating from or used by  
Fisheries Oceanography Coordinated Investigations (FOCI) in the North Pacific  
Ocean and Bering Sea 64 
James E. Overland.  Gridded atmospheric re-analysis fields 74 
iii
Fangli Qiao.  Research on the physical-biological-chemical coupled numerical 
model in China 75 
 
Breakout Group 2:  Phytoplankton, Zooplankton, Micronekton and Benthos  
 
Hal Batchelder.  U.S. GLOBEC Northeast Pacific Program:  Observations,  
retrospective studies and model products 79 
Sonia D. Batten and David W. Welch.  The Continuous Plankton Recorder 
survey of the North Pacific 84 
Richard D. Brodeur.  Micronekton data sets in North Pacific 86 
David M. Checkley, Jr.  Zooplankton in the California Cooperative Oceanic 
Fisheries Investigations 90 
Sanae Chiba.  Japan Sea time-series:  Qualitative study on lower trophic level  
ecosystem may reveal the process on climate-ecosystem interaction 93 
Rita Horner.  Phytoplankton data from the Gulf of Alaska, British Columbia and  
the Pacific coast of the U.S., with emphasis on harmful algal bloom species 96 
Shin-ichi Ito.  Physical and lower-trophic level data time-series in the Mixed  
Water Region 107 
Young-Shil Kang.  Monitoring system and long-term trend of zooplankton in 
the Korean waters 111 
Toru Kobari and Tsutomu Ikeda.  180º longitude - Oceanographic time-series  
information 114 
Carina Lange.  Phytoplankton time-series in the California Current 118 
David L. Mackas.  Canadian activities and plans for zooplankton, phytoplankton, 
micronekton, and benthos monitoring in the Pacific Ocean 122 
William T. Peterson, Julie Keister, Leah Feinberg and Cheryl Morgan.   
Monitoring of coastal pelagic ecosystems off Oregon, Washington and  
N. California - Hydrographic and plankton time-series 125 
Sei-ichi Saitoh and Kosei Sasaoka.  East-west variability of primary production  
in the subarctic North Pacific derived from Multi-Sensor Remote Sensing  
during 1996-2000 129 
Kazuaki Tadokoro.  Long-term variations of plankton biomass in the  
North Pacific 132 
 
Breakout Group 3:  Fish, Squid, Crabs and Shrimps  
 
Kerim Aydin.  North Pacific multispecies and ecosystem models of the  
Alaska Fisheries Science Center (and selected others) 137 
Steven R. Hare.  Life history of Pacific halibut (Hippoglossus stenolepis) 144 
Steven R. Hare.  Biological and physical environment databases of the  
International Pacific Halibut Commission 146 
Suam Kim.  Fishery data of the Republic of Korea 149 
Victor V. Lapko.  TINRO’s time-series data on Russian fish and ecosystems 151 
Patricia Livingston and Anne B. Hollowed.  Groundfish, crab, shrimp and  
other time-series of the Alaska Fisheries Science Center 152 
iv
Gordon A. McFarlane.  Groundfish and pelagic time-series maintained by  
the Stock Assessment Division of Fisheries and Oceans, Canada 155 
Bernard A. Megrey.  FOCI biological time-series available for use as ecosystem  
indicators from the Fisheries Oceanography Coordinated Investigation 158 
H. Geoffrey Moser.  The California Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries Investigations  
ichthyoplankton time-series 164 
Yasunori Sakurai.  Long-term monitoring of subarctic North Pacific ecosystems  
by the T/S Oshoro Maru and Hokusei Maru (Hokkaido University):   
The present and the future 170 
Qi-Sheng Tang and Xian-Shi Jin.  Time-series information in the Yellow Sea  
and Bohai Sea 172 
Akihiko Yatsu, Hiroshi Nishida, Minoru Ishida, Akira Tomosada,  
Takahiro Kinoshita and Tokio Wada.  Trajectories of catch and stock  
abundance of dominant small pelagic fishes and common squid with some  
related environmental indices around Japan 175 
 
Breakout Group 4:  Highly Migratory Fishes, Seabirds and Marine Mammals  
 
Douglas F. Bertram.  Seabirds reflect changes in ocean climate 179 
Hidehiro Kato.  Assessment of feeding impact by higher trophic predators 182 
Phillip R. Mundy, Cherri Womac and Carrie Holba.  Data summary:   
Impact of climate variability on observation and prediction of ecosystem and  
biodiversity changes in the North Pacific 183 
Robert Olson.  Yellowfin, bigeye, skipjack, bluefin, and albacore tunas in  
the Eastern Pacific Ocean 184 
Jeffrey J. Polovina.  Biological time-series for the central North Pacific 197 
Hiroshi Ueda, Masahide Kaeriyama and Shigehiko Urawa.  Recent progress  
in salmon migration research in Japan 199 
Yutaka Watanuki.  Seabird monitoring program at Teuri Island, Hokkaido,  
Japan 201 
 
 
Appendix 1.  Workshop agenda 203 
 
Appendix 2.  List of participants 205 
 
v
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section I 
 
PRESENTATIONS AND DISCUSSIONS AT PLENARY SESSIONS 
 
 
INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW OF WORKSHOP OBJECTIVES 
 
Vera Alexander
1
 and Patricia Livingston
2
  
1 
School of Fisheries and Ocean Sciences, University of Alaska Fairbanks, 245 O’Neill Bldg., 
Fairbanks, AK  99775-7220, U.S.A.  E-mail: vera@ims.alaska.edu 
2 
Alaska Fisheries Science Center, 7600 Sand Point Way NE, Seattle, WA 98115, U.S.A.  E-mail: 
Pat.Livingston@noaa.gov 
 
The Census of Marine Life (CoML) is an 
ambitious program that seeks to answer the 
question of what did live, what does live, and what 
will live in the oceans.  Although broad in overall 
scope, the program is moving forward through a 
series of focused pilot projects and international 
activities.  Also, as one approach, CoML is 
forming partnerships with and supporting other 
organizations with compatible interests, and which 
can contribute to the goals.  To this end, the Alfred 
P. Sloan Foundation, through the CoML, is co-
sponsoring this workshop on the North Pacific.   
 
The CoML goal coincides with the efforts of the 
North Pacific Marine Science Organization  
(PICES), which seeks to understand and predict 
changes in marine ecosystems of the North Pacific 
induced both by changes in environment and by 
human activities.  PICES has developed, as its 
major research effort, a program called “Climate 
Change and Carrying Capacity”.  This fits well 
into the CoML framework, and the two 
organizations have much to gain from interaction. 
 
The main focus of this workshop is to review the 
goals and strategies for observing North Pacific 
marine ecosystems and their biodiversity, and to 
improve our ability to predict ecosystem changes.  
This will be accomplished by:  (i) defining 
existing observation and prediction system 
(regional and basin-scales);  (ii) identifying needed 
improvements to the existing system for increasing 
our understanding of biodiversity and climate-
linked changes in biodiversity;  and (iii) nomina-
ting existing time-series and predictions for 
inclusion into a PICES Ecosystem Status Report.   
 
Time-series are especially important for evaluating 
climate change impacts, and drawing conclusions 
on effects on biodiversity.  At this workshop, the 
participants will examine the available information 
for the North Pacific Ocean with a strong 
emphasis on time-series of data.  Prepared during 
the workshop will be the compilation of existing 
time-series on:  physical and chemical 
oceanography and climate;  phytoplankton, 
zooplankton, and micronekton;  fish and 
crustaceans;  and  marine mammals and birds from 
the eastern, western, and open North Pacific.   
Information will be contributed on the state of 
knowledge and the major information gaps will be 
identified.  Although the primary emphasis of the 
workshop will be on the time-series information, 
candidate predictive models (from purely physical 
to coupled biophysical models) that could be used 
to forecast future climate changes and their effects 
on biota, will also be identified. 
 
Integrating national monitoring efforts for 
assessing the present state of North Pacific 
ecosystems has long been a focus of PICES.  
PICES is proposing the creation of a periodic 
North Pacific-wide status report, and the output of 
this workshop will be a critical stepping-stone in 
determining the feasibility and needs for such a 
report, as well as identifying the approach. 
 
The workshop structure will be a combination of 
plenary and breakout sessions.  The first plenary 
session will focus on the goals and objectives of 
the three main workshop sponsors:  Census of 
Marine Life, International Pacific Research Center 
and PICES, along with an overview of the 
objectives of programs, which are closely related 
to those of this workshop.  Breakout sessions will 
place participants into broad disciplinary groups, 
to review the available time-series and predictive 
models, and to suggest improvements in terms of 
sampling and modeling strategy, and the addition 
of new time-series observations that are not yet 
part of the monitoring system.  The final session 
will consist of reports from the breakout session 
leaders and plenary discussion of workshop 
recommendations. 
3

PLENARY SESSION PRESENTATIONS 
 
 
The Census of Marine Life:  An update on activities 
 
Cynthia Decker 
Consortium for Oceanographic Research and Education, Suite 800, 1755 Massachusetts Ave. NW, 
Washington, DC,  20036  U.S.A.  E-mail: cdecker@brook.edu 
 
Introduction 
 
The Census of Marine Life (CoML) is an 
emerging international research program to assess 
and explain the diversity, distribution, and 
abundance of marine organisms throughout the 
world’s oceans.  The planning and development 
stage for this decadal program is expected to 
require 1-2 more years.  Pilot field projects should 
take place in 2002-2004.  The main field projects 
should occur in 2005-2007.  Analysis and 
integration of information should culminate in 
2008-2010. 
 
Scientific Steering Committee 
 
Leadership and guidance for the Census of Marine 
Life are the responsibilities of the international 
Scientific Steering Committee (SSC), formed in 
June 1999.   The SSC has met six times, and will 
meet during the rest of 2001 in Alaska and 
Argentina.  The present focus of the SSC is the 
development of the scientific strategy for the 
CoML.  The SSC has initially chosen to remain 
small in order to ease the scheduling of frequent 
meetings, but it expects that its membership will 
grow as the program takes shape and becomes 
more global.  Subcommittees will be formed to 
lead particular aspects and projects of the CoML.   
Current SSC members are J. Frederick Grassle 
(Chairman), Rutgers University, U.S.A.;  Vera 
Alexander, University of Alaska Fairbanks, 
U.S.A.;  Patricio Bernal, Chile, and Intergovern-
mental Oceanographic Commission, France;  
Donald Boesch, University of Maryland, U.S.A.;  
David Farmer, Institute for Ocean Sciences, 
British Columbia, Canada, and University of 
Rhode Island, U.S.A.;  Olav Rune Godoe, Institute 
of Marine Research, Bergen, Norway;  Carlo Heip, 
Netherlands Institute of Ecology, The Netherlands;  
Poul Holm, Southern Denmark University, 
Denmark;  Yoshihisa Shirayama, Kyoto Univer-
sity, Japan;  and Andrew Solow, Woods Hole 
Oceanographic Institution, U.S.A. 
 
Secretariat and Scientific Team 
 
The Secretariat for the CoML program is located 
in Washington, DC, and is hosted by the 
Consortium for Oceanographic Research and 
Education (CORE).  CORE is comprised of 62 
oceanographic research institutions in the United 
States including universities, government 
laboratories, and non-profit aquaria.  Dr. Cynthia 
Decker, a benthic ecologist, directs the activities 
of the Secretariat.  Her associates include Pamela 
Baker-Masson, concerned with public outreach 
and education;  David Hilmer, ocean science 
specialist;  and Scott Sparks, program associate 
and webmaster.  
 
Alasdair McIntyre, emeritus professor of fisheries 
and oceanography at the University of Aberdeen, 
Scotland, is serving as a senior consultant to the 
Census of Marine Life SSC and Secretariat, 
helping to develop European participation in the 
CoML.  Dr. McIntyre earlier served as editor-in 
chief of Fisheries Research and as chairman of the 
United Nations Joint Group of Experts on 
Scientific Aspects of Marine Pollution 
(GESAMP). 
 
The SSC and Secretarariat have hired Dr. Ronald 
O’Dor, Professor of Biology at Dalhousie 
Univeristy, Halifax, Canada, to be the Senior 
Scientist for the Census of Marine Life.  Dr. 
O’Dor is an expert in cephalopod taxonomy, 
physiology and behavior, and has done research 
around the world on these organisms.  Dr. O’Dor 
will start his duties with the CoML in late March, 
2001, and will work with the SSC and the 
Secretariat to advance the Census of Marine Life 
5
program with international governmental, non-
governmental organizations, and the general 
public.   
 
Scientific strategy 
 
The scientific strategy, laying out the overall goals 
and plans for the CoML, is scheduled for release 
early in 2001, for review and comment by the 
scientific and relevant stakeholder communities.  
The document will be posted on the CoML 
website (http://www.coml.org) as well as actively 
circulated.  The plan is to revise the document for 
publication by September 2001. 
 
The SSC has sought to balance the writing of 
planning documents with the timely launching of 
components of the CoML that the community has 
indicated are already well-defined and urgently 
needed.  Two components of the CoML, its 
framework for data assimilation (OBIS), and its 
studies to document the history of marine animal 
populations (HMAP) are now underway.  In 
addition, several pilot field projects are in planning 
stage. 
 
Ocean Biogeographical Information System 
 
The Ocean Biogeographical Information System 
(OBIS) is envisioned as a distributed network of 
repositories of marine biological and environ-
mental data for use in examining changes in 
diversity, distribution, and abundance of 
organisms in time and space.  In May 2000, the 
CoML announced the funding of eight projects to 
foster the design and development of OBIS.  
Under the auspices of the US National 
Oceanographic Partnership Program (NOPP), 
eight OBIS projects received funding totaling US 
$3,700,000 over two years (see http://core.cast. 
msstate.edu/censpr1.html).  The projects will 
involve the participation of researchers at 63 
institutions in 15 countries. 
 
In September 2000, the CoML sponsored an 
international workshop at the University of Rhode 
Island Graduate School of Oceanography to 
further plan and organize the OBIS network.  Co-
chaired by Fred Grassle and Mel Briscoe (US 
Office of Naval Research), the workshop brought 
together the principal investigators of the eight 
funded projects, as well as several experienced 
leaders in the design and management of 
oceanographic and ecological databases.  Topics 
discussed included interoperability of databases, 
taxonomic and regional data priorities, and the 
management of OBIS.  A Workshop report has 
been posted on the CoML website.   
 
The SSC will consider the workshop’s 
recommendations for the governance of OBIS and 
will work with other stakeholders to develop 
effective mechanisms for its rapid, reliable 
fruition.  The SSC will establish a steering 
committee for OBIS that will guide the 
development of the system, particularly in the 
context of other data system efforts that are 
emerging such as the US Virtual Ocean Data Hub 
and the Global Biodiversity Information Facility 
(GBIF). 
 
History of Marine Animal Populations 
 
Early in the planning for the CoML, participants 
recommended strongly that the program include a 
historical component to obtain, assemble, and 
make accessible information on marine animal 
populations since fishing became important.  The 
History of Marine Animal Populations (HMAP) 
will combine classic historical archival research 
with marine biology to examine the distribution 
and abundance of species in the oceans over the 
past 500-1,000 years.  The aim of HMAP is to 
improve our understanding of marine ecosystem 
dynamics through interdisciplinary studies, 
specifically with regard to the ecological impact of 
large-scale harvesting, long-term changes in stock 
abundance, and the role of marine resources in the 
development of human society.   Integral to 
HMAP is the design and implementation of 
standard databases for marine species in 
collaboration with OBIS, the design and 
implementation of innovative biological sampling 
techniques to explore the marine environment, and 
the identification and use of historical data to aid 
in the development of predictive environmental 
models. 
 
In December 2000, the SSC announced the formal 
launching of HMAP, with the establishment of 
Centers for the Study of the History of Marine 
Animal Populations at Southern Denmark 
6
University, University of Hull (UK), and the 
University of New Hampshire (U.S.A.).  The 
initial phase of HMAP, supported with more than 
US$1,200,000 in grants, will include case studies 
of marine populations in seven regions involving 
31 institutions in 18 countries.  The overall leader 
of HMAP is Steering Committee member Poul 
Holm of Southern Denmark University.  A special 
issue of the International Journal of Maritime 
History dedicated to HMAP will be published in 
early 2001 (http://www.cmrh.dk/hmapindx.html). 
 
Pilot projects 
 
The Census of Marine Life will ultimately be the 
sum of a set of specially designed field projects 
observing populations in a variety of regions and 
ways, and integrated with ongoing (and enhanced) 
survey activities conducted by fisheries and 
environmental agencies.  The SSC has been 
working with several segments of the research 
community to design pilot projects that can 
demonstrate the effectiveness in diverse settings of 
new approaches and technologies for the 
observation of marine life.  While the SSC can 
influence resources sufficient to help completion 
of the planning phases for pilot projects, each 
project must ultimately secure the finances for 
research activities on its own.  The goal is for the 
pilot projects to get the financial commitments to 
be “in the water” soon and to be completed in 2-3 
years, so they can serve as examples for the main 
body of fieldwork conducted under the CoML.  So 
far, groups of scientists have initiated planning for 
six promising pilot projects under the auspices of 
the CoML.   
 
Census of Marine Life in the Gulf of Maine 
 
Ken Foote, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institu-
tion, U.S.A. (http://www.whoi.edu/marinecensus/) 
The Gulf of Maine and Georges Bank are much-
studied regions commercially important for 
fisheries, and they thus offer an excellent chance 
to calibrate and demonstrate the superiority of new 
technologies to describe the diversity, distribution, 
and abundance of marine life.  Targets include 
finfish, zooplankton communities, and the poorly-
known benthic communities.  A workshop held 
May 2-3, 2000, led to the establishment of a 
steering committee for the project and laid the 
basis for a regional consortium of institutions to 
carry out the project. 
 
Ecosystems of the northern mid-Atlantic 
 
Odd Aksel Bergstad, Institute of Marine Research, 
Norway 
The biology of the waters overlying the Mid-
Atlantic Ridge has been little studied and offers 
difficult challenges for new technologies to see 
deep and far.  The tentative project goal is to 
identify and model the ecological processes that 
cause variability in the distribution, abundance, 
and trophic relationships among organisms 
inhabiting this pelagic zone.  A planning workshop 
held February 12-13, 2001, in Bergen, Norway, 
has led to the establishment of a steering 
committee, which will further develop the project. 
 
Pacific Ocean salmon tagging 
 
David W. Welch, Pacific Biological Station, 
Nanaimo, British Columbia, Canada 
Little is known about the distribution and behavior 
of salmon once they leave the rivers.  This project 
proposes to use electronic tags and innovative 
acoustic arrays to track and monitor salmon 
populations on the continental shelf of Canada and 
the United States and in the open waters of the 
North Pacific.  A planning workshop held 
December 8-9, 2000, in Vancouver, Canada, 
brought together leading experts on a variety of 
salmon populations to consider the design of this 
project and how it can serve as a template for 
study of salmon and other anadromous fish 
populations in the world. 
 
Tagging of Pacific pelagics 
 
Barbara Block, Stanford University, U.S.A. 
A much better understanding of the distribution 
and behavior of large pelagic animals at the top of 
the food chain may allow strong inferences about 
the distribution and abundance of many other 
organisms that live in the oceans.   A workshop 
held November 13-14, 2000, explored the design 
of an ambitious pilot project in the North Pacific 
to deploy advanced electronic data-storage tags to 
7
track and monitor large vertebrates, such as 
whales, sea turtles, and tuna.  The workshop 
generated great interest among the public in the 
CoML as evidenced by coverage in the San 
Francisco Chronicle and on the news websites of 
ABC News and National Geographic (see 
http://www.abcnews.go.com/sections/science/Dye
Hard/dyehard001129.html).  
 
Chemosynthetic ecosystems in the Arctic and 
northern Atlantic Oceans 
 
Cindy Lee Van Dover, College of William and 
Mary, U.S.A. 
 
Little is known about the basin-scale diversity, 
distribution, and abundance of marine life in deep 
sea chemosynthetic ecosystems such as 
hydrothermal vents and seeps in the northern 
Atlantic and Arctic oceans.  In order to study these 
systems, new technologies for plume-tracking 
from autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) 
will need to be refined and used over large spatial 
scales.  A planning workshop to develop this pilot 
project was held on 16-17 March 16-17, 2001. 
 
Coastal survey of the western Pacific 
 
Yoshihisa Shirayama, Seto Marine Biological 
Laboratory, Kyoto University, Japan 
 
A major unanswered question is how marine 
biodiversity varies with the latitudinal gradient.  A 
coastal study to be conducted under the auspices 
of the Diversitas International in the Western 
Pacific Area (DIWPA) program aims to 
quantitatively survey marine life and examine 
biodiversity in near-shore areas in the western 
Pacific in a continuum from the northern to 
southern boreal regions using traditional sampling 
methods (i.e., scuba gear).  A workshop held in 
April 2001 refined the plans for this project. 
 
Other activities 
 
SCOR Working Group 
 
The Scientific Committee on Oceanographic 
Research (SCOR) of the International Council of 
Scientific Unions has formed a Working Group on 
New Technologies for Observing Marine Life, 
which held its first meeting on November 9-11, 
2000, in Sidney, British Columbia, Canada.  The 
Working Group, chaired by David Farmer, is 
considering individual technologies, their 
integration, and transition to practice (http://core. 
cast.msstate.edu/censscor1.html). 
 
Museums and marine laboratories 
 
Natural history museums contain precious 
collections and expertise on marine biodiversity, 
as do marine laboratories, and the participation of 
these institutions is key to the success of the 
CoML.  A workshop was held November 15-17, 
2000, at the Institute of Marine Biology, Crete, 
Greece, that was organized by Annelies Pierrot-
Bults (Zoological Museum of Amsterdam), Ross 
Simons (Smithsonian Institution, U.S.A.) and 
Carlo Heip (Netherlands Institute of Ecology, The 
Netherlands).  This workshop explored ways for 
museums and marine laboratories to contribute to 
the CoML and their interests in it.  Over 30 
experts from 15 countries attended the workshop, 
which has sparked further interest in the CoML 
within these communities.  A report on the Crete 
workshop will be published shortly. 
 
Aquariums 
 
Aquariums house displays of marine biodiversity 
and are a main way that the public learns about it.  
The CoML was featured in a plenary presentation 
in November 2000, at the International Aquarium 
Congress hosted by Monaco’s Musee 
Oceanographique, and was strongly endorsed as 
"an opportunity too good to pass up" in the 
concluding summary address by Jerry Schubel, 
director of the New England Aquarium.  Follow-
up activities will increase involvement of 
aquariums in the CoML.  Jordi Sabate, director of 
the Barcelona Aquarium, will convene the 
directors of several of the world’s foremost public 
aquariums in the spring of 2001, to explore 
creation of a consortium of aquariums to work 
with the CoML.  Meanwhile, another workshop in 
spring 2001, at the New England Aquarium, will 
bring together exhibit designers, film makers, and 
persons involved in outreach activities to advance 
the education and outreach dimensions of the 
CoML.  Specifically, this workshop will identify 
the most effective vehicles for bringing the plans 
8
and discoveries of the CoML to the 150 million 
people who visit aquariums each year.   
 
Southeast Asia Workshop 
 
To strengthen CoML activities in the tropical areas 
of Southeast Asia and the western Pacific, the SSC 
is teaming with the Intergovernmental 
Oceanographic Commission’s (IOC) 
SubCommission for the Western Pacific 
(IOC/WESTPAC).  A workshop in mid-2001 at 
the IOC/WESTPAC headquarters in Bangkok, 
Thailand, will bring together numerous scientists 
from countries in the region involved in assessing 
the diversity, distribution, and abundance of 
species in Southeast Asia and the western Pacific. 
 
POGO 
 
About twenty of the world’s leading 
oceanographic research institutions are now 
participating in a new Partnership for Observation 
of the Global Oceans (POGO), with a Secretariat 
at the Bedford Institute of Oceanography, Nova 
Scotia, Canada.  The POGO institutions play 
major roles in the development and deployment of 
new monitoring systems, such as the Argo floats.  
The leaders of POGO are eager to assure that 
biological observations develop in conjunction 
with other environmental measures and have 
decided to make biological observations the focus 
of their 2001 meeting.  The CoML provided a 
progress report at the November 2000 POGO 
meeting in Sao Paulo, Brazil (http://www. 
oceanpartners.org/). 
 
US government initiatives 
 
The US Congress passed the Oceans Act in 2000.  
This legislation directs that a Presidential 
Commission on the Oceans be established to 
review all US government ocean activities in the 
next two years and provide recommendations to 
the President and Congress.  The Census of 
Marine Life expects to be invited to make a 
presentation to the Commission soon after it is 
established. 
 
The US government is considering a major new 
initiative on ocean exploration, as recommended 
by the President's Panel on Ocean Exploration, 
whose report was released on December 4, 2000, 
in Washington DC.  The report recognizes the 
Census of Marine Life and the Ocean 
Biogeographical Information System.  Marcia 
McNutt, director of the Monterey Bay Aquarium 
Research Institute, chaired the panel, whose 
members included Frederick Grassle and Jesse 
Ausubel (http://oceanpanel.nos.noaa.gov/ 
panelreport/ ocean_panel_report.html). 
 
National Committees 
 
Several nations are now in the process of bringing 
together the stakeholders in the CoML within that 
country to determine how best to organize the 
program at the national level for the Program.   
Following a pattern successful in other major 
global research programs, which require 
organization at both the international and national 
(and sometimes regional) level, the formation of 
National Committees for the Census of Marine 
Life should be one of the important developments 
during the next couple of years.  The SSC and 
Secretariat are eager to work with the national 
interests for this purpose, and small amounts of 
funds will be available to help convene the 
appropriate national stakeholders.  
 
 
Decadal climate variability in the Pacific Ocean, and theories as to its cause 
 
Julian P. McCreary, Jr.  
International Pacific Research Center, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii, U.S.A.  E-mail: 
jay@soest.hawaii.edu 
 
Interest in decadal variability in the Pacific region 
increased considerably during the 1990s, both at 
mid-latitudes (PDV) and in the tropics (EDV).  
During the first half of the decade, the tropical 
9
Pacific remained anomalously warm and this 
warming appeared to have limited ENSO 
predictability in coupled models (Ji et al. 1996).  
This EDV also had significant economic impacts, 
a prime example being the severe drought in 
Northeast Australia.  At the same time, PDV has 
attracted much attention (Trenberth and Hurrell 
1994; Mann and Park 1996; Nakamura et al. 
1997).  See Miller and Schneider (2001) for a 
recent review. 
 
Observations 
 
PDV is present in both atmospheric and oceanic 
variables.  In contrast to ENSO, however, it does 
not have a sharp spectral peak, suggesting that it 
does not result from a single, well-defined process 
and even that it may be generated stochastically. 
 
It is also not clear if there is just one type of PDV.  
Nakamura et al. (1997) and Nakamura and 
Yamagata (1999) reported two modes of North 
Pacific decadal variability based on sea surface 
temperature (SST) data, which they obtained using 
the empirical orthogonal function (EOF) statistical 
technique.  Figure 1 shows the first two EOFs 
from their analysis.  The EOFs were obtained in 
the rectangular box indicated in Figure 1, and the 
fields outside the box were then found by 
regressing the EOF time-series on SST anomalies 
in the full basin.  Thus, implicit in their study is 
the idea that the box region is the key area for the 
generation of PDV.  The first mode is confined to 
the North Pacific mid-latitudes, with most of its 
amplitude centered on the Subarctic Front.  The 
second EOF extends over much of the basin.  In 
northern mid-latitudes, it has a distinctive dipole-
like structure, with anomalies of opposite sign on 
either side of the Subtropical Front, and anomalies 
with significant amplitude throughout the tropics 
in both hemispheres.  It should be stated, however, 
that the EOF statistical technique seeks to find 
separate modes of variability.  It may be, then, that 
there is really only one mode, that the EOFs in 
Figure 1 really represent two different phases of 
the same oscillation. 
 
Figure 2 shows a time-series of SST anomalies in 
the NINO3 region (after Timmermann and Jin, 
2001).  To emphasize the decadal variability, the 
thick curve plots the 10-year running mean of the 
standard deviation of the time series.   
 
There is a remarkable periodicity in the curve, 
with a time scale of 15-20 years.  Thus, one aspect 
of EDV is that the amplitude of El Niño varies 
with surprising regularity on decadal time scales. 
 
Hypotheses 
 
At the present time, prominent aspects of PDV and 
EDV have already been successfully simulated in 
solutions to coupled ocean-atmosphere models, 
but neither the nature nor location of the primary 
generation mechanisms have yet been clearly 
identified.  Indeed, the studies explore several 
different types of hypotheses, which can roughly 
be divided into three categories, namely, that PDV 
and EDV are generated by:  i) midlatitude 
processes only;  ii) both midlatitude and tropical 
 
 
Fig. 1 First (top) and second (bottom) EOFs of 
decadal variability in North Pacific wintertime 
SST for 1968-92.  The EOFs are determined 
within the indicated rectangular box, and linear 
regression coefficients are plotted between Pacific 
SST and the time-series (PCs) associated with the 
two modes.  The contour interval is 0.1;  it is 
thickened every 0.3, dashed for negative, and zero 
lines are omitted.  Shaded areas are the regions in 
which correlation between SST and a given PC 
exceeds the 90% significance level assuming 3 
degrees of freedom (after Nakamura et al. 1997). 
10
 
Fig. 2 Observed NINO3 SST anomaly time-series (highly variable curve), together with the 1-year 
running mean of its variance (smoother curve).  The latter curve indicates that the amplitude of ENSO 
varies with a time-scale of 15-20 years (after Timmermann and Jin 2001). 
 
processes;  and  iii) tropical processes only.  I 
comment here on all these processes but focus on 
the first category, noting the role of the North 
Pacific Subtropical Cell (STC) in the generation of 
EDV. 
 
Mid-latitude processes only 
 
Latif and Barnett (1994, 1996) reported a mode of 
decadal oscillation in a solution to their global, 
coupled general circulation model (GCM).  It was 
associated with SST anomaly patterns similar to 
both of the EOFs in Figure 1, with one pattern 
developing into the other.  The oscillation existed 
even when tropical feedbacks were suppressed, 
indicating that its dynamics are distinctly different 
from those of ENSO.  The authors concluded that 
positive feedbacks involving mid-latitude wind 
stress and heat flux anomalies were important for 
the mode's excitation, whereas subtropical gyre 
adjustment and advection (which both have 
decadal time scales) were likely responsible for 
determining its period.  Other modelers, however, 
have not been able to produce as strong a 
midlatitude mode (e.g., Palmer and Sun 1985; 
Ferranti et al. 1994; Peng et al. 1995), likely 
because the other atmospheric models did not 
respond as effectively to mid-latitude SST 
anomalies as the one used by Latif and Barnett 
(1994, 1996). 
 
Several pathways have been proposed to account 
for how mid-latitude PDV might influence the 
tropics.  One involves atmospheric teleconnections 
from mid-latitudes to the tropics.  Pearce et al. 
(2000) noted that in their coupled model the wind 
anomaly associated with PDV extended well into 
the tropics, and this anomaly generated the model's 
EDV.  The other involves teleconnections from the 
subtropics to the tropics via the ocean's North and 
South Subtropical Cells (STCs). 
 
The STCs are shallow (less than about 500 m) 
meridional circulation cells in which water flows 
out of the tropics within the surface layer, 
subducts in the subtropics, flows equatorward 
within the thermocline, and upwells in the eastern 
equatorial ocean (McCreary and Lu 1994; Liu et 
al. 1994; Rothstein et al. 1998; Lu et al. 1998).  
Figure 3 illustrates the STC pathways in the 
Rothstein et al. (1998) solution, showing 
streamlines at the surface (top panel) and in the 
thermocline layer (bottom panel). 
 
The STC pathway has recently been proposed by 
Gu and Philander (1997) as a possible explanation 
for EDV.  They hypothesized that SST anomalies 
in the North Pacific are subducted into the 
thermocline to join the North STC, and are 
subsequently advected to the equatorial Pacific 
with a time lag of the order of a decade, thereby 
providing a delayed negative feedback (labeled the 
vT´ hypothesis).  This idea received observational 
support from Deser et al. (1996), who were able to 
follow the equatorward movement of a subsurface  
 
11
 
Fig. 3 Surface (top) and thermocline-level (bottom) currents from the Rothstein et al. (1998) solution. 
Areas of upwelling and subduction are labeled in the top and bottom panels, respectively.  The panels 
illustrate the presence of closed, shallow, meridional overturning circulations, the model's North and 
South Subtropical Cells, which carry cool thermocline water into the tropics and return warm surface 
water to the subtropics.  
 
anomaly for some distance.  However, they did not 
follow the signal far enough to determine whether 
it moved into the equatorial region or simply 
recirculated within the Subtropical Gyre.  Recent 
solutions to oceanic GCMs suggest that most of 
this signal does in fact recirculate, with little ever 
reaching the equator (Schneider et al. 1999; 
Nonaka et al. 2000).  As proposed by Gu and 
Philander (1997), then, the STC pathway may not 
provide a sufficiently strong interaction to account 
for ENSO decadal variability. 
 
An alternate hypothesis is that EDV is generated 
by variability in STC strength rather than its 
subsurface temperature (the v´T hypothesis).  This 
idea has been explored by Kleeman  et al. (1999) 
and Solomon et al. (2001) using intermediate 
coupled models.  In the former study, solutions 
developed two oscillations, corresponding to PDV 
and to ENSO.  Subtropical wind anomalies 
associated with the PDV mode altered the strength 
of the STC, thereby causing more or less cool 
thermocline water to flow to the equator, which 
led to a change in the size and strength of the 
equatorial cold tongue.  This change in turn fed 
back to the atmospheric model to generate EDV.  
Solomon et al. (2001) extended and improved the 
Kleeman et al. (1999) model.  They showed that 
the model PDV was generated by processes 
similar to those suggested by Latif and Barnett 
(1994, 1996), but that convection was important in 
northwest Pacific.  In addition, they also reported 
solutions in a parameter range where the PDV 
mode is damped, requiring tropical air-sea 
interactions to maintain it.  Thus, in this solution 
the generation of PDV is tightly linked to tropical 
air-sea interactions, similar to the solutions 
discussed next. 
12
Tropical and mid-latitude processes 
 
A number of studies have suggested that the 
generation mechanism of PDV (and EDV) may 
originate in the tropics, with PDV at mid-latitudes 
resulting from ENSO-like atmospheric tele-
connections from the tropics (Yukimoto et al. 
1996, 1998; Knutson and Manabe, 1998).  In these 
solutions, subtropical Rossby waves provide the 
negative feedback that forces the solutions to shift 
from one extreme state to another (cold to warm 
state).  The time scale of the decadal oscillation 
depends on the latitude band of the Rossby waves: 
the farther poleward the band is located, the longer 
is the period of the oscillation.  The basic idea is 
thus analogous to the delayed-oscillator theory of 
ENSO, except that in the ENSO case the Rossby 
waves are equatorially trapped.  A theoretical 
limitation of the idea is that there is no obvious 
dynamical reason why the system selects a 
particular latitude band for the Rossby waves, one 
that provides variability at decadal time scales 
rather than some other period.  On the other hand, 
since observed PDV does not have an obvious 
preferred period, perhaps there is no preferential 
latitude band and this limitation is not so bad. 
 
Tropical processes only 
 
Finally, other studies using intermediate and 
simple coupled models suggest that EDV is 
generated entirely within the tropics by stochastic 
processes.  This type of EDV is implicit in the 
solutions reported in Zebiak and Cane (1987).  
Recently, Timmermann and Jin (2001) have 
explored the nature of EDV in a simple (low 
number of degrees of freedom), tropical, coupled 
system, arguing that the decadal response results 
from tropical nonlinear interactions alone.  They 
demonstrate that in their model the EDV has a 
character well known in applied mathematics, 
namely, that of “homoclinic chaos”.  In addition, 
in their solution the amplitude of ENSO varies 
decadally, rather like the observations in Figure 2.  
The authors also note similarities between their 
simple solutions and those to the Case and Zebiak 
(1987) model.  Solutions of this sort have the 
advantage that they do not develop a sharp decadal 
peak, consistent with the observations. 
 
Conclusion 
 
In conclusion, the current suite of hypotheses for 
PDV and EDV is a confusing one, pointing toward 
the potential importance of several, apparently 
conflicting mechanisms.  Part of the confusion 
may result from the fact that there is not one 
simple explanation for PDV and EDV, that in fact 
many (or all) of the aforementioned mechanisms 
are at work.  In this regard, it is interesting that for 
a particular parameter range in the Solomon et al. 
(2001) model, PDV exists only when the model 
also allows for ENSO.  In this solution, all the 
mechanisms noted above are at work except 
stochastic forcing.  This solution therefore 
suggests that a simpler picture of the causes of 
PDV and EDV will soon emerge, one that unifies 
many or all of the existing hypotheses. 
 
References 
 
Deser, C., Alexander, M.A., and Timlin, M.S.  
1996.  Upper-ocean thermal variations in the 
North Pacific during 1970-1991.  J. Clim. 9: 
1840-1855. 
Ferranti, L., Molteni, F., and Palmer, T.N.  1994.  
Impact of localized tropical and extratropical 
SST anomalies in ensembles of seasonal GCM 
integrations. Quart.  J. Roy. Meteor. Soc. 120: 
1613-1645. 
Gu, D., and Philander, S.G.H.  1997.  Interdecadal 
climate fluctuations that depend on exchanges 
between the tropics and the extratropics.  
Science 275: 805-807. 
Ji, M., Leetmaa, A., and Kousky, V.E.  1996.  
Coupled Model Predictions of ENSO during 
the 1980s and the 1990s at the National Centers 
for Environmental Prediction.  J. Clim. 9: 3105-
3120. 
Kleeman, R., McCreary, J.P., and Klinger, B.A.  
1999.  A mechanism for generating ENSO 
decadal variability.  Geophys. Res. Lett. 26: 
1743-1746. 
Knutson, T.R., and Manabe, S.  1998.  Model 
assessment of decadal variability and trends in 
the tropical Pacific Ocean.  J. Clim. 11, 2273-
2296. 
Latif M., and Barnett, T.P.  1994.  Causes of 
decadal climate variability over the North 
Pacific and North America.  Science 266: 634-
637. 
13
Latif M., and Barnett, T.P.  1996.  Decadal climate 
variability over the North Pacific and North 
America: Dynamics and predictability.  J. Clim. 
9: 2407-2423. 
Liu, Z.Y., Philander, S.G.H., and Pacanowski, P.C.  
1994.  A GCM study of tropical-subtropical 
upper-ocean water exchange.  J. Phys. 
Oceanogr. 24: 2606-2623. 
Lu, P., McCreary, J.P., and Klinger, B.A.  1998.  
Meridional circulation cells and the source 
waters of the Pacific equatorial undercurrent.  J. 
Phys. Oceanogr. 28: 62-84. 
Mann, M.E., and Park, J.  1996.  Joint spatio-
temporal modes of surface temperature and sea 
level pressure variability in the Northern 
Hemisphere during the last century.  J. Clim. 9: 
2137-2162. 
McCreary, J.P., and Lu, P.  1994.  On the 
interaction between the subtropical and the 
equatorial oceans: The Subtropical Cell.  J. 
Phys. Oceanogr. 24: 466-497. 
Miller, A.J., and Schneider, N.  2000.  Interdecadal 
climate regimes dynamics in the North Pacific 
Ocean: Theories, observations and ecosystem 
impacts.  Prog. Oceanogr. 47: 355-379. 
Nakamura, H., and Yamagata, T.  1999.  Recent 
decadal SST variability in the Northwestern 
Pacific associated atmospheric anomalies.  In 
Beyond El Niño: Decadal and interdecadal 
Climate.  Edited by A. Variability, and Navarra. 
Springer, Berlin, pp. 49-72. 
Nakamura, H., Lin, G., and Yamagata, T.  1997.  
Decadal climate variability in the North Pacific 
during the recent decades.  Bull. Amer. Meteor. 
Soc. 78: 2215-2225. 
Nonaka, M., Xie, S.-P., and Takeuchi, K.  2000.  
Equatorward spreading of a passive tracer with 
application to North Pacific interdecadal 
temperature variations.  J. Oceanogr. 56: 173-
183. 
Palmer, T.N., and Sun, Z.  1985.  A modeling and 
observational study of the relationship between 
sea surface temperature in the northwest 
Atlantic and atmospheric general circulation.  
Quart. J. Roy. Meteor. Soc. 111: 947-975. 
Pearce, D.W., Barnett, T.P., and Latif, M.  2000.  
Connection between the Pacific Ocean tropics 
and midlatitudes on decadal time scales.  J. 
Clim. 13: 1173-1194. 
Peng S., Mysak, L.A., Ritchie, H., Derome, J., and 
Dugas, B.  1995.  The differences between 
early and midwinter atmospheric response to 
sea surface temperature anomalies in the 
northwest Atlantic.  J. Clim. 8: 137-157. 
Rothstein, L.M., Zhang, R.-H., Busalacchi, A.J., 
and Chen, D.  1998.  A numerical simulation of 
the mean water pathways in the subtropical and 
tropical Pacific Ocean.  J. Phys. Oceanogr. 28: 
322-344. 
Timmermann, A., and Jin, F.-F.  2001.  Homoclinic 
chaos: a paradigm for decadal ENSO amplitude 
modulations (Submitted.). 
Trenberth, K.E., and Hurrell, J.W.  1994.  Decadal 
atmosphere-ocean variations in the Pacific.  
Clim. Dyn. 9: 303-319. 
Yukimoto, S., Endoh, M., Kitamura, Y., Kitoh, K., 
Motoi, T., Noda, A., and Tokioka, T.  1996.  
Interannual and interdecadal variabilities in the 
Pacific in the MRI coupled GCM.  Clim.e Dyn. 
12: 667-683. 
Yukimoto, S., Endoh, M., Kitamura, Y., Kitoh, A., 
Motoi, T., and Noda, A.  2000.  ENSO-like 
interdecadal variability in the Pacific Ocean as 
simluated in a coupled general circuylation 
model.  J. Geophys. Res. 105, 13: 945-963. 
Zebiak, S., and Cane, M.  1987.  A model of El 
Niño-Southern Oscillation.  Mon. Wea. Rev. 
115: 2262-2278. 
 
 
Comments on LMR-GOOS recommendations 
 
Warren S. Wooster 
School of Marine Affairs, University of Washington, 3707 Brooklyn  Ave. NE, Seattle, WA 98105-6715 
U.S.A.  E-mail: wooster@u.washington.edu 
 
The GOOS (Global Ocean Observing System) is 
being developed by IOC (UNESCO), with the 
cooperation of ICSU, WMO, and UNEP.  FAO 
has joined in supporting consideration of living 
14
marine resources.  The system intends to monitor 
changes in the condition of the ocean and its 
ecosystems, to process and analyze the resulting 
data, and to make them available to users.  It is in 
effect an extension of the weather monitoring 
network to the ocean and arose from realization 
that the ocean and atmosphere were closely linked 
in the development of climate change. 
 
Initially GOOS planning was dominated by 
physical scientists who were accustomed to 
networks of routine measurements and to having 
the observational data made available in near real 
time.  Until last summer, there were four planning 
panels – climate, coastal, health of the ocean, and 
living marine resources (LMR).  The last three 
have now all been merged into a so-called Coastal 
Ocean Observations Panel (COOP).  Of these 
various elements, LMR had a late start and a brief 
life, from its first meeting in March 1998 to its last 
(fourth) in May 2000. 
 
One reason for the late start was the controversy 
over what should be monitored – e.g., just 
plankton or also fish – and who were the potential 
users of the findings.  There were two false starts 
from different ends of that controversy before a 
new panel was formed.  The beauty of stopping at 
the plankton level is that the data are largely 
apolitical.  Scarcely any humans are harvesting 
plankton, but by the same token, there is no 
constituency clamoring for such data.  Attempting 
to transform plankton data into useful predictions 
of distribution, abundance, and availability of 
wanted fish and shellfish products is not a task for 
the faint of heart.  But as soon as fish are included, 
political interests are aroused.  One of the most 
serious consequences is that data become 
proprietary and real-time international exchange of 
such data becomes unlikely.  Also, the task of 
assessing and predicting fish stocks is a tightly-
held national prerogative, not one to be shared 
freely with other countries. 
 
It is possible to identify many of the users of living 
marine resources and of information concerning 
their distribution and abundance.  In the most 
obvious case, fisheries extract and sell such 
resources, and information on present and future 
status is useful to the fishers, industrial, 
subsistence, or recreational, and to those who 
manage their activities.  Those who manage other 
human activities that affect marine ecosystems are 
also potential customers.  Oceanographers, fishery 
biologists and investigators of climate change and 
its impacts can also use the outputs of a 
comprehensive ocean observing system. 
 
Early on in its new life, the LMR Panel decided to 
take an ecosystem approach, to consider 
monitoring changes in the state of marine 
ecosystems along with the forcing functions of 
such changes.  If assessments of such observations 
could be routinely produced, they would be of 
great utility at a range of time scale, from 
interdecadal and decadal to the seasonal 
assessments and predictions needed for fishery 
management.  Essential ecosystem components to 
be monitored include the gamut of trophic levels, 
from plankton up to fish and top predators like 
marine mammals and seabirds.  Plankton are 
important not just because of their trophic role, but 
as potential indicators of ecosystem changes.  A 
complete ecosystem assessment cannot leave out 
certain significant components, for example 
salmon, because they “belong” to some country or 
international organization. 
 
Obviously monitoring life in the sea is vastly more 
complex than that of the relatively simple abiotic 
components like temperature or atmospheric 
pressure.  On large, ocean basin scales only 
satellite observations of surface ocean color, a 
measure of surface phytoplankton concentration, 
are routinely made.  Zooplankton are only 
routinely sampled in a few regional programs 
(e.g., CalCOFI) and CPR surveys.  Fish and 
shellfish of commercial interest are sampled 
largely by commercial and research fisheries for 
them on a local scale, and the only large scale 
information comes from compilations of catch 
statistics a few years after the fact.  Unlike the 
situation with surface weather and ocean physical 
information, there is at present no obvious funding 
in prospect for large scale monitoring of living 
marine resources. 
 
Sampling strategy is affected by the distribution of 
biota, especially those components of commercial 
or other human interest.  The intensity of 
necessary sampling in time and space increases 
from the open ocean toward the coastal zone as 
15
does the availability of support for an 
observational program.  While in the open ocean, 
regular sampling of biota is limited by the 
availability of platforms of opportunity, in waters 
less than a few hundred miles from the coast there 
are often research surveys funded by the coastal 
state.  
 
Some ongoing programs have been identified as 
elements of the so-called Initial Operating System.  
In the North Pacific these are the Japanese and 
Korean LMR observing systems, the CalCOFI 
observations, and those of the Canadian Ocean 
Station P and Line P.  Another category is that of 
LMR pilot projects which includes ongoing or 
planned programs intended to develop experience 
with routine biological observations.  These 
include the northeast Pacific CPR surveys and the 
proposed project to study Biological Action 
Centers (BACs).  Also, several retrospective 
studies were commissioned with a view to 
learning what sorts of observations permit 
identifying significant environmental changes such 
as regime shifts.  In the PICES region, these were 
in the southern part of the California Current 
(CalCOFI and Mexico) and a joint Japan-Korea 
project in the East Sea/Japan Sea and the East 
China Sea. 
 
The LMR Panel produced a catalog of desirable 
observations, physical, chemical and biological, 
and many of these may be appropriate for the open 
ocean.  On the regional scale, however, there are 
significant differences between, for example, what 
is appropriate in the North Sea and what off the 
Peruvian coast.  Thus our “strategic plan” included 
some examples of more specific suggestions 
relating to upwelling ecosystems, the Scotian 
Shelf ecosystem of Atlantic Canada, the Yellow 
Sea and East China Sea, and the Gulf of Guinea.  
Monitoring systems in these regions are in widely 
different stages of development, and it is hoped 
that they may be enhanced and brought together 
through the action of organizations such as ICES 
and PICES. 
 
The generalized catalog of potential observations, 
physical and biological, is highly schematic.  
Think of it as listing all of the ingredients of some 
elaborate dish, say a bouillabaisse.  Now we need 
a recipe, to select the proper quantities of each of 
the components and to determine how best to 
prepare them.  The recipe for optimal monitoring 
schemes in the PICES region has been under 
consideration by the MONITOR Task Team and 
will likely be discussed at this meeting. 
 
If one had a comprehensive set of monitoring 
observations, what could be done with them?  In 
the first place, there are largely unsolved problems 
of compiling, storing, and making available for 
retrieval biological data and information that are 
far more heterogeneous than the more standard 
physical data.  Then there are the problems of 
bringing them together with relevant physical and 
other data in a holistic analysis.  This will 
undoubtedly involve the use of appropriate models 
such as those being developed in GLOBEC 
projects. 
 
The Panel proposed that the assessments be 
prepared in regional analysis centers (RACs).  In 
the PICES region, one can visualize perhaps three 
RACs, one for the open ocean, located perhaps in 
Hawaii, one for the eastern North Pacific and 
Bering Sea, located perhaps in British Columbia, 
and one for the waters off eastern Asia, perhaps 
under the sponsorship of NEAR-GOOS.  Analysis 
teams should include scientists from different 
disciplines, and participation in such activities 
should attract the interest of graduate students as 
well as that of established scientists.  In many 
parts of the world, RACs are expected to serve as 
centers for capacity building as well as for 
analysis.  
 
The analyses will require a blending of the biotic 
and abiotic data from all sources, national and 
international, within a region.  They should yield 
descriptive products on the current state of the 
ecosystem and its recent and longer-term changes, 
and analytic products in the form of forecasts of 
probable future conditions of the ecosystem and its 
components.  Levels of information detail should 
extend from raw data to indices, alerts, and 
forecasts.  The products would be regularly 
provided, perhaps on a quarterly basis, to 
participating countries and organizations and 
would be made widely available on the web.  They 
could, among other things, contribute to improving 
the observational system.  RACs might be based at 
16
national centers but would include participation 
from other countries contributing data and ideas. 
 
Examples of descriptive efforts along these lines 
for several PICES regions are regularly produced 
by Freeland, Stabeno, and Sugimoto, and 
published in PICES Press.  These are primarily 
summaries of physical conditions, reflecting the 
availability of data and the interests of the authors.  
There are also more comprehensive, but less 
frequent, syntheses such as the Canadian DFO 
Ocean Status Reports. 
 
The desired structure and contents of such 
ecosystem status reports are topics for discussion 
at this workshop.  The collective wisdom of this 
group should lead to a better understanding of 
what is desirable and what is feasible with current 
or anticipated technology and organizational 
structures and within conceivable budgets.  The 
discussions should help to clarify how the 
monitoring system can best be strengthened to 
provide the necessary information and what 
arrangements would most facilitate regular 
preparation of the status reports. 
 
RAC assessments can be described as follows: 
Input data:  atmospheric;  physical, chemical, 
biological oceanographic;  fisheries 
Sources:  national and international 
Descriptive products:  current state of ecosystem, 
recent and longer-term changes therein 
Analytical products:  forecasts of probable future 
conditions of ecosystem and components 
Levels of information detail:  (1) raw unformatted 
data;  (2) indices;  (3) alerts, status of stocks, 
maps;  (4) forecasts 
 
 
Background and objectives of POGO 
 
Kees Zwanenburg 
Marine Fish Division, Bedford Institute of Oceanography, 1 Challenger Drive, Dartmouth, NS, Canada.  
B2Y 4A2  E-mail: Zwanenburgk@mar.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
The Partnership for Observation of the Global 
Oceans (POGO) is a forum recently created by 
leaders of major oceanographic institutions 
(presently 14 countries) to promote global 
oceanography, particularly the implementation of 
international and integrated ocean observing 
systems. 
 
The long-term goals of POGO are to participate in 
the creation and operation of an integrated global 
ocean observing strategy that addresses the 
information needs of decision-makers, researchers, 
service providers, and the general public by: 
• Providing an informal forum for dialogue 
among leaders of key oceanographic 
institutions; 
• Development of an advocacy plan for 
observing systems; 
• Participating in the process to secure 
governmental commitments to funding ocean 
observing systems; 
• Integrating the observational needs of different 
ocean disciplines (circulation, biology, 
climate);  
• Reducing the barriers between research and 
operational research; 
• Making the case for extensive and sustained 
observations, research, and modeling; 
• Encouraging developing countries to 
participate fully in collecting and using 
environmental information; and 
• Promoting training education and capacity 
building in oceanic observation. 
 
POGO supports global oceanographic research 
and operational ventures but it is not a vehicle for 
launching new international programs.  One of 
POGO’s goals is to act as a catalyst and facilitator 
to develop and enhance existing programs, and to 
undertake and participate in collaborative training 
and capacity building.  POGO can act as an 
effective voice for the oceans.  POGO membership  
17
is open to individual institutions or consortia of 
institutions promoting regional collaboration and 
co-ordination. 
 
POGO activities to date 
 
Planning for POGO started in March 1999, and the 
first formal meeting was held in December 1999.  
At this meeting, an initial workplan was developed 
that included the following items: 
- development of an advocacy plan for 
observing systems; 
- participation in the process to secure 
governmental commitments to funding ocean 
observing systems; 
- a data interchange pilot project; and 
- establishment of a data clearing house for 
POGO members and the broader community. 
 
The second meeting was held in December 2000, 
in Sao Paulo, Brazil.  International organizations 
present were:  IOC (Intergovernmental 
Oceanographic Comission), SCOR (Scientific 
Committee on Ocean Research), Argo, CLIVAR 
(CLImate VARiability and predictability), COOP 
(COastal Ocean Panel of GOOS), GODAE 
(Global Ocean Data Assimi-lation Experiment), 
OOPC (Ocean Observation Panel), and CoML 
(Census of Marine Life – Sloan Foundation). 
 
The meeting focussed on issues pertinent to the 
southern ocean.  Two-thirds of the world’s oceans 
are in the Southern Hemisphere while most 
oceanographic institutions are in the Northern 
Hemisphere.  The participants adopted a 
declaration to promote observations in the 
Southern Hemisphere, to identify the gaps in these 
observations, and means to fill them. 
 
There was agreement to promote education by 
instituting a scholarship scheme in collaboration 
with SCOR and IOC, and to provide training to 
scientists and technicians from developing 
countries related to global ocean observations. 
 
POGO agreed to co-sponsor SEREAD (Scientific 
Educational Resources and Experience Associated 
with the Deployment of Argo drifting floats in the 
South Pacific Ocean). 
 
Structure of POGO 
 
Executive Committee 
Dr. Charles Kennel, Founding Chairman (Director, 
Scripps Institute of Oceanography, U.S.A.)  
Dr. Robert Gagosian (Director, Woods Hole 
Oceanographic Institution, U.S.A.) 
Dr. Howard Roe (Director, Southampton 
Oceanographic Centre, UK) 
Dr. Michael Sinclair (Director, Bedford Institute 
of Oceanography, Canada) 
Dr. Rolf Weber (Director, Instituto Oceanografico, 
Univeristy of Sao Paulo, Brazil) 
 
Executive Director 
Dr. Shubha Sathyendranath (Bedford Institute of 
Oceanography, Canada) 
 
Future Activities 
 
The next meeting of POGO is scheduled for fall, 
2001, at the Bedford Institute of Oceanography.  
The major themes of the meeting will be:   
1. Biological observations - observations are 
more complex, less automated, and vary 
depending on the objectives of the study.  The 
needs of programs with climate/change carbon 
perspective and those that target biodiversity 
will be examined, so that POGO can requisite 
observations (note LMR GOOS has a lot to 
offer). 
2. Time-series observations to complement the 
Argo program. 
 
 
 
 
 
18
Plans for a CoML Workshop on Canadian Marine Biodiversity:  Pacific, 
Arctic, and Atlantic 
 
Kees Zwanenburg 
Marine Fish Division, Bedford Institute of Oceanography, 1 Challenger Drive, Dartmouth, NS, Canada.  
B2Y 4A2  E-mail: Zwanenburgk@mar.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
Rationale and objectives of the workshop 
 
The world demand for food from the oceans is 
expected to outstrip availability within the next 
few decades.  Increased use of the oceans for 
extraction of non-renewable resources and the 
accelerating growth of coastal population centers 
will put additional pressures on these systems.  In 
Canada this is reflected by increasing pressures on 
wild fish and invertebrate stocks, some to the point 
of fishery closure, increases in offshore oil and gas 
exploration, and increases in non-consumptive and 
other ocean use activities.  At the same time there 
is increasing demand for conservation of marine 
habitats and biodiversity.  The latter reflects a 
growing recognition that the welfare of mankind is 
inextricably linked to the welfare of these marine 
systems both as sources of food and as indicators 
of overall biosphere health.  Rational management 
of future harvesting and other human marine 
activities requires a reliable information base and 
theoretical framework with which to make 
effective decisions.  This workshop proposes to 
develop a national perspective on marine 
biodiversity in Canada’s ocean territories, to 
develop recommendations for improved 
monitoring of this diversity in future and to 
provide guidance on what key factors may control 
biodiversity.  
 
By signing the International Convention on 
Biodiversity, Canada has agreed to: make 
inventories of biodiversity, monitor changes in 
biodiversity, and make plans to conserve 
biodiversity.  Although Canada ranks among the 
world leaders in marine research and has been 
carrying out biophysical monitoring since at least 
the 1950s, knowledge of its vast ocean territories 
is still rudimentary for many areas, especially for 
many groups of organisms inhabiting them.  A 
pre-requisite to developing effective programs to 
protect habitats and biodiversity is to determine 
the extent to which information on biodiversity is 
available for Canada’s Pacific, Arctic and Atlantic 
Ocean territories.  Identifying the shortcomings in 
this information will allow us to amend existing 
biophysical monitoring activities to ensure that 
these information gaps can be filled.  In addition, 
the theoretical framework within which these data 
are interpreted and from which generalities 
regarding biodiversity can be drawn are not well 
established for marine systems.  Such a framework 
would allow us to make predictions about what 
major factors control biodiversity within marine 
systems and therefore what mitigative procedures 
would be effective for its maintenance.  Most 
ecological theory and ecological generalizations 
about biodiversity were developed using terrestrial 
systems.  The second pre-requisite therefore is to 
examine the applicability of terrestrial ecological 
theory to marine systems. 
 
The Centre for Marine Biodiversity (CMB) will 
convene a national workshop to examine these 
biodiversity issues in Canadian marine waters.  
The CMB is proposing this workshop in 
recognition of the many projects relating to 
biodiversity that are being carried out in all of its 
ocean territories (Pacific, Arctic, and Atlantic) and 
the need to consolidate and review this knowledge 
at a national scale.  Canada is well positioned for 
this workshop given the activity and caliber of its 
marine science community, the long tradition of 
monitoring of its marine systems, and the 
implementation of ecosystem level research in 
many of its marine institutions.  Specifically the 
workshop will achieve the following objectives: 
 
• A comprehensive description of information 
on biodiversity available for all of Canada’s 
ocean territories (Pacific, Arctic, and 
Atlantic).  This includes information collected 
as a result of government-funded biophysical 
monitoring surveys as well as the results of 
research carried out by universities, NGO’s, 
fisheries organizations, and First Nations.  The 
19
key elements of these data will be time and 
location of collection, the method of collection 
(sampling gear), and the number of specimens 
of each species observed. 
• A gap analysis of these data to determine 
where information on marine biodiversity is 
lacking (both geographically and 
taxonomically). 
• Recommendations for the improvement / 
augmentation of biophysical monitoring 
programs in each of the Pacific, Arctic, and 
Atlantic oceans based on the gap analysis of 
existing data, and focussed by model results if 
these indicate key taxonomic groups for which 
information is presently missing. 
• An evaluation of the applicability of existing 
ecological theory and generalizations to 
marine biodiversity.  Such an evaluation will 
focus on identifying key factors that maintain 
or modify the biodiversity of marine systems.  
This will be at three distinct but inter-
dependent levels, ecosystem diversity, species 
diversity within ecosystems, and population 
diversity within species. 
• Development of a National Plan for producing 
inventories of marine biodiversity, modifying 
or augmenting existing biophysical monitoring 
programs to ensure adequate monitoring of 
biodiversity, and providing guidance for the 
development of biodiversity conservation / 
augmentation plans. 
 
Summary of proposed work 
 
The CMB was recently established at the Bedford 
Institute of Oceanography to provide a focal point 
for the range of biodiversity related research 
presently being conducted in government 
institutes, universities, and NGO’s in the Atlantic 
region.  The proposed workshop will be attended 
by invited experts and others from the Pacific, 
Arctic and Atlantic regions of Canada and by 
international experts.  They will develop a detailed 
overview of current knowledge and gaps in 
knowledge about organismal diversity in its three 
oceans.  The workshop will also develop an 
overview of current models used to explore the 
trophic inter-relationships and organismal 
dynamics within Canadian marine ecosystems.  
The results of the gap analysis and model 
overviews will be used to focus recommendations 
for improving / augmenting existing biophysical 
monitoring programs.  Finally, the workshop will 
examine and debate the underlying ecological 
theory applicable to the maintenance of 
biodiversity at the marine ecosystem, species, and 
populations levels with the specific objectives of 
identifying key factors controlling diversity at 
these levels of organization.  The findings of the 
workshop will be used to develop a National Plan 
for cataloguing, monitoring, and providing the 
theoretical principles to govern the plans for 
conservation of biodiversity in Canadian marine 
territories.  This plan will provide guidance for 
Canada to fulfill its obligations under the 
International Convention on Biodiversity. 
 
Technical description of proposal 
 
We propose a Canada-wide approach to ensure 
that the workshop reflects biodiversity issues from 
all three of Canada’s oceans, and to encourage co-
ordination and co-operation among researchers 
working in these areas.  Such collaboration is 
essential to the successful development of a 
national view of marine biodiversity.  Since 
development of a Canadian view of marine 
biodiversity could provide significant insights or 
lessons to a global scale project, DFO and the 
Census of Marine Life will partner funding of the 
project.  
 
The motivations for the Census of Marine Life are 
that it provides opportunities to make exciting 
discoveries about our world, that it supports and 
operationalizes the International Convention on 
Biodiversity, and that this improved knowledge 
will lead to an improved ability to manage marine 
resources.  Specifically the objectives of the 
Census are to describe:  (i) what did live in the 
oceans,  (ii) what does live in the oceans,  and  
(iii) what will live in the oceans.  
 
Between 1997 and the present, the Census of 
Marine Life sponsored a series of expert 
workshops examining the justification, scope, and 
feasibility of such a project (Ausubel 1999).  
These workshops have concluded that this is one 
of the grand challenges of marine science whose 
execution has the potential to unify all its 
disciplines (biology, chemistry, and physics).  The 
20
global objectives of the Census are not only about 
classifying and counting the number of organisms 
in the sea;  they are about understanding the 
complexities of biological-physical-chemical 
coupling in dynamic marine environments.  An 
international steering committee has been 
established to integrate the most valuable and 
feasible ideas resulting from these and future 
workshops into a 10-year strategy document. 
 
The historical component of the program will 
involve rescuing and putting into electronic 
formats historical information on biodiversity.  For 
the Canadian workshop this will be accomplished, 
in part, by developing a meta-database of existing 
information on biodiversity.  Once the data 
sources have been identified it may be feasible to 
consider development of an integrated biodiversity 
data set for Canada.  Previous projects which 
developed integrated data sets of biophysical 
monitoring information (i.e. Mahon et al. 1998) 
resulted in many new insights into biogeography 
and (in this case) fish assemblages at previously 
unexplored geographic scales.  The program is 
also developing an Ocean Biogeographical 
Information System (OBIS) which could be used 
to develop the integrated biodiversity data set. 
Work being carried out through Canada’s Marine 
Environmental Data Service (MEDS) may also 
provide direction on how to merge these biological 
data with the accompanying physical data. 
 
The “present” component of the program will 
involve a number of new field programs 
specifically aimed at assessing the efficacy of new 
technologies to make synoptic and synchronous 
measures [of biodiversity] over large areas of 
ocean.  These will be in the form of pilot project in 
a number of key locations (Georges Bank / Gulf of 
Maine, Mid-Atlantic ridge and overlying deep-
water, vent and seep communities, Pacific large 
pelagic fish populations, North Pacific salmon 
populations, and Western Pacific near-shore 
fauna).  For the Canadian workshop we propose 
that the present component consist of an analysis 
of the available information to determine data gaps 
that will provide broad direction for the 
modification of existing biophysical monitoring 
programs to ensure effective future monitoring. 
We also propose that detailed direction for 
improved monitoring would be aided by results of 
modeling efforts to determine key structural or 
trophodynamic groups within systems. 
 
Although integration and analysis of historical 
data, and identifying and filling in data gaps will 
lead to an improved description of Canada’s 
marine system, the ultimate objective is to be able 
to predict what will happen to the diversity in 
these systems in the future.  This objective 
requires the ability to model the systems with the 
objective of identifying major forcing variables, or 
at least to identify the major factors controlling the 
key species groups.  This work is pre-requisite to 
developing or implementing management 
measures to protect or enhance the diversity of 
these systems.  Such modeling will require a 
theoretical framework within which to interpret 
the existing data.  These issues have been 
extensively deliberated for terrestrial systems but 
not for marine systems. Canada is presently 
embarking on a program to define and establish 
Marine Protected Areas.  Although the objectives 
for these areas have not been explicitly articulated, 
they do imply some desire to protect biodiversity 
at least within the boundaries of the areas.  The 
theoretical basis for determining the size, number, 
and location for such areas in order to maintain or 
enhance biodiversity has not been clearly 
articulated.  Although it is not necessary to delay 
the implementation of MPA’s while this theory is 
developed, deliberation and refinement of these 
concepts may lead to generalities that improve the 
efficacy of these areas.  Specifically, knowledge of 
what controls diversity within marine systems will 
allow for more effective management.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
21
An appraisal of current Pacific Ocean monitoring efforts existing within 
PICES countries 
 
David W. Welch 
Fisheries & Oceans Canada, Ocean Sciences & Productivity Division, Pacific Biological Station, 
Nanaimo, British Columbia, Canada.  V9R 5K6  E-mail: welchd@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
During the PICES Seventh Annual Meeting in 
Fairbanks (October 1998), it became clear that the 
PICES community does not have a good sense of 
how well the North Pacific is monitored.  As a 
result, following the meeting we worked to collect 
information on current monitoring efforts within 
the PICES region.  For purposes of this paper, we 
define monitoring as regular systematic ocean 
sampling.  For simplicity, we restricted our survey 
to ocean monitoring that is still on-going.  If we 
plot all of the ocean sampling that is currently 
occurring, the map of the North Pacific Ocean and 
adjacent seas looks fairly well-covered (Fig. 4).  
Reasonably extensive time-series of data exist at 
Station P (since 1949), Line P (since 1956), the 
GAK-1 line (since 1970) and the CalCOFI grid 
(since 1949). 
Fig. 4 Summary of on-going monitoring efforts in the PICES arena.  The figure shows all locations 
sampled at least once per year. 
Line P 
GAK-1 
CalCOFI 
KNOT 
 
Fig. 5 The same chart as Figure 4, but restricting the definition of monitoring to sampling that occurs 
two or more times per year.  Very little of the North Pacific is adequately monitored if seasonal variation 
occurs. 
22
However, the time of peak abundance of the 
dominant copepod Neocalanus plumchrus has 
shifted by approximately two months in the 
eastern North Pacific (Mackas 1998), emphasizing 
the need for seasonal coverage in order to identify 
such changes.  If we therefore restrict our 
definition of “monitoring” to sampling activities 
that re-sample the same locations two or more 
times per year, the picture changes dramatically 
(Fig. 5).  The limited sampling is particularly 
noticeable in the open ocean, where apart from 
Line P and the new Japanese Station KNOT, no 
monitoring activities are taking place.  As Steele 
(1998) has noted, coastal zooplankton populations 
appear to be forced by the offshore populations (at 
least in the Atlantic), so it is reasonable to expect 
that events happening offshore will have 
significant impacts in the shelf region as well.  It is 
clear, however, that the role of offshore and shelf 
ecosystems under climate change will not be 
resolved with the existing monitoring effort. 
 
 
Census of Marine Life – POST (Pacific Ocean Salmon Tagging) proposal 
 
David W. Welch 
Fisheries & Oceans Canada, Ocean Sciences & Productivity Division, Pacific Biological Station, 
Nanaimo, British Columbia, Canada. V9R 5K6  E-mail: welchd@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
The goal of this project, which is currently under 
review by the CoML for funding a two-year 
planning phase, is to develop a project focussed 
(initially) on Pacific salmon.  The purpose is to 
showcase the use of new electronic tagging 
technology that should allow marine scientists, for 
the first time, to really track and evaluate the 
movements of marine fish in the ocean 
environment.  A companion program, “TOPP” 
(Tagging of Pacific Pelagics), may also go 
forwards which would focus on using Pacific 
bluefin tuna and elephant seals using different 
classes of electronic tags.  This program is being 
co-ordinated by Barbara Block, Dan deCosta, and 
George Boehlert in California, U.S.A. 
 
The biological objective of POST is to evaluate 
whether salmon do not merely return to their home 
address or spawning grounds, but also home to 
marine feeding grounds using population-specific 
migration routes.  If this concept is correct, then 
salmon can be thought of as animals whose marine 
life history phase is every bit as complex and 
sophisticated as its freshwater phase.  The main 
difference is that the ocean life history of salmon 
(and all other migratory fish) is hidden within the 
opaque medium of seawater. 
 
The proposed CoML POST program has two 
components – an offshore component using 
archival tags to track the movements of Pacific 
salmon in the open ocean, and a nearshore 
component that would use an acoustic array to 
track the movements of salmon tagged with 
acoustic tags along the continental shelf (Fig. 6).   
 
Only the second component is of direct relevance 
to the purpose of this meeting.  Although acoustic 
tracking is normally considered to be of use over 
short distances and restricted time periods, it is 
likely that we can design and build an acoustic 
monitoring network that could stretch the length of 
the West Coast of North America at relatively low 
cost.  This network is called “POTENT” (for 
Pacific Ocean Tracking And Evaluation 
NeTwork), and would consist of about 600-700 
low cost acoustic receivers that would be deployed 
in a series of acoustic listening lines, that would 
stretch across the shelf on the sea bottom from 
land to the shelf break. 
 
As the continental shelf off the West Coast of 
North America is relatively narrow (20-30 km 
wide in most places), we believe that it will be 
possible to place a series of receivers at roughly  
1-km spacings that should provide for virtually 
complete detection of all acoustically tagged 
animals that swim above it (Fig. 7).  As each tag 
has a unique acoustic signature, and each receiver 
records the date and time that each tag is detected, 
it is possible to build up a detailed picture of the  
 
23
 
Fig. 6 Conceptual example of the monitoring 
network.  Monitoring lines (in red) will be placed 
using islands and straits as bottlenecks to 
minimize the length of monitoring lines.  For 
example, all tagged salmon migrating to or from 
the Fraser River or the East coast of Vancouver 
Island could be monitored with two short lines in 
Johnstone and Juan de Fuca Straits.  Their 
detection north or south of the straits would 
demonstrate which direction specific stocks move 
and their rates of migration. Similar design criteria 
would apply to other major rivers such as the 
Columbia.  Actual positions need to be determined 
as part of the planning process to minimize 
disruption to fisheries. 
 
Fig. 7 Conceptual example of the cross-shelf 
monitoring array.  The basic design goal is to 
determine the detection radius, r, at which an 
acoustically tagged animal can be identified under 
different oceanographic conditions.  Knowing r, it 
is possible to determine the spatial separation, D, 
for the receivers to ensure that an animal crossing 
the array at right angles has a high probability of 
being detected.  For a salmon smolt travelling at 
20 cm/sec, assuming that the minimum chord 
length is L=100 m in the example given results in 
the animal travelling within the detection zone for 
a minimum of 8 minutes. 
 
movements of individual animals during their 
migrations along the continental shelf over many 
months or years at sea.  This approach should for 
the first time allow the study of large scale 
movements of shelf-resident marine fish, which 
are not otherwise amenable to study. 
 
The POTENT array, if built, is thus of some 
interest for monitoring animals over wide regions 
along the continental shelf.  However, a further 
aspect of the array is of relevance, which is its use 
as a framework within which a much wider range  
of sea-bed instruments (such as temperature or 
salinity probes) could sit.  Assuming that the 
initial infrastructure can be developed, it should be 
possible to place a wide range of additional 
sensors on the seabed, and use the same 
infrastructure to retrieve long-term measurements 
of oceanographic properties as well. One could, 
for example, envisage such a seabed network 
recording the rate of movement of an El Niño at 
depth up the coast, since the greatest warming 
during the last two El Niños occurred at  
200-400 m depth off British Columbia. 
24
REPORTS OF THE BREAKOUT GROUP DISCUSSIONS 
 
After the plenary session reports on large 
international programs, the workshop participants 
were separated into four breakout groups 
organized by discipline.  Breakout Group 1 
consisted of experts in physical/chemical 
oceanography and climate.  Group 2 was 
phytoplankton, zooplankton, micronekton and 
benthos experts.  Group 3 consisted mainly of 
scientists involved in fish, squid, crab, and shrimp 
population analyses.  Group 4 was for migratory 
fish such as salmon and tunas, seabirds, and 
marine mammals.  Breakout group leaders asked 
participants to report on national monitoring 
activities within each discipline and their 
individual reports are contained in Section II.  
Each group then discussed the status of the 
monitoring, modeling and prediction system in the 
North Pacific with regards to the discipline.  
Monitoring gaps, priority sampling and analysis 
activities were identified. 
 
 
Breakout Group 1:  Physical/Chemical Oceanography and Climate 
 
Chairman:  Richard E. Thomson  
Rapporteur:  James E. Overland  
 
Participants:  Steven J. Bograd, Alexander S. Bychkov, Kimio Hanawa, Makoto Kashiwai, 
Andrei S. Krovnin, Vyacheslav B. Lobanov, Allen Macklin, Humio Mitsudera, Yukihiro Nojiri, 
Fangli Qiao, Warren S. Wooster, and David Foley.  Suam Kim attended part time. 
 
Introductions and preliminary discussion 
 
The morning session on the first day (March 7) 
began with each participant giving their name and 
affiliation, and outlining their area of research.  
Introduction was followed by a general discussion 
that attempted to define the exact goals of the 
breakout group in terms of the challenges 
presented in the workshop description.  There was 
some uncertainty in the goals and the best 
approach to proceed.  The initial discussion 
eventually centered on several main themes: 
• The importance of national governments in the 
establishment and maintenance of time-series 
for observing North Pacific marine ecosystems 
and their biodiversity.  Too often, continuation 
of important time-series is determined by the 
ability of individual scientists to secure 
funding and, unless the program is 
“institutionalized”, it may end with the depar-
ture of the leading proponent of the program.  
• The fundamental physical and chemical 
measurements needed for any long-term 
monitoring of the ocean.  Minimum 
requirements are temperature and salinity from 
CTDs, but preferably would also include 
meaurements of nutrients, dissolved oxygen, 
beam attenuation, chlorophyll, carbonate 
parameters, currents, and high-frequency 
bioacoustics. 
• Identification of “critical” time-series, such as 
those from coastal lighthouses and oceanic 
gyre sites (Station P and Station KNOT) that 
should be maintained to some level regardless 
of politics and funding constraints. 
• The approaches and sensors that are needed to 
overcome the logistical and funding 
difficulties required maintaining long-term 
physical and chemical oceanic time-series.  
Newly emerging technological advanced 
projects, such as the proposed NEPTUNE 
project in the northeast Pacific, offer an 
opportunity for oceanographers to collect 
long-term, externally powered, real-time, 
simultaneous physical, chemical, biological 
and geophysical data in the open ocean.  
• The degree of “value-added” information (i.e., 
degree of time-series interpretative) that 
should accompany any PICES database, and 
the need for a “stand-alone” document – such 
as a regularly updated State-of-the-Ocean 
Report – for managers.  
25
Presentations on existing and proposed time-
series observation programs and research 
 
The afternoon of the first day (March 7) and the 
morning of the second day (March 8) were 
devoted to presentations by individual scientists on 
material they had prepared for the meeting (see 
Table 1 and Section II).  The talks provided 
detailed information on existing physical/chemical 
databases for the North Pacific archived by 
American, Canadian, Chinese, Japanese, Korean, 
and Russian national institutions.  Presentations 
afforded insight into past, present and future field 
programs for each country and associated research 
programs within the institutions represented by 
each of the participating scientists.  Talks were 
generally informal and informative, ranging from 
presentations on data inventories to reports on 
scientific interpretation and numerical modeling.  
Some impressions are summarized below: 
 
• It is clear that the major sea-going nations of 
the North Pacific collectively hold an 
impressive range of continuing (as well as 
recently terminated) time-series of physical 
and chemical data.  Most participants reported 
on one or more oceanographic time-series 
(often bottle and/or CTD temperature and 
salinity data series) of more than 10 to 15 
years duration, as well as shorter (2 to 5 year) 
data series from process-based studies.  The 
latter tend to be multi-disciplinary and 
encompass a wide range of oceanic 
measurements.  Much of these “untapped” 
data are securely stored away in the archives 
of various institutions.  In some instances, 
different institutions in the same country have 
limited access to each other’s data series. 
• Most of long-term data series have been 
collected under the auspices of fisheries, ship 
navigation (e.g., ice concentrations and 
currents), and climate-related programs.  
Time-series for process-based studies are 
generally only a few years but encompass a 
broader range of physical, chemical and 
biological variables.  Unlike the open ocean 
areas, there generally are sufficient data from 
most coastal seas to accurately define seasonal 
and interannual variability.  
• Most of the existing datasets contain standard 
temperature and salinity data series from 
bottle/CTD casts, but many also include other 
oceanic parameters such as chlorophyll, beam 
(light) attenuation, nutrients, dissolved 
oxygen, carbonate parameters, current speed 
and direction, and zooplankton net haul time 
series.  Sea surface temperature (SST) from 
satellite AVHRR imagery and SeaWIFS ocean 
colour are critical to examining long-term 
variability but are often too limited by cloud 
and fog for short-term process-related studies. 
• Data coverage is highest within territorial seas 
and the continental margins of the World 
Ocean, and marginal at best in the offshore 
waters of the central Pacific, especially 
regions outside commercial shipping lanes.  
• Data collection is now generally 
complemented by primitive equation 
biophysical modeling and box-type ecosystem 
productivity modeling.  
• Scientists at the meeting were generally 
enthusiastic – albeit cautious – about sharing 
information on existing data sets and setting 
up a cooperative exchange program. 
 
Time-series data requirements 
 
Following the informal presentations on March 8, 
the group momentarily lost its direction.  It was 
not clear how to proceed and how to address the 
formidable tasks set out by the convenors.  The 
original goal of the meeting was seen by some as 
“analogous to climbing Mount Everest in winter 
without oxygen”.  After a brief discussion, it 
became clear that our goal was not to reach the 
peak but to set up “base camps” for future assaults 
on the database summit. 
 
We decided to return to the theme of meeting 
which was “to review the available existing time-
series and predictive models, to discuss the utility 
of those for assessing biodiversity and its changes, 
and to suggest improvements in terms of sampling 
and modeling strategy, and the addition of new 
time series observations that are not yet part of the 
monitoring system”.  
26
Table 1 Presenters and themes for Breakout Group 1. 
Presenter  Type of data series described  
Bograd, Steven 
U.S.A.  
(a) CalCOFI (1949-present) physical and biological data for the coast of 
California;  (b) PMEL/NIMPS data server.  Data on NOAA & CalCOFI 
websites.  
Hanawa, Kimio 
Japan 
Presented a handout of material on repeat sections.  JMA repeat surveys 
137°E, 155°E, 165°E.  Also short coastal lines 4x per year CTD/nutrients 
and physics.  Fisheries surveys of phyto/zooplankton along 179.5°W. 
Kashiwai, Makoto 
Japan 
Repeat lines by JFA (referred to David Welch’s overhead from his talk). 
Has a program for distributing fisheries data.  Noted the problem with data 
exchange among Japanese agencies. 
Krovnin, Andrei 
Russia 
Discussed monthly mean data collected by Russian fisheries agencies since 
1950.  Time-series exist for winter months and for ice cover in the Sea of 
Okhotsk.  T and S data for the NW Pacific.  Data are in digital form;  older 
data in paper form. 
Lobanov, Vyacheslav 
Russia 
Pacific Oceanological Institute database (http://poi.dov.ru).  Sakhalin 
Hydrometeorological Administration and Sakhalin Institute of Fisheries and 
Oceanography (SakhNIRO) sections off Sakhalin Islands continuing since 
the 1950s.  POI studying the eddy regime off the Kuril Islands from 1990 
till 2000 as an indicator of climate regimes.  
Macklin, Allen 
U.S.A. 
Indices from gridded data sets.  Bering Sea ice pack data.  Find an earlier 
transition from spring to summer.  Timing of the last spring storm in the 
Bering Sea used for pollock predictions.  North Pacific bottom pressure 
data at 1-minute samples collected for tsunami warnings since 1986.  
Alaska line 8 has 16-year data set.  Pollock larvae survey = 17 years data 
set. Alaskan Stream work began in 1987;  7 years of current moorings. 
North Pacific CTDs since 1932;  Sitka air temp since 1829;  North Pacific 
index since 1899;  satellite-tracked drifters 1986-2000.  
McLaren, Ron 
Canada 
Canadian meteorological program in the North Pacific.  Array of 6-12 deep-
drogued drifters since the mid-1980s (pressure and temperature sensors), 
and moored met buoys (6 m NOMADs and 3 m Discuss) measuring wind 
speed and direction, SST, air temperature, pressure, wave height, and wave 
period since late 1980s.  
Mitsudera, Humio 
Japan/U.S.A. 
Share data server with PMEL and have distributed data site at University of 
Hawaii.  Argo implementation and remote sensing data.  
Nojiri, Yukihiro 
Japan 
Discussed measurement of carbonate parameters data in the North Pacific. 
Also collection of pCO
2
, hydrography, DIC, and nutrient data.  CO
2
 and 
nutrients from underway sampling.  1998 began KNOT time-series.  
Compared time-series from Station P and Station KNOT.  Station P has 
higher productivity in winter but to his surprise, the two are the same in 
summer (need to verify this).  Chemists need coverage in the South Pacific 
on a repeated track.  Has a website for T/S and CO
2
 data. 
Overland, James 
U.S.A. 
Discussed NCEP (National Center for Environmental Prediction).  Data 
from 1947- present.  Used fixed physics and data assimilation to produce 
three-daily and monthly data files and maps.  
 
 
27
Table 1 (continued) 
Presenter Type of data series described  
Qiao, Fangli 
China 
Presented results for a numerical model of Jiaozhou Bay.  Other areas of 
interest include Yellow Sea area (observations), Kuroshio (have 18 years of 
data). 
Thomson, Richard 
Canada 
Discussed programs and data collected by the Institute of Ocean Sciences.  
Omitted to discuss ongoing paleooceangraphy studies examining piston, 
box and freeze cores from anoxic basins in British Columbia to examine 
histories of pelagic fish abundance, earthquake occurrences, and climate 
change. 
Batchelder, Hal 
U.S.A. 
Breakout group 2.  US GLOBEC program:  Transects off Oregon 4x per 
year for 6 to 7 years.  Extensive CODAR array.  Long-term observation 
program along Seward Line 1997-2005.  AVHRR imagery and SeaWIFS. 
Foley, David  
U.S.A. 
Pacific basin wide TOPEX/Poseidon, SeaWIFS and measurement of wind 
stress, SST, wind stress curl, and chlorophyll.  Websites for real-time data 
access.  
Kim, Suam 
Korea 
Breakout group 3.  Described the 22 transects conducted around Korean 
Peninsula, occupying about 75 stations, plus lighthouse coastal data dating 
to 1965.  6 surveys per year (every other month) for T, S, nutrients, DO, 
zooplankton. 
The following factors were addressed: 
 
• The need to collect and process high-quality, 
reliable physical and chemical data of 
sufficient sampling frequency to define 
seasonal, interannual and decadal variability, 
and climate-scale trends. 
• The need to distribute these data on a timely 
basis to national and international users 
(through joint programs if needed). 
• A requirement to analyze and interpret time-
series data in terms of physical and chemical 
dynamics of interest to biologists and political 
decision-makers. 
• The need to provide oceanographic data for 
formulation, calibration and validation of 
numerical models of ocean/atmosphere 
processes and climate change. 
 
Regional data coverage 
 
Given its considerable observational expertise, the 
breakout group decided to separate the North 
Pacific into nine distinct oceanographic regions 
and then discuss the degree of coverage in each of 
the primary regions.  A photocopy of the North 
Pacific was supplied by Dr. Nojiri, and group 
members were asked to sketch on the maps the 
locations and types of surveys their institutions are 
providing, separating these into “terminated data 
series” (Fig. 8) and “continuing data series”  
(Fig. 9). 
 
The general conclusion is that there are 
considerable physical, chemical and biological 
data collected within the coastal domains and 
continental margins of the North Pacific, but a 
marked paucity of data series for the central 
Pacific and Subarctic Gyre regions.  AVHRR 
satellite imagery and SeaWIFS are hampered by 
cloud cover.  However, TOPEX/POSEIDON is 
not hampered by clouds and has been providing 
critical time-series data on sea level height 
anomalies and their propagation in the open ocean 
and coastal seas.  
 
The 9 Biophysical Domains identified for the 
North Pacific were identified as the: 
 
1. California Current System (including 
hydrothermal venting regions) 
2. Alaska Current and Gulf of Alaska System  
28
3. Bering Sea 
4. Central North Pacific 
5. Sea of Okhotsk 
6. Sea of Japan 
7. Western Subtropical Gyre (including the 
Kuroshio) 
8. Western Subarctic Gyre (including the 
Oyashio)  
9. East China Sea 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 8 Time-series observations of physical/chemical or atmospheric parameters that have been 
discontinued. 
 
 
 
Fig. 9 Time-series observations of physical/chemical or atmospheric parameters that are continuing. 
 
29
Sea of Japan 
 
JMA (Japan) sections 
NFRDI (Korea) transects  
TINRO (Russia):  2 sections 
SakhNIRO (Russia):  semi-annual sections off 
Sakhalin Island 
NEAR-GOOS activities 
 
Coastal Japan  
Since 1964:  T, S, nutrient, chlorophyll, zoo-
plankton 
 
Coastal Korea 
Since 1965:  T, S, DO, nutrients, chlorophyll, zoo-
plankton 
 
Western Subarctic Gyre (and Oyashio) 
 
HNFRI (Japan):  Line A (7 years) 
JMA (Japan):  lines along 41.5° and 144°E; SST 
data composite 
Station KNOT (1998-) 
 
Western Subtropical Gyre (and Kuroshio) 
 
JMA (Japan):  lines along 137°, 155°, and 165°E 
JHD (Japan):  lines along 134.7° and 144°E;  also 
G, P Lines 
NIES (Japan) and IOS (Canada):  Basin wide CO
2
 
measurements since 1995  
 
Sea of Okhotsk 
 
TINRO (Russia):  Sakhalin and Kamchatka 
transects, T, S, DO, nutrient, zooplankton 
VNIRO (Russia):  weekly SST from satellites and 
ships 
SakhNIRO (Russia):  semi-annual sections off 
Sakhalin Island 
JMA, JHD and VNIRO:  sea-ice data 
 
Bering Sea 
 
TINRO and KamchatNIRO (Russia):  Kamchatka 
Current (in 1970s and 1995-);  SST, winds, T, 
S, DO, nutrient, zooplankton, primary 
productivity, currents 
FOCI (U.S.A.):  2 moorings and sections; sea ice 
NMFS (U.S.A.):  survey data 
Central Pacific  
 
Station HOT (U.S.A.):  22°N station and transect 
monthly along 175.5°E since 1998 
Hokkaido University, HU (Japan):  survey lines 
along 170°E, 180° and 165°W;  Line P and 
ships of opportunity 
 
Gulf of Alaska 
 
FOCI (U.S.A.):  Shelikof Strait since 1985;  T, S, 
nutrient, chlorophyll, primary productivity, 
zooplankton, currents 
GAK (U.S.A.):  line since 1971, now part of US 
GLOBEC;  CPR lines, T, S, nutrient, 
chlorophyll, zooplankton 
IOS (Canada):  La Perouse/GLOBEC lines off 
Vancouver Island and northern Washington 
State 
IOS (Canada):  Line P and Station P (1956-) 
HU (Japan):  line along 145°W 
NMFS (U.S.A.):  Gulf of Alaska groundfish 
surveys 
NMFS (U.S.A.)/DFO (Canada):  west coast of 
North America hake surveys (every 3 years) 
Meteorological buoys report near real-time hourly 
data on wind speed and direction, wind 
maximum, SST, air temperature, atmospheric 
pressure, significant wave height, and wave 
period   
Drifting buoys provide information on 
atmospheric pressure, SST, air temperature, 
and wind speed and direction (some buoys 
only)  
 
California Current System 
 
IOS (Canada):  Station P/Line P;  La Perouse/ 
Canadian GLOBEC programs;  T, S, nutrient, 
chlorophyll, zooplankton 
US GLOBEC:  Newport Oregon line (originally in 
the 1960s;  restarted 1996-);  T, S, nutrient, 
chlorophyll, zooplankton 
CalCOFI (U.S.A.):  ongoing since 1949;  T, S, 
nutrient, chlorophyll, primary productivity, 
zooplankton 
Canada/U.S.A. Vents programs (focus on Juan de 
Fuca Ridge). T, S, currents, nutrients, 
zooplankton  
30
MBARI moorings and Scripps (U.S.A.) pier time-
series 
IMECOCAL line off Baja (U.S.A./Mexico) 
Santa Barbara Basin (U.S.A./Mexico) 
Meteorological buoys report near real-time hourly 
data on wind speed and direction, wind 
maximum, SST, air temperature, atmospheric 
pressure, significant wave height, and wave 
period  
 
East China Sea 
 
SOA (China):  five standard sections since 1960 
JMA (Japan):  PN line 
 
Strait of Georgia 
 
IOS (Canada):  CTD, DO and nutrient data time-
series begun in 1999 
 
Except for the Sea of Japan 
 
NIES (Japan):  VOS CO
2
 program 
 
PICES “State-of-the-Ocean Reports” and 
establishment of a meta-database 
 
The general consensus of the breakout group was 
that: 
 
• PICES could provide a “virtual” site for 
communication of data inventory (i.e., provide 
information on geographical/time/type of data 
and data source) but should not attempt to 
store the data.  NOAA scientists attending the 
meeting had considerable expertise on setting-
up and maintaining a meta-database site.  
They should be consulted prior to and during 
formulation of any database site. 
• PICES could provide a site for regional large-
scale climate indices such as the Southern 
Oscillation Index, Pacific Decadal Oscillation, 
and Length of Day Index, and other indices. 
• PICES should oversee an annual (or 
semiannual) report detailing the “State-of-the-
Ocean” for the North Pacific which 
summarizes the temperature, salinity, currents, 
winds, primary/secondary production, 
fisheries productivity, carbonate parameters, 
and other oceanographic factors (including 
results of numerical modeling and theoretical 
studies).  Several nations presently issue such 
status reports for their areas of interest. 
• The reporting frequency should be at least 
annual but would prefer monthly so that 
seasonal cycle can be defined.  
• The information should be widely distributed 
through as many organizations as possible.  
PICES should help establish a meta-database 
by supporting (or finding support for) existing 
facilities set up by NOAA on the west coast of 
the United States. 
 
 
Breakout Group 2:  Phytoplankton, Zooplankton, Micronekton, and Benthos 
 
Chairmen:  David L. Mackas and Young-Shil Kang 
 
Participants:  Vera Alexander, Harold Batchelder, Sonia D. Batten, Richard D. Brodeur, David 
M. Checkley Jr., Sanae Chiba, Cynthia Decker, Rita Horner, Takahito Iida, Shin-ichi Ito, Michio 
J. Kishi, Toru Kobari, Kosei Komatsu, Allen Macklin, Phillip R. Mundy, William T. Peterson,  
Sei-Ichi Saitoh, S. Lan Smith, Takashige Sugimoto, Kazuaki Tadokoro 
 
Preliminary discussions 
 
We began with a general discussion of the need 
for improved ocean observation and prediction 
systems.  Briefly, sustained and enhanced ocean 
time-series are necessary because: 
• The oceans are not constant (there are large 
changes at interannual and longer time scales); 
• Some of these changes cannot yet be predicted 
(the ocean generates “surprises”);  and 
• Present time-series are insufficient for 
diagnosis and prediction (inadequate density 
31
and integration among all variables and 
regions). 
 
We next reviewed the specific objectives for this 
workshop/breakout group.  These were: 
 
• To describe what we are now doing (coverage, 
methodology, data management),  
• To document successes and problem areas 
(lessons from past and present activities), and 
• To develop plans for the future.  
 
Individual presentations on existing 
observation and modeling programs 
 
Most of the Breakout Group agenda (afternoon of 
March 7, all of March 8) was filled by a series of 
presentations on existing observation and modeling 
programs (Table 2).  Extended abstracts of 
individual presentations can be found in Section II.  
The presentations provided a good overview of the 
lower trophic level time-series observations now 
being made in many parts of the North Pacific.  
However, there may be some important omissions.  
For example, our Breakout Group lacked 
representation from China or Russia, and also 
from the international community of 
intertidal/subtidal benthic ecologists. 
 
Table 2 Presenters and themes for Breakout Group 2. 
Presenters Topics 
V. Alexander  Oral presentation 
H. Batchelder U.S. GLOBEC Northeast Pacific Program observations, retrospective studies and model 
products 
S. Batten  Continuous Plankton Recorder pilot study in the North Pacific 
R. Brodeur Micronekton data dets in North Pacific 
D. Checkley Plankton in the California Cooperative Fisheries Investigations 
S. Chiba Japan Sea time-series - qualitative study on lower trophic level ecosystem may reveal the 
process on climate-ecosystem interaction 
R. Horner  Phytoplankton data from the Gulf of Alaska, British Columbia, and the Pacific coast of the 
U.S., with emphasis on harmful algal bloom species 
S.-I. Ito Time-series of the Tohoku National Laboratory 
Y.-S. Kang Monitoring system and long-term trend of zooplankton in the Korean waters 
T. Kobari  180º time-series information 
C. Lange (presented 
by R. Horner) 
Scripps Pier phytoplankton time-series 
D. Mackas Canadian activities and plans for zooplankton, phytoplankton, micronekton, and benthos 
monitoring in the Pacific Ocean 
A. Macklin Physical and biophysical time-series originating from or used by Fisheries Oceanography 
Coordinated Investigations (FOCI) in the North Pacific Ocean and Bering Sea 
W. Peterson Zooplankton time-series - Oregon, Washington and N. California 
S.-I. Saitoh East-west variability of primary production in the subarctic North Pacific derived from 
Multi-Sensor Remote Sensing during 1996-2000 
N. Shiga Oral presentation 
K. Tadokoro Long-term variations of plankton biomass in the North Pacific 
32
Group discussion of shared themes 
(characteristics, strengths and weaknesses of 
North Pacific time-series observation 
programs) 
 
Spatial coverage and sampling frequency  
 
For the margins of the North Pacific (inland seas, 
continental shelf and slope regions, boundary 
currents), time-series coverage ranges from poor 
to fair (in most high latitude and subtropical 
regions), and to very good (waters off Japan and 
Korea, the continental US and southern Canadian 
coasts, and some parts of Alaska). 
 
In contrast, open ocean regions are consistently 
undersampled, except for a few variables and 
regions that can be sampled from satellites (e.g. 
ocean color in locations with low or moderate 
cloud cover).  Seasonality of biological production 
and upper ocean physics is very strong in the 
North Pacific, but very few open-ocean programs 
have a sampling frequency sufficient to resolve 
seasonal phasing and amplitude. 
 
Biological coverage 
 
For mesozooplankton and phytoplankton, most 
North Pacific time-series provide indices of 
biomass (typically either wet weight, dry weight, 
or displacement volume for mesozooplankton; 
chlorophyll-a concentration for phytoplankton).  
Some time-series include additional information 
on taxonomic (and sometimes age/stage) 
composition within these categories.  There was a 
strong consensus that this information on 
biological composition has been very useful where 
and when it has been available. 
 
Unfortunately, there are fewer (and in some cases 
no) time-series observations for two key groups of 
“lower trophic level” pelagic organisms that play 
very important roles in oceanic food webs and 
geochemical cycles.  Some of the conspicuous 
gaps: 
• Very small “microbial loop” taxa such as 
bacteria, picoplankton and microzooplankton 
(some exceptions:  HOTS, Station P, US 
GLOBEC and some Japan coastal lines); 
• “Micronekton” - this category includes taxa 
for which quantitative sampling is very 
difficult:  small mesopelagic fishes, shrimps, 
squids, and (to a lesser but significant extent) 
euphausiids.  They are too large and agile to 
be well-sampled by standard zooplankton nets, 
but are (to date) not targeted by commercial 
fishing gear. 
 
For benthic taxa, availability of time-series data 
drops off steeply with distance from shore.  Many 
intertidal benthic time-series exist, but collection 
and use of these data is for the most part by 
individuals and organizations outside the PICES 
scientific community.  This could (and should) be 
changed by more collaboration between biological 
oceanographers and intertidal ecologists.  
 
There is much less time-series information on 
North Pacific sub-tidal and deep-sea benthos.  
One-time baseline studies have been done for a 
few regions (e.g., Bering Sea, southern BC 
continental shelf).  Time-series data for large 
benthic epifauna are sometimes available from 
fisheries assessment trawl surveys (e.g., Anderson 
and Piatt 1999).  For infauna and small benthic 
epifauna, breakout group members were unaware 
of sustained benthic time-series, except for site-
specific studies of environmental perturbations in 
near-shore regions, and some recent repeat 
observations of hydrothermal vent environments. 
 
Paleoceanography is based primarily on “benthic” 
sampling of chronologically stratified sediments.  
Comparison/intercalibration with water-column 
time-series from nearby regions is essential if we 
wish to interpret the longer time scales of ocean 
variability. 
 
Duration and life expectancy of observation 
programs 
 
There is a worrisome mismatch between time 
scales of North Pacific variability, and the typical 
duration of observation programs.  Although this 
meeting has documented an increasing number of 
North Pacific time-series, nearly all sampling 
programs are either fixed duration (typically ≤ 5 
years) or continue on an uncertain ‘year by year’ 
basis.  Lack of long-term continuity appears to be 
more attributable to lack of funding agency 
commitment than to lack of interest and 
commitment by individual researchers.  
33
Given the importance of decadal and longer time 
scales of climate variability, are 5-10 year 
fragments sufficient ingredients for a “long-term 
observation program”?  If not, how and to whom 
do we convey this message?  What can we offer as 
remedies?  Can we use technology to reduce the 
cost per data point?  From preliminary knowledge 
of spatial and temporal scales of variability, can 
we now design less detailed, but more permanent, 
sampling designs?  What is the optimal mix of 
spatial lines and grids with single-point Eulerian 
time series? 
 
Sensors and platforms 
 
Existing biological oceanographic sampling 
programs in the North Pacific make broad use of 
dedicated survey cruises and satellite remote 
sensing.  The ship-based methods used for time-
series in situ sampling (nets, water bottles, 
auxiliary electronic sensors on CTDs) are 
generally effective, although taxonomically 
selective and perhaps a bit dated (see Biological 
coverage section above).  
 
There is effective spot use of commercial ships-of-
opportunity and dedicated moorings carrying 
sediment traps and/or optical and acoustic sensors.  
Promising opportunities for the future include: 
high frequency acoustics (we are behind fisheries 
scientists in standardized measurement of acoustic 
backscatter);  supplemental “add-on” sampling 
that uses research vessels as ships-of-opportunity, 
“moorings of opportunity”, “drifters of 
opportunity”, “ocean observatories”, autonomous 
nutrient analyzers;  use of optical plankton 
counters (OPCs) for quick analysis of size 
spectrum of net samples, broader routine use of 
quick and simple indicators like Secchi depth.  
 
Integration with operational and diagnostic 
simulation models 
 
Efforts to couple time-series observations with 
marine ecosystem models are expanding rapidly in 
the United States and Japan, somewhat less rapidly 
in other PICES nations.  Breakout group members 
agreed that this is an important activity, beneficial 
to both data collectors and modellers.  Some issues 
that were identified in our brief discussion: 
• Most modellers of lower trophic levels use a 
quantification based on (pooled) biomass 
rather than numeric abundance.  This is 
effective for biogeochemical applications, but 
may be less effective for applications 
involving population dynamics (survival, 
recruitment) of individual target species or 
changes in community composition. 
• Neither models nor sampling can be 
completely detailed in every respect.  Model 
development always involves tradeoff choices 
in model complexity (e.g., space and time 
resolution vs. community structure and 
diversity).  There is a good discussion of this 
issue in the recent GLOBEC International 
“Report of the GLOBEC Focus 3 Working 
Group on Modelling and Predictive 
Capabilities”. 
• Data assimilation (the constraint of model 
output by ongoing observations) is proving 
extremely useful in meteorology and physical 
oceanography, but is not yet common in 
biological models. 
 
Community data archival and availability 
 
There has been ongoing, but slow, progress toward 
“data sharing” in biological oceanography.  
Compared to physical oceanographic and 
meteorological data (for which there is a large 
amount of accessible “shared” data), obstacles 
include the high diversity of type and quality 
among measured biological variables, occasional 
long time lags for sample workup, scientific 
culture, and (in a few cases) political sensitivity.  
More complete participation can be enforced by 
research funding policies.  However, it is also 
important that data originators “buy-in” 
voluntarily to data sharing.  This will occur if and 
because “community” data banks are set up in a 
way that the data originators find accessible and 
useful. Specific suggestions and problems 
mentioned in our group discussion: 
 
• Metadata clearing house (A PICES node of 
OBIS?); 
• Problem of no fixed internet address for web-
access data and derived-index time-series 
(“URL mutation”);  and 
34
• Regional Analysis Centers (products, tools to 
aid formatting and analysis,  site and funding 
vehicle for comparative analysis projects, 
politically neutral). 
 
Additional gaps, problems and opportunities 
 
Taxonomic capacity is declining, at the same time 
as we are learning (or re-learning) the value of 
species-level identification for understanding 
ecosystem structure and change.  There is a critical 
need to maintain and restore access to this 
expertise.  CoML has a clear interest and could 
play an important role.  Suggested initiatives 
included:  
 
• development of a Pacific identification 
clearing house;  
• funding of graduate-level “taxonomic 
apprenticeship” programs;  and  
• alternative computer-based formats for 
identification guides. 
 
Standardization/intercomparison of sampling 
methods is needed.  Simplicity and constancy have 
merit.  However, methods will differ and evolve.  
In cases where methods change within a time-
series, there should be an adequate overlap and 
intercomparison period.  There should also be 
careful choice/calibration of methods on any 
startup of new time-series.  
 
Between-nation coordination and intercomparison 
of results (both in regions with overlapping 
sampling, and between separated regions) could be 
improved.  Because of the importance of long-time 
scale and large spatial scale variability of marine 
ecosystems, there is great benefit in ensemble 
comparisons/contrasts among time-series from 
both adjoining and widely-separated ocean 
regions.  PICES has been very effective in 
establishing a forum for this exchange, and a 
willingness of individuals and nations to 
participate.  However, data-handling tools to 
facilitate collaborative analysis are not yet in place 
(this could be a valuable role for proposed PICES 
Regional Analysis Centres). 
Value-added biological sampling could be 
conducted.  Pacific monitoring programs that are 
now primarily focussed on physical oceanography 
and air-sea interaction (e.g., NEAR-GOOS, Argo) 
could be expanded at modest incremental cost to 
include biological measurements. 
 
“State of the North Pacific” report  
 
In the opinion of the breakout group leaders, there 
was general endorsement of the value of such a 
report, but some apprehension about capacity and 
infrastructure to ensure consistent and timely 
delivery of the proposed contents. 
 
We concluded with a brief discussion of issues 
such as: 
 
• Optimal ratio of fact to interpretation/opinion 
(the breakout group consensus was that some 
interpretation is desirable and necessary); 
• Editorial/vetting structure; 
• Frequency of publication/release:  breakout 
group consensus is that there should be an 
annual report, possibly supplemented by less 
detailed releases at more frequent (quarterly) 
intervals;  
• What contents?  Suggestions follow: 
For a quarterly issue/update: 
null SeaWiFS composites 
null Real-time in situ data (where available) 
null CalCOFI plankton volumes, egg surveys 
null Preliminary (anecdotal) notifications of 
faunistic/floristic changes 
For a more extensive annual compilation and 
summary: 
null Pigment samples 
null Carbon chemistry 
null Plankton (phyto, microzoop, mesozoop) 
biomass and/or community composition 
(about 12-month time lag, may be possible 
for only a subset of samples, species) 
null Rate measurements and derived properties 
(e.g. productivity maps) 
null Fish larval surveys? 
null Results from recent retrospective & model 
analyses 
 
35
Breakout Group 3:  Fish, Squid, Crabs and Shrimps 
 
Chairmen:  Anne B. Hollowed and Suam Kim 
 
Participants:  Richard D. Brodeur, Cynthia Decker, Steven R. Hare, Patricia Livingston, Gordon 
A. (Sandy) McFarlane, Bernard A. Megrey, H. Geoffrey Moser, Yasunori Sakurai, Hiroyuki 
Sakano, Robert Spies, Qisheng Tang, Daniel M. Ware, AkihikoYatsu, Kees Zwanenburg 
 
Introduction 
 
The Fish, Squid, Crabs and Shrimps (FSCS) 
breakout group focused their discussion on three 
primary questions:  What information should be 
examined?  What is the availability of 
information?  What is the most expeditious way to 
develop a PICES indices database to examine this 
information? 
 
Presentations from workshop participants provided 
an overview of the availability of information 
from each of the PICES regions (see Section II for 
extended abstracts of individual presentations).  
These presentations provided strong evidence of 
the role of ocean variability in shifts in marine fish 
and shellfish community structure.   
 
Candidate biological indicators   
 
Collectively breakout group members supported 
the development of leading indicators of climate 
change based on four types of biological 
measures:  shifts in production, shifts in growth or 
condition, shifts in distribution, and shifts in 
community structure. 
 
Production 
 
• Annual production  
- Recruitment 
- Egg and larval surveys 
- Juvenile surveys 
- Diet composition of key predators:   
available for most regions 
• Estimates of biomass or abundance 
- Fishery independent surveys targeting 
species  
- Catch statistics for target species 
 
- Anecdotal information  
null Bycatch in fishery independent survey 
null Bycatch in commercial fishery for 
other species 
- Changes in predation mortality 
- Hatch-date distributions 
 
Growth and condition 
 
• Annual or semi-annual measures of growth  
- Size or weight at age 
- Daily and annual growth increments 
• Annual or semi-annual measures of  
reproductive potential 
- Fecundity  
- Maturity at age 
• Annual or semi-annual measures of larval 
condition  
- RNA/DNA ratios 
- Stable isotopes 
- Lipid content 
- Free fatty acids 
• Food habits information 
- Shifts in diet composition 
- Shifts in percent fullness 
 
Distribution 
 
• Distribution by life history stage  
- Range-wide by species  
- Range-wide by species by age or size 
- Index regions  
null spawning habitat 
null foraging habitat 
- Patchiness 
- Average area required to include the  
majority of the population (e.g. 75%) 
- Number of non-zero sets 
• Migration pathways  
 
36
Change in community 
 
• Stock structure 
- Genetics  
- Parasites 
- Trace elements of otoliths 
- Morphology 
• Species assemblages 
• Food habits 
- Seasonal diet composition  
- Annual diet composition 
• Diversity indices 
- Functional diversity 
- Species diversity 
- Average trophic level of the population 
 
Candidate species 
 
Upon review of the variety of biological 
indicators, breakout group participants realized 
that it would be unreasonable to suggest that each 
member nation should collect indices for all major 
species within each region.  However, it might be 
reasonable to suggest that a smaller group of 
indicator species or indicator regions (in the case 
of community studies) would be comprehensively 
monitored on a regular basis (annually or semi-
annually).  Breakout group participants identified 
several candidate species for consideration in the 
PICES report: 
 
• Gadids:  walleye pollock, Pacific cod, Pacific 
hake 
• Small pelagics:  anchovy, Pacific sardine, 
chub mackerel, Pacific herring, Pacific saury, 
osmerids 
• Pacific salmon 
• Sablefish 
• Invertebrates:  common squid, selected 
crustaceans (e.g. king crab) 
• Rockfish including thornyheads 
• Flatfish:  Pacific halibut, small mouthed 
flounders 
• Small yellow croaker 
• Lightly exploited or non-commercial species:  
sharks, myctophids 
• Commercially exploited sharks 
 
North Pacific Ecosystem Bio-Physical Meta-
database and “State of the North Pacific” 
report 
 
A major impediment to the development of the 
PICES “State of the Ocean” report is that it would 
require an infrastructure to access information 
from each member nation.  One possible solution 
to this problem would be for PICES to suggest a 
rapid method for identifying and updating annual 
information from each member nation.   
 
Dr. Megrey presented an overview of the Bering 
Sea Ecosystem Biophysical Metadatabase 
(http://www.pmel.noaa.gov/bering/mdb/).  It was 
developed for the Bering Sea, however, it could be 
expanded to encompass other PICES regions.  The 
BSEBM allows researchers to search for 
information by region using key words.  Once a 
data set is identified, the user can access the data if 
the contributor volunteers a web-accessible link to 
information.  In theory, the BSEBM platform 
could operate as a distributed database for rapid 
access to summarized information from each 
member nation.  This platform would provide a 
possible mechanism for expediting the 
development of a summary of biological indicators 
on an annual basis.  Based on this possibility the 
group made the following recommendations. 
 
Recommendations 
 
1. Workshop participants should encourage 
member nations to submit information on 
observational time series and analytical 
products to the North Pacific Ecosystem Bio-
Physical Meta-database by the next PICES 
Annual Meeting. 
2. A sub-group should be formed to establish 
protocols to facilitate searches for specific 
data types and indices (e.g., key word 
dictionary). 
3. Each member nation will collect a suite of 
leading indicators of ecosystem patterns and 
trends.  Time series of this sub-set of 
indicators will be provided to PICES. 
4. PICES will require an individual to summarize 
this information into an annual report on the 
status of the North Pacific. 
 
37
Remaining Questions 
 
What are the gaps in information? 
• For some transboundary species in the western 
Pacific, fisheries statistics are spatially limited 
and information is missing for some regions; 
• Data is limited for non-commercially 
exploited species, particularly small pelagic 
species (e.g., myctophids, osmerids and squid) 
that are not well sampled by standard surveys; 
• A variety of different gears and mesh sizes are 
needed to measure the diversity of species in 
the system; 
• Seasonal coverage is limited which impacts 
our ability to evaluate the ontogenetic 
movements of fish. 
 
What time-series are particularly informative for 
understanding or evaluating climate changes in 
biodiversity? 
• Research survey CPUE by species; 
• Bycatch data from fisheries observers - 
caution should be used when interpreting these 
data because a variety of factors influence the 
catch rates; 
• Spatial distribution of total effort by fisheries 
(see caution above); 
• Time-series of fish prices and associated 
landings; 
• Species composition and catch rate from 
ichthyoplankton surveys. 
What types of analyses or models are useful for 
best understanding climate related changes in 
biodiversity? 
• Analysis of the spatial distribution of fish 
relative to environmental characteristics; 
• Retrospective studies based on trends in stock 
production; 
• Examine a variety of species diversity indices 
(e.g., slope of the size spectrum, Shannon-
Wiener index, species richness) relative to a 
suite of environmental indices; 
• Nested statistical models relating biological 
time series with environmental co-variates 
(recruitment, growth etc.); 
• Changes in functional groups. 
 
How can PICES facilitate and coordinate the 
collection and analysis of information for 
producing a North Pacific-wide ecosystem status 
report based on our time series and analytical 
products? 
• Improve intra-national cooperation and 
coordination through symposia and 
workshops; 
• Can TCODE members be charged with this 
responsibility? 
• Recommend the formation of a cooperative 
group to enhance the exchange of information 
on transboundary stocks and oceanic species 
(e.g., Pacific pomfret and flying squid). 
 
 
Breakout Group 4:  Highly Migratory Fishes, Seabirds and Marine Mammals 
 
Chairmen:  Hidehiro Kato and Jeffrey J. Polovina 
Rapporteur:  Stewart (Skip) M. McKinnell 
 
Participants:  Richard J. Beamish, Douglas F. Bertram, Phillip R. Mundy, Robert Olson, Hiroshi 
Ueda, Yutaka Watanuki, David W. Welch 
 
Time-series and their recent trends presented 
by species groups 
 
Salmon 
 
The North Pacific Anadromous Fisheries 
Commission (NPAFC) has agreed to provide 
salmon abundance information to the PICES 
Ecosystem Status Report.  Their first contribution 
to the report will be prepared at the NPAFC 
research planning and coordinating meeting in 
Seattle, in March 2001.  Historical catches of 
salmon in Canada, Japan and the United States, 
were reported annually to the INPFC from 1952-
1992.  With the creation of NPAFC in 1993, 
Russia became a member nation, and Russian 
38
catch statistics have been reported annually, as 
have hatchery release statistics.  In the absence of 
NPAFC data, salmon experts in our breakout 
group noted the following:  
 
• Coho, chinook and steelhead catches declined 
somewhat synchronously in the coastal 
northeastern Pacific during the 1990s. 
• Coho and chinook abundance in the past 
several years show evidence of increasing in 
Washington/Oregon. 
• High sockeye returns to the Fraser River in 
2001 have been forecast. 
• Alaska salmon in central/southeast have 
generally increased in abundance and variance 
in the 1990s. 
• Chum/chinook survival in the Yukon River in 
recent years is low and certain populations 
have been extirpated. 
• PSMFC coded wire tagging database exists 
from 1974 to present. 
• Salmon catches in western Alaska have gone 
from consistently high abundance to 
exhibiting much higher variance. 
• The Japanese salmon catch peaked in 1997 
and a sharp decline occurred thereafter.  Masu 
salmon have persisted at very low levels since 
the 1960s. 
• National Salmon Resources Center has been 
established to replace the National Research 
Institute of the Hokkaido Salmon Hatchery. 
 
Seabirds 
 
• Pacific Seabird Group and USGS have 
established a database of seabird time-series 
for the entire North Pacific and that will be 
accessible on the web. 
• Cassin’s auklet population, monitored at 
Triangle Island (central British Columbia) 
since the 1970s, has exhibited a long-term 
decline.  However, in 1999/2000 the 
reproductive rate sharply increased. 
• No indication of changes at Frederick Island 
(northern British Columbia) for the same 
species. 
• In Japan, time-series of Black-tailed gull and 
slaty-back gull abundance are available since 
1980, and for rhinoceros auklet and Japanese 
cormorant since about 1984.  The data show 
interannual variability but no evidence of 
trends. 
• Reproductive success of black-footed and 
Laysan albatrosses, measured at French 
Frigate Shoals since 1980, remained generally 
stable for both species since the early 1980s, 
but sharp declines have been observed in the 
last few years. 
 
Marine mammals 
 
• Whaling statistics (operational time budget, 
length, sex, stomach contents, blubber 
thickness) are available from the 1950s to 
1987 through the International Whaling 
Commission (IWC), and since 1996, data from 
Japan research whaling is collected by the 
Japan Far Seas Laboratory in Shimizu.  
Systematic sighting surveys are available since 
1982 from dedicated surveys, largely in the 
western Pacific, conducted by the National 
Research Institute of Far Seas Fisheries 
(NRIFSF), Shimizu.  Also, platform-of-
opportunity (POP) sighting surveys were 
conducted largely by U.S. researchers since 
the mid-1970s in the eastern Pacific.  Shore-
based censuses are available in specific 
locations (e.g., North American gray whales). 
Orca abundance and distribution is assessed in 
North American coastal waters. 
• Grey whales are fully recovered after 
approaching near extinction.  Bowhead whale 
monitoring has detected an increase in 
abundance.  
• Sperm whale abundance along the coast of 
Japan is estimated at 170,000 animals and has 
been increasing 6-11% per year.  Sperm whale 
stomach samples have the potential to sample 
deep water squid status. 
• Minke whale population is estimated at 23,000 
animals and increasing in northwestern North 
Pacific.  Prior to 1975, their diet was mainly 
mackerel or some similar schooling fishes in 
waters off the Pacific coast of Japan.  By the 
late 1970s, it changed to Japanese pilchard and 
this status continued until 1987.  From 1996 
onward, their diet contained an abundance of 
Pacific saury or anchovy.  
• For pinnipeds, rookery counts are typically 
used to gauge abundance, but in some areas 
39
index of thickness of blubber is available.  
Steller sea lion have been declining in 
abundance in Alaska and the south Kuril 
Islands.  There is no abundance information 
prior to the 1970s. 
• Hawaiian monk seals in the northwestern 
Hawaiian Island chain have been monitored 
since the early 1980s.  Monk seal pup girth 
decreased from the mid-1980s to the mid-
1990s and increased after 1998.  
 
Tunas 
 
• Stock assessments on tuna species in the 
eastern tropical Pacific are available from the 
mid-1970s for yellowfin, skipjack, and bigeye. 
Model estimates of yellowfin tuna recruitment 
incorporate sea surface temperature (SST).  
There seems to be a relationship with tropical 
SST anomalies leading recruitment by 6 
months.  Large increases of yellowfin tuna 
followed the recent El Niño.  Data on the 
average weight of the catch are available since 
1975.  
• Bluefin tuna spawn in the western Pacific and 
some migrate to the eastern Pacific.  Catch 
data are available from 1960-1998 for purse 
seiners in the eastern Pacific and Japanese 
longline fishery largely in the western Pacific, 
from 1952-97.  Japan’s Far Seas Fisheries Lab 
is conducting a major archival tagging study 
of bluefin tuna.  
• North Pacific albacore catch rate time-series 
from US troll vessels is maintained by 
NMFS/SWFSC and extends from 1960 to the 
present.  The data show a drop in the catch 
rates in the mid-1970s to the mid-1990s, with 
an increase in the late-1990s. 
 
Models 
 
In the North Pacific, in recent years there have 
been numerous ECOPATH/ECOSIM models 
developed covering regional as well as gyre scales.  
Some are used to explore both bottom-up and top 
down forcing.  The supporting documentation for 
these models contains a wealth of information on 
marine ecosystems across the North Pacific.  In 
the breakout group, ECOPATH/ECOSIM models 
  
were presented for the Western Pacific Transition 
Zone and subarctic, Prince William Sound, 
Northwest Hawaiian Islands, and Eastern Tropical 
Pacific. 
 
Dynamic ecosystem models such as ECOSIM can 
be useful in understanding mechanisms or 
hypotheses to explain observed time-series trends 
as well as in identifying species to monitor. 
 
Habitats 
 
In addition to monitoring trends in organism 
abundance, it may be useful to monitor the 
dynamics of oceanic habitats that are important to 
apex species foraging, reproduction or migration.  
This may include location, spatial scale, and 
intensity of specific fronts, eddies, and upwelling 
regions which have been identified as critical 
oceanic habitat. 
 
Discussion points 
 
Regarding what species are well monitored, 
commercially exploited species have the longest 
time-series.  Formerly commercial cetacean 
species have rather good time-series of absolute 
abundance, especially minke whale.  Some seabird 
series are also good (30 years at Farallon Is.). 
 
Regarding what species would be best for 
comparative analysis of ecosystems, Rhinoceros 
auklets and salmon are found all around the 
Pacific Rim.  However, if a monitoring program is 
to be set up, it may be best to establish a sampling 
project in a region that takes all trophic levels into 
consideration, rather than try to use the same 
species throughout the region. 
 
Regarding parameters to monitor, characteristics 
such as birth/death rates, fecundity,  school size, 
age at maturity, blubber thickness, and lipid 
contents may be more timely indicators of climate 
impacts than population size, since the latter 
integrates many years.  
 
PICES can facilitate the writing of an ecosystem 
status report and include electronic version of the 
data;  perhaps every year.  For the first report, each 
country might nominate people to write the report.  
40
CLOSING PLENARY DISCUSSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Participants discussed the common themes and gaps 
identified in the breakout group reports and made 
recommendations for PICES action on several 
items. 
 
North Pacific Ecosystem Meta-database 
 
The most common recommendation of the breakout 
groups dealt with ensuring that the time-series 
information and scientific contacts identified at the 
workshop be recorded and updated in the North 
Pacific Ecosystem Meta-database in which TCODE 
has already placed the PICES long-term time-series 
`information.  This meta-database, originally titled 
the “Bering Sea Ecosystem Meta-database”, was 
initiated by two US researchers to provide a means 
of promoting scientific collaboration and research 
on the Bering Sea.  Direct links to data are only 
available if the researcher wishes to make it 
assessable.  Otherwise, the meta-database provides 
information on who to contact about the data.   
 
Participants endorsed the proposal that the existing 
meta-database be considered as the PICES North 
Pacific Ecosystem Meta-database.  Presently, the 
database is maintained and updated by U.S. 
researchers through various funding sources that 
will be exhausted by the end of 2001.  If it is to be 
considered as a PICES meta-database, then it was 
recommended that it be shown as a link on the 
PICES web site, even if it physically resides on a 
U.S. server at present.   
 
Further discussion about the database involved 
details on how to ensure that keyword indices for 
the database are sufficiently detailed to obtain good 
quality data searches.  It was recommended that 
TCODE examine the existing keyword indices of 
this database and suggest revisions.  It was also 
recommended that TCODE explore the OBIS 
database system, which is being developed under 
funding by the Sloan Foundation’s Census of 
Marine Life.  TCODE should then determine 
whether the North Pacific Ecosystem Meta-
database could be considered a contribution to the 
OBIS system or whether the Meta-database would 
require revision to be compatible with OBIS.  
Funds for future enhancements and maintenance of 
the meta-database might be obtained through 
written proposals to the Sloan, Packard, or W. 
Alton Jones Foundations, which might support this 
activity.  The CoML funding announcement will be 
coming out in early fall 2001, but it was not clear 
whether the announcement would include this type 
of work.  
 
Another issue surrounding the database was how to 
ensure information on all data (meta-data) 
presented at this workshop could be entered into the 
database.  Sending database forms for participants 
to fill out and return might get very low response 
rates.  Participants agreed that the optimal solution 
would be for the meta-data lists compiled at the 
meeting to be given to the present North Pacific 
Ecosystem Meta-database administrators.  These 
people would then do follow-ups with individual 
researchers to ensure that all meta-data sources are 
entered into the Meta-database, using the keyword 
list agreed upon by TCODE. 
 
Data gaps and exchange 
 
It was clear from the breakout group presentations 
that there were data gaps for many groups, 
particularly for lower trophic level species.  As 
found in data gathering efforts for other world 
oceans, there was a noticeable lack of long time-
series information in both coastal and open ocean 
areas for benthic invertebrates, primary production, 
secondary production, micronekton and small 
pelagic fish biomass and dynamics.  It was also 
obvious that data collection in the margins 
(continental shelves) was much denser than in the 
open ocean.  Most sampling methodology used in 
the long time-series tend to be more traditional, low 
technology approaches such as continuous plankton 
recorders and net sampling. 
 
As noted before in many PICES gatherings, 
participants recognized that no individual country 
could provide a complete sampling coverage of the 
open ocean.  Nations need to pool observational 
resources in order to provide a complete program in 
these areas.  One possibility would be to enhance or 
begin sampling temperature, salinity, chlorophyll-a, 
fluorometry, and plankton (through continuous 
41
plankton recorders and/or optical plankton 
counters) on ships-of-opportunity.  It was recom-
mended that MONITOR Task Team examine pilot 
projects of this nature and also consider projects for 
putting biological sensors on Argo floats and buoys, 
and using commercial fishing vessels for data 
gathering.  Some of the technological and practical 
problems of adding biological sensors to buoys 
were mentioned.  The Marine Mammal and Bird 
Advisory Panel (MBM) might also want to consider 
proposals or projects that relate to video monitoring 
of birds and mammals along CPR cruises and 
solving species identification and density estimation 
problems associated with such a program.  
Coordinated proposals or discussion between MBM 
and CPR panels and MONITOR Task Team for 
these projects should be planned.  Technological 
advancements in various fields will also be the 
theme of the PICES Eleventh Annual Meeting in 
2002, so some of these issues could be examined 
further at that meeting.   
 
It was recommended that PICES make formal 
connections with programs that are planning 
coordinated, technologically-advanced observation 
and communication systems.  The NEPTUNE 
underwater observatory for the northeast Pacific is a 
program initiated by the University of Washington 
that will be a contribution to the “Dynamics of 
Earth and Ocean Systems” planning effort of the 
US National Science Foundation.  There also exists 
a separately funded Canadian NEPTUNE program 
led by several Canadian universities.  Other nations, 
such as France, Germany and Japan, have 
expressed a strong interest in providing 
contributions to a global NEPTUNE program.  The 
US Consortium of Oceanographic Research and 
Education (CORE) Task Team on Ocean 
Observations has prepared a report on an integrated 
ocean observation system that should be considered 
by PICES, and by MONITOR Task Team in 
particular. 
 
It was also suggested that PICES further exploit 
scientific platforms-of-opportunity for filling data 
gaps.  This would require more communication 
among PICES scientists about national cruise plans, 
particularly in international and transboundary 
waters, in order to provide more scientific 
exchange. 
 
To address the technological difficulties in 
assessing small pelagic fish, it was recommended 
that FIS Committee consider a new working group 
to examine this problem and make recommen-
dations on how to improve sampling of these 
important links in marine food chains.   
 
There was mention of the idea that physical models 
could be used to fill historical gaps in the data 
record.  Some examples were given of how this is 
being done by US researchers.  Simulation models 
that include biology could be used to identify 
important ecosystem components that would 
warrant increased sampling effort.  Other data gaps 
might be clearer once PICES completes one or two 
Ecosystem Status Reports and more recommen-
dations might be made at that time with regard to 
filling identified gaps.  
 
Data exchange was discussed as an issue to bring 
forward to Governing Council.  MONITOR and 
TCODE, in particular, should consider specific data 
exchange issues and develop recommendations for 
Science Board and Governing Council to consider.  
There was also data exchange issues discussed in 
relation to the WMO Data Buoy Cooperation Panel.  
Presently, there are separate web sites and access 
for buoy data from various PICES nations.  It 
would be of great value to those making ocean 
predictions to have these data sources joined and 
linked, through the work of a North Pacific Data 
Buoy Cooperation Panel, and then linked to the 
PICES web site. 
 
North Pacific Ecosystem Status Report and 
Regional Analysis Centers 
 
There was general recognition that the initial North 
Pacific Ecosystem Status Report would take the 
form of a “quick” report that might omit substantial 
interpretation of the observed trends.  Some 
components of the report, such as physical 
oceanography and atmospheric information, might 
be updated more frequently (e.g., quarterly) than 
other components such as fish stock assessments 
that might be carried out on an annual time frame.  
Thus, one possibility would be that the report might 
be updated quarterly on the PICES web site for 
some components but less frequently for other 
components.  There would also need to be further 
work on future reports to decide how to provide 
42
objective interpretation and expert opinion of the 
trends to decision-makers.  This is an area that is 
actively being worked on in some PICES countries 
and by ICES.  We may need to have future 
workshops to refine a set of quantitative ecosystem 
change indicators and methods for synthesizing and 
interpreting results of these change indicators for a 
target audience that might consist of the interested 
public and policy- and decision-makers in PICES 
countries. 
 
Details regarding actual production of the report 
were discussed.  One suggestion was that the 
analyses should be done and the report prepared by 
PICES.  Another idea was that report sections 
would be prepared by co-lead authors, one from 
each side of the North Pacific.  Some thought that 
what we would be doing was similar to what the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC) is doing.  This group bases its assessment 
mainly on published and peer-reviewed scientific 
technical literature and individuals contribute ideas.  
IPCC working group group reports are prepared by 
co-leaders, with many experts that represent a 
balance of geographic areas.  There is an effort to 
achieve consensus in the reports and then a set of 
procedures is followed to accept and approve the 
report, first by the working group and then by the 
IPCC.  Reports are reviewed by experts and by 
governments before a final draft is prepared for 
approval by the IPCC.  A summary for 
policymakers is also prepared and approved.  A 
recommendation was made to contact ICES to look 
at their structure and procedures for stock and 
environmental assessments and also how they are 
proceeding with providing ecosystem advice. 
 
There was a suggestion that the procedure should 
be to get PICES and other international 
organizations and their experts together to agree on 
an assessment.  The assessment would then adopt 
the practice used in stock assessment reviews, 
where a draft document is provided about 6 months 
before the meeting for review.  A final, revised 
draft would then be prepared for approval at the 
annual meeting.  The PICES-GLOBEC Climate 
Change and Carrying Capacity (CCCC) Program 
was mentioned as the primary PICES group that 
should be performing these assessments, though it 
should also be recognized that PICES Working 
Groups and Advisory Panels would also provide 
important scientific input to these reports. 
 
The concept of Regional Analysis Centers (RACs) 
was discussed as a way for PICES to have a central 
focus for supporting the work involved in 
producing an Ecosystem Status Report.  
Participants mentioned two different ways of 
viewing these centers.  One type of RAC would be 
an actual geographic location and building with 
staff assigned to it.  The other view was that it could 
be thought of as a virtual entity, such as the Human 
Genome Project, where a variety of organizations 
and individuals contribute to the work even though 
they may not be housed in a common center.  (It 
should be noted that post-workshop review of this 
revealed that this Project is actually operated in the 
U.S. through a research institute whose function is 
to coordinate the research, which may be performed 
either internally or by other institutions.) 
 
Similarly, the Space Environment Database and 
Analysis Tools project was mentioned as another 
model.  This project is carried out by the Central 
Laboratory of the Research Councils of the United 
Kingdom, which provides the building space for 
outside researchers, plus its own technical experts 
to work on joining and interpreting data.  Funding 
for this Central Laboratory is provided mainly by 
the other Research Councils of the U.K. 
 
Finally, participants thought that although the RAC 
concept would draw heavily upon a distributed 
network of scientists to contribute to the work, 
some central support would still be required to 
accomplish the work.  Initially, one person in the 
PICES Secretariat might be sufficient to organize 
and coordinate the work involved in producing an 
Ecosystem Status Report. 
 
 
 
 
 
43
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Section II 
 
EXTENDED ABSTRACTS OF INDIVIDUAL PRESENTATIONS 
AT BREAKOUT GROUP SESSIONS 
 
 
GROUP 1:  PHYSICAL /CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY AND CLIMATE 
 
 
CalCOFI hydrographic climatology 
 
Steven J. Bograd 
NOAA/NMFS, Pacific Fisheries Environmental Laboratory, 1352 Lighthouse Avenue, Pacific Grove, CA 
93950,  U.S.A.  E-mail: sbograd@pfeg.noaa.gov 
 
Introduction 
 
Routine oceanographic sampling within the 
California Current System has occurred under the 
auspices of the California Cooperative Oceanic 
Fisheries Investigations (CalCOFI) since 1949, 
providing one of the longest existing time-series of 
the physics, chemistry and biology of a dynamic 
oceanic regime.  All data are now available on a 
CalCOFI CD-ROM, obtainable from the Scripps 
Institution of Oceanography (for details see 
http://www.calcofi.org).  The principle objective 
in preparing the CD-ROM was to make these data 
easily accessible to the general oceanographic 
community, as well as to provide a baseline data 
set from which water property anomalies can be 
computed and compared between regions along 
the West Coast.  Thus, in addition to providing the 
50-year dataset, we also include a climatology of 
the CalCOFI hydrographic data, as well as a 
program for computing the mean values of various 
physical variables at any given location within the 
CalCOFI domain and for any day of the year.  
(Data and software are also available directly from 
the website noted above.) 
 
Data 
 
The historical CalCOFI sampling grid extends 
from the southern reaches of Baja California 
northward to the California-Oregon border, and 
out to several hundred kilometers offshore, with 
36 nominal lines oriented approximately 
perpendicular to the coastline.  Stations are 
designated by a line and station number (e.g., 
77.60 is station 60 on line 77).  Nominal station 
spacing is approximately 70 km offshore (e.g., 
distance between 77.60 and 77.70), but is 
considerably less inshore of station 60.  The 
greatest spatial and temporal coverage occurred 
during the early years of the program (1950-1960), 
when multi-vessel cruises occupied significant 
portions of the grid at monthly intervals (Moser et 
al. 1988).  Quarterly surveys were conducted 
annually from 1961 to 1965, with target months of 
January, April, July and October.  Monthly 
coverage was resumed, but only triennially, 
between 1966 and 1984.  Measurements were 
made on over 23,000 stations on this grid over the 
35-year period from 1949 to 1984.  Through 1964, 
standard station sampling consisted of 12- to 18- 
Nansen bottle casts mostly to 500-m depth (and 
occasionally to 1,200 m or 2,000 m).  STD or 
CTD casts were taken subsequently, often in 
conjunction with a Nansen cast or with several 
water-bottle samples for calibration (Lynn et al. 
1982).  Values of oceanographic parameters were 
interpolated to standard depths.  All data from 
observed and standard depths are published in 
Scripps Institution of Oceanography data reports. 
 
The present CalCOFI grid, a subset of the 
historical grid which has been occupied quarterly 
since 1984, comprises nearly 7,500 station 
occupations (through January 2001) from six 
nominal lines between San Diego and Point 
Conception.  Routine station activities include 
CTD/rosette casts to 500-m depth, bottom depth 
permitting, with continuous measurements of 
pressure, temperature, conductivity, dissolved 
oxygen and chlorophyll fluorescence.  Water 
samples are collected at 20 depths, with variable 
spacing depending on depth of the chlorophyll, 
oxygen and salinity extrema and the thermocline 
depth (Hayward and Venrick 1998).  Salinity, 
oxygen and nutrients are determined for all 
sampled depths, while chlorophyll-a and phaeo-
pigments are determined within the top 200 m, 
bottom depth permitting.  Details of the standard 
sampling and analysis procedures can be found in 
any of the recent CalCOFI data reports, e.g., SIO 
(1999). 
47
Methods 
 
The CalCOFI CD-ROM and website include 
climatologies of the hydrographic data.  We 
describe the mean seasonal variability of 7 
hydrographic variables (temperature, salinity, 
density, oxygen concentration, oxygen saturation, 
dynamic height anomaly and spiciness) at 14 
standard levels (0, 10, 20, 30, 50, 75, 100, 125, 
150, 200, 250, 300, 400, 500 m) for all stations 
within the CalCOFI dataset for which sufficient 
data exist.  Spiciness, as defined by Flament 
(1986), is a state variable (units of σ
t
) that is most 
sensitive to isopycnal thermohaline variations and 
least correlated with the density field.  It is 
conserved in isentropic motions, and is defined to 
be largest for warm and salty water. 
 
Our approach follows that of Lynn (1967) and 
Lynn et al. (1982), in which the mean seasonal 
variation is obtained by a least squares regression 
of the data to annually periodic sinusoids.  Since 
the time intervals between measurements are 
irregular, and typically consist of 3-4 month gaps, 
we restrict our harmonic analysis to include only 
the annual and semiannual harmonics.  The 
general form of the regression curve is: 
 
Y = A
1
cosΦ + B
1
sinΦ  + A
2
cos2Φ  + B
2
sin2Φ  + C, 
 
where Φ is the angular equivalent of the day of the 
year in radians, and C is the annual mean value.  
In the least squares regression, the sum of the 
squares of the data anomalies from the regression 
curve is minimized with respect to each of the five 
coefficients, with the resulting set of equations 
solved simultaneously for the coefficients (Lynn 
1967).  In order to maintain sufficient data for 
performing the regression, the criterion of at least 
5 occupations (for a given variable, at a particular 
station and standard depth) were required within 
each 60-day period of the time series. 
 
The files containing the derived harmonic 
coefficients for each station, standard depth and 
variable for which sufficient data exist are 
included on the CD-ROM.  These files are used to 
compute the mean values for a selected variable, 
station, standard depth and day of year, or to 
compute anomalies for a particular set of 
measurements. 
Climatological base periods 
 
Not all stations within the CalCOFI region have 
been regularly occupied since 1949.  As 
mentioned above, there have been several 
fundamental changes in the areal extent of the 
nominal sampling grid, with the latest change 
occurring in 1984.  It was therefore necessary to 
construct several climatologies that represent 
different portions of the region over different 
baseline periods.  For the period 1950-1984, 
harmonic coefficients were computed for all 
stations on the entire historical grid, from Baja 
California to northern California, which had 
sufficient data.  The harmonic analysis was 
performed on only those data from the present grid 
for two additional baseline periods:  1950-1999 
and 1984-1999.  The latter base period was chosen 
because it represents the period in which various 
changes in sampling methods and strategies were 
employed. 
 
Tables of monthly mean values of each of the 
physical variables for the periods 1950-1984 
(historical grid) and 1950-1999 (present grid), for 
all stations and standard depths for which 
sufficient data exist, are included on the CD-
ROM.  We also included coefficient files for the 
base periods 1950-1976 and 1977-1999 for all 
stations within the present grid, as these represent 
both sides of an observed “regime shift” in Pacific 
climate (e.g., Trenberth and Hurrell 1994; Francis 
and Hare 1994), and may be of use in diagnosing 
decadal variability in the region. 
 
We encourage caution when using these 
climatologies to determine anomalies from 
independent observations made along the West 
Coast.  The choice of baseline period has a 
significant effect on the derived mean values  
(Figs. 1 and 2), due primarily to an upper-level 
warming and freshening trend in the Southern 
California Bight over the past 20 years. 
 
References 
 
Flament, P.  1986.  Subduction and finestructure 
associated with upwelling filaments.  Ph.D. 
dissertation, University of California, San 
Diego 123p. 
 
48
Francis, R.C., and Hare, S.R.  1994.  Decadal-
scale regime shifts in the large marine 
ecosystems of the northeast Pacific: A case for 
historical science.  Fish. Oceanogr. 3: 279-
291. 
Hayward, T.L. and Venrick, E.L.  1998.  
Nearsurface pattern in the California Current: 
Coupling between physical and biological 
structure.  Deep-Sea Res. II 45: 1617-1638. 
Lynn, R.J.  1967.  Seasonal variations of 
temperature and salinity at 10 meters in the 
California Current.  CalCOFI Rep. 11: 157-
174. 
Lynn, R.J., Bliss, K.A. and Eber, L.E.  1982.  
Vertical and horizontal distributions of 
seasonal mean temperature, salinity, sigma-t, 
stability, dynamic height, oxygen, and oxygen 
saturation in the California Current.  1950-
1978 CalCOFI Atlas No. 30. 
Moser, H.G., Charter, R.L., Smith, P.E., Ambrose, 
D.A., Charter, S.R., Meyer, C.A., Sandknop, 
E.M. and Watson, W.  1988.  Distributional 
atlas of fish larvae and eggs in the California 
Current region: Taxa with 1000 or more total 
larvae.  1951 through 1984, CalCOFI Atlas 
No. 31. 
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of 
California.  1999.  Physical, Chemical and 
Biological Data, CalCOFI Cruises 9802, 9803, 
9804, 9805 and 9806, SIO Ref. 99-9 160p. 
Trenberth, K.E., and Hurrell, J.W.  1994.  Decadal 
atmosphere-ocean variations in the Pacific.  
Climate Dynamics 9: 303-319. 
 
Fig. 1 Harmonic means of 10-m temperature at 
CalCOFI stations 80.51 (inshore) and 80.90 
(offshore) for different base climatologies. 
 
 
 
Fig. 2  Harmonic means of 10-m salinity at 
CalCOFI stations 80.51 (inshore) and 80.90 
(offshore) for different base climatologies. 
 
 
 
Improving access to environmental datasets:  Data holdings at Pacific 
Fisheries Environmental Laboratory 
 
Lynn deWitt and Roy Mendelssohn 
Pacific Fisheries Environmental Laboratory, NOAA/NMFS, 1352 Lighthouse Avenue, Pacific Grove, CA  
93950, U.S.A.  E-mail: ldewitt@pfeg.noaa.gov; rmendels@pfeg.noaa.gov 
 
Introduction 
 
Research in oceanography and other 
environmental sciences often involves obtaining 
data from many sources.  Unfortunately, these data 
are usually in multiple formats, causing 
investigators to spend a discouraging amount of 
their research time reducing data to a form useful 
for analysis.  In addition, it is rarely possible to 
obtain only the small subsets of data that are 
pertinent to their research.  This problem is often 
particularly acute in fisheries research, where 
investigators may not have familiarity with 
oceanographic datasets and appropriate means of 
subsetting them (Boehlert and Schumacher 1997).  
At the Pacific Fisheries Environmental Laboratory 
49
(PFEL), we are working to provide environmental 
data to investigators in a more usable form. 
 
PFEL, a component of the National Marine 
Fisheries Service (Southwest Fisheries Science 
Center), specializes in analyzing the effects of 
environmental variability on fisheries.  Due to its 
cooperation with the Navy’s Fleet Numerical 
Meteorology and Oceanography Center (FNMOC) 
and other data centers, PFEL has a wide variety of 
oceanographic and atmospheric datasets that are 
relevant to many areas of fisheries science, marine 
resource management, and climate change in the 
ocean.  For many years, PFEL has supplied 
extracts from these datasets to users around the 
world, and has also developed a number of derived 
products from these datasets.  These have been 
used in many areas of research.  Currently PFEL is 
increasing the number of datasets available and 
improving access to these datasets by converting 
them to common formats and making them readily 
available over the Internet. 
 
PFEL receives both observational data and gridded 
model output in near-real time (Table 1).  These 
data include:  Global Telecommunications System  
(GTS) surface observational data;  Global 
Temperature-Salinity Profile Program (GTSPP, 
Hamilton 1994) subsurface data; and FNMOC 
operational forecasts of the state of the atmosphere 
and ocean.  PFEL also maintains the World Ocean 
Database (WOD98, Levitus et al. 1998) and 
Comprehensive Ocean-Atmosphere Data Set 
(COADS, Slutz et al. 1985).  Each data set arrives 
at PFEL in its own native format, each requires a 
different set of extraction software, and each 
presents its own unique problems in attempting to 
organize, extract, subset and distribute the data.  
Detailed descriptions of each currently held data 
set and the methods employed to place them in 
common formats are available in the unabridged 
version of this data summary (deWitt and 
Mendelssohn 2001), available from PFEL. 
 
Data products 
 
PFEL makes available a variety of products derived 
from the observational products and Fleet 
Numerical Meteorology and Oceanography Center 
(FNMOC) model output.  Most of these products 
can be obtained on the Live Access Server 
(described below). 
 
Table 1 PFEL Data Holdings.  G or O refers to (G) Gridded derived (model output) data or (O) non-
gridded observational data.  Dimensions are (L)Latitude by (L)Longitude by (D)Depth by (T)Time.  All 
data generally have global coverage, except for FNMOC SLP, which, for the years 1967 - 1981, is only 
available for the Northern Hemisphere.  Observational (O) data, although available globally, is often 
locally sparse.   
Data Set Native 
Format 
Frequency 
of Arrival 
at PFEL 
Monthly 
Storage 
Required 
G or 
O 
Availability Dates Dimensions 
GTS Surface BUFR hourly 500Mb
1 
O Jan 1997 - present LxLxT 
GTSPP Subsurface MEDS monthly 8Mb O Jan 1990 - present LxLxDxT 
FNMOC       
   Sea Level Pressure GRIB 6 hrs 10Mb G Jan 1967 - present LxLxT 
   Surface Winds (20 m) GRIB 12 hrs 18Mb G Jul 1998 - present LxLxT 
   Surface Winds (10 m) GRIB bimonthly 9Mb G Nov 1999 - present LxLxT 
   Geopotential Height GRIB 6 hrs 14Mb G Jul 1998 - present LxLxT 
World Ocean Database 
  1998 Standard Level Data 
NODC/ 
OCL 
Archived 1541Mb 
  Total
2 
O Jan 1950 - Dec 1994 LxLxDxT 
1 
Uncompressed, compressed size is 50 megabytes (Mb)  
2 
Total uncompressed size for all probe types for standard level data for entire period of availability (from 
Conkright et. al. 1998, appendix 12A). 
50
Historical products 
 
On a monthly basis, PFEL generates indices of the 
intensity of large-scale, wind-induced coastal 
upwelling at 15 standard locations along the west 
coast of North America (3-degree intervals, 21°N to 
60°N).  The indices are based on estimates of 
offshore Ekman transport driven by geostrophic 
wind stress (Bakun 1973; Schwing et al. 1996).  
Geostrophic winds are derived from monthly 
averages of six-hourly FNMOC surface 
atmospheric pressure fields.  The following 
monthly products are available for subsetting and 
downloading (upwelling index and along-shore 
transports are also available as 6-hourly and daily 
averaged values) for 1967 to the present: 
- Surface Atmospheric Pressure  
- North-South component of surface wind  
- East-West component of surface wind  
- North-South component of wind stress  
- East-West component of wind stress  
- Curl of surface wind stress  
- Cube of wind speed  
- North-South component of Ekman Transport  
- East-West component of Ekman Transport  
- Offshore Ekman transport (Upwelling index)  
- Vertical Velocity into Ekman Layer  
- Sverdrup Wind Stress Curl Transport 
 
In recent years, PFEL has re-calculated upwelling 
indices and transports, updating the procedure to 
include averaging the 6-hourly transport fields 
rather than computing the fields from the averaged 
pressure, and eliminating the earlier 3°-grid 
limitation.  In order to offer a consistent time-series 
to those who have been using PFEL products for a 
number of years, both the historical and new 
products remain available and are updated monthly. 
 
Near real-time six-hourly products 
 
Six-hourly products from the current and previous 
month (sea level pressure, geostrophic wind, wind 
stress and upwelling index) are available for 
viewing and download on PFEL’s web page 
(“www.pfeg.noaa.gov”, click on the “Upwelling/ 
Environmental Indices” button, then “Current 
Month’s Six-hourly Products”) and Live Access 
Server (see below).  These products are 
automatically updated daily and include the current 
day’s 0600Z pressure field. 
 
Global upwelling index 
 
From the new monthly pressure-derived products, 
Live Access Server users can calculate a time series 
of upwelling index (off-shore component of Ekman 
transport) for any coastal location in the Northern 
Hemisphere (1967-1980) and globally (1981-
present).  The user must provide latitude, longitude 
and the angle the coastline makes with a vector 
pointing north.  A Ferret script rotates the Ekman 
transport in the desired direction and returns a time 
series at the desired location which can be viewed 
or downloaded. 
 
Extratropical Northern Oscillation Index (NOIx) 
 
Monthly values of the NOIx (extratropical Northern 
Oscillation Index) and its analog, the SOIx 
(extratropical Southern Oscillation Index), along 
with the traditional Southern Oscillation Index 
(SOI) are available for viewing and downloading 
on PFEL’s web page (“www.pfeg.noaa.gov”, click 
on the “Upwelling/Environmental Indices” button, 
and scroll down to “Other Environmental Indices”) 
for 1948 to the present.  The NOIx and SOIx are 
new indices (Schwing et al. 2001) of mid-latitude 
climate fluctuations that are useful for monitoring 
and predicting climate fluctuations and their 
physical and biological consequences in the 
Northeast Pacific. 
 
Mixed layer depth 
 
Monthly mixed layer depth and mixed layer depth 
climatology computed from the WOD98 (Levitus et 
al. 1998) standard level data are available on the 
Live Access Server.  Mixed layer depth is 
computed using two different criteria (Monterey 
and Levitus, 1997; Monterey and deWitt, 2000) 
from individual WOD98 profiles, then averaged on 
a 1-degree latitude/longitude grid.  The two criteria 
are:  (i) a temperature criterion:  mixed layer depth 
is determined as the depth at which the temperature 
falls to 0.5°C below the surface temperature,  and  
(ii) a density criterion:  mixed layer depth is 
determined as the depth at which the density 
difference from the sea surface is 0.125 σ
t
 units. 
51
Table 2 Products currently available on the PMEL’s Live Access Server. 
Name of Dataset Dates available  Types of Measurements/Depths 
GTS Sea Surface Observations Jan 1997 – present Sea Surface Temperature 
SST Anomaly 
Number observations in the means 
GTSPP Subsurface Temperature 
     Real Time 
     Best Copy (Delayed Mode) 
 
Aug 1996 – present 
Jan 1990 - Dec 1998 
Temperature at 18 standard depths (10 - 1000 m) 
Depths of 14 and 10-degree isotherms 
FNMOC Sea Level Pressure 
     1-degree model output 
     Interpolated from larger mesh 
 
Nov 1996 - present 
Jan 1967 - Oct 1996 
Pressure reduced to mean sea level 
FNMOC Surface Winds 
    10 m 
    20 m 
 
Nov 1999 - present 
Jul 1998 - present 
Wind components and magnitude 
Wind Stress components and magnitude 
Wind Stress curl 
FNMOC Geopotential Height Jul 1998 - present Geopotential Height at 500 mb 
World Ocean Database 1998 
    Observational means 
 
     Mixed Layer Depth 
Jan 1950 - Dec 1990 
 
Jan 1945 - Dec 1994 
 
Temperature at 33 standard depths (0 - 5500 m) 
Temperature and salinity climatology (0 - 5500 m) 
Mixed layer depth and mixed layer depth 
    Climatology using two criterion 
PFEL Derived Products 
PFEL “Historical” Products 
   Upwelling index (N. America) 
           Monthly 
           Daily and 6-hourly 
   Monthly Wind products 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Indices   
 
Global Upwelling Index 
           SLP and wind products 
 
 
           Upwelling index 
 
Near Real-time Six-hourly 
           SLP and wind products 
 
 
           Upwelling index 
 
 
 
Jan 1946 - present 
Jan 1967 - present 
Jan 1967 - present 
 
 
 
 
Jan 1948 - present 
 
 
Jan 1967 – present  
 
 
Jan 1967 - present   
 
 
Current month 
 
 
Current month 
 
 
Upwelling index and along shore transport at 15 
    Locations along the E. North Pacific coast 
 
Winds, speed cubed, wind stress, wind stress curl,  
   Ekman Transport at 15 locations along the E. 
   North Pacific coast computed from monthly  
   sea level pressure 
 
Monthly NOIx, SOIx, SOI 
 
 
Winds, wind stress, wind stress curl, and 
   Ekman Transport computed from 6-hourly  
   sea level pressure 
Upwelling index (calculated using user-supplied 
    Coastline geometry) 
 
Winds, wind stress, wind stress curl, and 
   Ekman Transport computed from 6-hourly  
   sea level pressure 
Upwelling index at 15 North American and 11   
   South American coastal locations 
 
52
Live access server 
 
PFEL has implemented a version of PMEL’s Live 
Access Server (LAS) (Hankin et al. 1999, and 
ferret.wrc.noaa.gov/Ferret/LAS/) which allows 
users to visualize, subset, and extract PFEL’s data 
products over the Internet (deWitt and 
Mendelssohn, 1999 and “www.pfeg.noaa.gov”).  
The LAS is designed to handle gridded fields, 
preferably in netCDF format.  As part of our 
routine monthly processing most PFEL standard 
and derived products are converted to netCDF by 
appending a month’s worth of data onto pre-
existing netCDF files.  Products currently 
available on the LAS are listed in Table 2.  Unless 
specified otherwise, all products are available as 
monthly summaries on a 1-degree grid. 
 
In order to make observational data available on 
the LAS, we calculate 1-degree monthly means at 
standard depths.  For the monthly GTS data we 
have so far only made temperature means 
available on the LAS, but these include number of 
observations, monthly anomalies and an attempt at 
some quality control.  The GTSPP netCDF files 
include number of observations and depths of the 
10- and 14-degree isotherms. 
 
Although all the standard level WOD98 data has 
been converted to HDF-EOS format, we are 
presently only serving part of it to our users.  The 
amount of data below 1,000 m does not justify the 
storage required in gridded format.  For these 
reasons, and since we have GTSPP subsurface 
data available starting in 1990, our WOD98 
products include monthly 1-degree summaries of 
temperature for the upper 1,000 m (19 depths) for 
the years 1950-1990.  The size of the WOD98 
makes it prohibitive to save the gridded product in 
a single netCDF file.  We store the data in 51 
yearly files (118.2 Mb each for a total of 6 
gigabytes), and use the multi-netCDF feature of 
Ferret to visualize and subset the files with the 
LAS.  In addition to the monthly temperature 
summaries, monthly climatologies of temperature 
and salinity are also available on the LAS, and we 
hope to make other variables available in the 
future. 
 
Since gathering the supporting data can be the 
most time-consuming part of a research project, 
improvements in the time and effort necessary to 
access and subset environmental data products can 
be a great benefit to research in fisheries, 
oceanography, meteorology and other fields.  At 
PFEL, by carefully choosing the formats in which 
we store our data, we are striving to make data 
products available to users in ways that are multi-
platform, inexpensive and user friendly. 
 
References 
 
Bakun, A.  1973.  Coastal upwelling indices, west 
coast of North America, 1946-71.  U.S. Dept. 
of Commerce, NOAA Tech. Rep., NMFS 
SSRF-671, 103p.  
Boehlert, G.W., and Schumacher, J.D.  1997.  
Changing Oceans and Changing Fisheries:  
Environmental Data for Fisheries Research 
and Management.  NOAA Tech. Memo. 
NOAA TM-NMFS-SWFSC-239, 146p. 
Conkright, M.E., Levitus, S., O’Brien, T., Boyer, 
T.P., Stephens, C., Johnson, D., Stathoplos, L., 
Baranova, O., Antonov, J., Gelfeld, R., 
Burney, J., Rochester, J., and Forgy, C.  1998.  
World Ocean Database 1998.  NODC Internal 
Report 14, 113p. 
deWitt, L., and Mendelssohn, R.  1999.  Live 
Access Server visualizes, subsets and extracts 
oceanographic data.  Earth System Monitor 
Vol. 10, No. 1. 
deWitt, L., and Mendelssohn, R.  2001.  
Improving access to environmental datasets: 
Data holdings at Pacific Fisheries 
Environmental Laboratory.  Ocean and 
Atmosphere Data Management submitted. 
Hamilton, D.  1994.  GTSPP builds an ocean 
temperature-salinity database: Technology and 
international cooperation improve access to 
global ocean data.  Earth System Monitor Vol. 
4, No. 4. 
Hankin, S., Harrison, D.E., Sirott, J., Manke, A., 
Callahan, J., Davison, J. and O’Brien. K.  
1999.  Ferret and the Live Access Server.  
Earth System Monitor Vol. 9, No. 3. 
Levitus, S., Boyer, T.P., Conkright, M.E., O'Brien, 
T., Antonov, J., Stephens, C., Stathoplos, L., 
Johnson, D., and Gelfeld, R.  1998.  NOAA 
Atlas NESDIS 18, World Ocean Database 
1998: Vol. 1: Introduction, U.S. Gov. Printing 
Office, Wash., D.C. 346p.  
53
Monterey, G., and Levitus, S.  1997.  Seasonal 
variability of mixed layer depth for the World 
Ocean.  NOAA Atlas, NESDIS 14, 100p. 
Monterey, G., and deWitt, L.M.  2000.  Seasonal 
variability of global mixed layer depth from 
WOD98 temperature and salinity profiles.  
NOAA Technical Memorandum NOAA-TM-
NMFS-SWFSC-296. 
Schwing, F.B., O’Farrell, M.O., Steger, J., and 
Baltz, K.  1996.  Coastal Upwelling Indices, 
West Coast of North America 1946 – 1995.  
NOAA Technical Memorandum NOAA-TM-
NMFS-SWFSC-231, 207p. 
Schwing, F.B., Murphree, T., and Green, P.M.  
2001.  A climate index for the northeast 
Pacific.  Progress in Oceanography (in press). 
Slutz, R. J., Lubker, S.J., Hiscox, J.D., Woodruff, 
S.D., Jenne, R.L., Joseph, D.H., Stuerer, P.M., 
and Elms, J.D.  1985.  Comprehensive Ocean-
Atmosphere Data Set; Release 1, NOAA 
Environmental Research Laboratories. 
Boulder, CO, NTIS PB86-105723, 268p. 
 
 
Japanese repeat hydrographic lines in the North Pacific 
 
Kimio Hanawa 
Department of Geophysics, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, Aoba, Sendai 980-8578, 
Japan.  E-mail. hanawa@pol.geophys.tohoku.ac.jp 
 
Introduction 
 
In this report, we introduce the present (2001 
fiscal year) status of repeat hydrographic lines in 
the North Pacific conducted by the Japan 
Meteorological Agency (JMA), Hydrographic 
Department/Japan Coast Guard (HD/JCG), Japan 
Fisheries Agency (JFA) and Faculty of Fisheries, 
Hokkaido University (HU).  The information is 
provided by Koichi Ishikawa (JMA), Hiroyuki 
Yoritaka (HD/JCG), Shin-ichi Ito (JFA) and 
Yutaka Isoda (HU). 
 
Repeat lines by JMA 
 
Long lines 
 
JMA currently maintains two long repeat sections  
(Fig. 3): 
 
1. 137°E line by the R/V Ryofu Maru and the 
R/V Keifu Maru 
1.1. every winter since 1967, every spring 
since 1989, every summer since 1972, 
and every autumn since 1992; 
1.2. interval of 1 degree in latitude from 34°N 
to 3°N; 
1.3. from surface to 2,000 m or bottom (every 
5 degrees);  temperature (T), salinity (S), 
oxygen (O
2
), total carbonate, nutrients 
and others. 
2. 165°E line by the R/V Ryofu Maru and the 
R/V Keifu Maru 
2.1. once a year since 1996, and twice a year 
since 2001; 
2.2. interval of 1 degree in latitude from 50°N 
to 3°S; 
2.3. from surface to 2,000 m or bottom;  T, S, 
O
2
, total carbonate, nutrients and others. 
 
Short lines 
 
JMA currently supports the following short repeat 
lines (Fig. 3):   
 
1. PH line, along 41.5°N, south of Hokkaido, by 
the R/V Kofu Maru 
2. 144°E line, along 144°E, east of Honshu, by 
the R/V Kofu Maru 
3. PM line, northwest of Echizenmisaki, Japan 
sea, by the R/V Seifu Maru 
4. “G” line, northwest of Sado, Japan sea, by the 
R/V Seifu Maru 
5. PN line, northwest of Okinawa, East China 
Sea, by the R/V Chofu Maru 
6. TK line, Tokara Straits, south of Kyushu, by 
the R/V Chofu Maru 
7. “OK” line, southeast of Okinawa, south of 
Okinawa, by the R/V Chofu Maru 
8. “ASUKA” line, southeast of Ashizurimisaki, 
south of Shikoku, by the R/V Ryoufu Maru 
and the R/V Keifu Maru 
54
 
Fig. 3 Repeat lines currently conducted by 
JMA. 
 
Fig. 4 Long repeat lines currently conducted 
by HD/JCG. 
 
9. “BOSO” line, southeast of Boso Peninsula, 
east of Honshu, by the R/V Ryofu Maru and 
the R/V Keifu Maru 
 
These lines are sampled at an interval of 3 months, 
i.e., four times a year, with almost the same set of 
observations as at the long repeat sections. 
 
Repeat lines by HD/JCG 
 
Long lines 
 
The following two long repeat sections have been 
maintained by HD/JCG (Fig. 4).  Unfortunately, 
the 134°40’E line has not been supported since 
1999. 
 
1. 144°E line by the S/V Takuyo or the  
S/V Shoyo 
1.1. every winter since 1984;  
1.2. interval of 1 degree in latitude from 34°N 
to 1°S; 
1.3. from surface to 4,500 m or bottom;  T, S, 
O
2
, surface current, nutrients and others. 
 
2. 134°40'E line by the S/V Shoyo 
2.1. every summer and winter since 1994 to 
1999; 
2.2. interval of 1 degree in latitude from 34°N 
to 5°N; 
2.3. from surface to 4,000 m or bottom;  T, S, 
O
2
, surface current and others. 
 
Repeat lines by JFA 
 
Long lines 
 
The following two long repeat sections are 
conducted by JFA (Fig. 5): 
 
1. 179.5°W line by the T/V Wakatake Maru 
1.1. every summer since 1991; 
1.2. interval of 1 degree in latitude from 
38.5°N to 58.5°N; 
1.3. from surface to 600 or 800 m;  T, S, 
plankton and others. 
 
2. 165°E line by the R/V Hokko Maru 
2.1. every summer since 1992; 
2.2. interval of 1 degree in latitude from 40°N 
to 50°N; 
2.3. from surface to 1,500 m;  T, S, plankton 
and others. 
55
 
Fig. 5 Long repeat lines currently conducted 
by JFA. 
 
3. A (Akkeshi)-line by the Hokkaido National 
Fisheries Research Institute 
3.1. 7 times a year since 1988; 
3.2. from surface to 3,100 m;  T, S, plankton 
and others. 
4. OICE (Oyashio Intensive Observation line off 
Cape Erimo) by the Tohoku National Fisheries 
Research Institute 
4.1. 4 times a year since 1997; 
4.2. from surface to 3,000 m;  T, S, plankton 
and others. 
 
5. 37ºN line by the Tohoku National Fisheries 
Research Institute 
5.1. every spring since 1983; 
5.2. interval is 45’ in longitude from 143ºE to 
165ºE; 
5.3. from surface to 1,000 m;  T, S, plankton 
and others. 
 
Short lines 
 
Ocean monitoring of JFA is carried out by 7 
National Fisheries Research Institutions and 
fisheries laboratories of 39 prefectures.  Observa-
tional lines are classified into two categories.  One 
is repeat-lines in coastal waters and the other is 
repeat-lines extending to offshore waters.  T, S, 
surface current and other variables are measured at 
intervals of 1 month (coastal line) and 3 months 
(offshore line). 
 
 
Fig. 6 Long repeat lines currently conducted by Hokkaido University. 
 
56
Repeat lines by Hokkaido University 
 
Long lines 
 
The Faculty of Fisheries currently supports two 
long repeat lines (Fig. 6): 
 
1. 155°E line by the T/V Hokusei-Maru to 2001, 
by the R/V Oshoro Maru from 2002 
1.1. every summer since 1979; 
1.2. interval of 1 degree in latitude from 36°N 
to 48°N; 
1.3. from surface to 3,000 m;  T, S, O
2
, 
nutrients and others. 
 
2. 165°W line by the T/V Oshoro Maru 
2.1. every summer since 1998; 
2.2. interval of 1 degree in latitude from 
35°N to 48°N; 
2.3.  from surface to 3,000 m;  T, S, O
2
, 
nutrients and others. 
 
Although HU had maintained the following two 
meridional lines since 1970s, they were 
unfortunately ended recently (Fig. 6): 
 
1. 180° line by the T/V Oshoro Maru 
1.1. every summer since 1979 to 2000 
1.2. interval of 1 degree in latitude from 36°N 
to 48°N; 
1.3. surface to 3,000 m;  T, S, O
2
, nutrients 
and others. 
 
2. 175.5°E line by the T/V Hokusei Maru 
2.1. every summer since 1979 to 1999; 
2.2. interval of 1 degree in latitude from 36°N 
to 48°N; 
2.3. from surface to 3,000 m;  T, S, O
2
, 
nutrients and others. 
 
 
Monitoring of climatic variations in Far Eastern Seas 
 
Andrei S. Krovnin
1
, Gennady V. Khen
2
, Elena Ustinova
2
 and Marat Bogdanov
1
 
1 
Russian Federal Research Institute of Fisheries and Oceanography (VNIRO), 17 V. Krasnoselskaya, 
Moscow, Russia.  107140  E-mail: akrovnin@vniro.ru 
2  
Pacific Research Fisheries Centre (TINRO-Centre), Shevchenko Alley, Vladivostok, Russia.  690600 
 
The Far Eastern Seas and the adjacent Pacific 
waters are the main interest for Russia in the 
PICES area.  One of our scientific goals in this 
area is to understand how climate affects the 
ecosystem structure and the productivity of key 
fish species in the Russian EEZ.  The research is 
based on several types of climatic and 
oceanographic data used for detecting and 
describing climatic variations in the northwest 
Pacific, and searching for empirical relationships 
between physical and biological parameters. 
 
The first group of data includes time-series of 
monthly means of different atmospheric indices 
(e.g. WP index, PNA index, etc.) and basic 
atmospheric characteristics (pressure, geopotential 
heights, air temperature at different levels).  These 
data for the period from 1950 to the present are 
provided by the NOAA-CIRES Climate 
Diagnostic Center, Boulder, Colorado, from their 
web site at http://www.cdc.noaa.gov.  Similar 
time-series are available from the Russian 
Hydrometeorological Center.  All these data are 
used to give a general characteristic of climatic 
situation in the northwest Pacific and in the whole 
northern hemisphere in different seasons of the 
given year, or to detect tendencies in variations of 
large-scale atmospheric circulation with the 
emphasis on identifying the climatic regimes. 
 
Sea surface temperature anomalies (SSTA), 
especially in winter season, are a very good 
indicator of climatic changes in the ocean.  It is 
important to have SSTA time-series that are 
representative for vast oceanic areas.  Such time-
series may be obtained by partitioning the North 
Pacific into several sub-domains with coherent 
anomaly fluctuations in each sub-domain.  For this 
purpose, mean winter (January-April) values of 
SST in the North Pacific (from 20°N to 55°N) at 
grid points of 5°-longitude by 5°-latitude were 
used for the 1957-2000 period.  These data are 
57
available from the Russian Hydrometeorological 
Center.  For each grid point, winter SSTA were 
calculated as deviations from the 1961-1990 mean.  
To divide the North Pacific into several sub-
domains, one of the hierarchical clustering 
methods, known as the Ward’s method (1963), 
was used.  This method is distinct from all other 
hierarchical clustering methods because it uses an 
analysis of variance approach to evaluate the 
distances between clusters.  In short, this method 
attempts to minimize the sum of squares of any 
two (hypothetical) clusters that can be formed at 
each step.  In general, this method is regarded as 
most efficient.  A detailed description of the 
algorithm for the Ward’s method used in our 
research can be found in Krovnin (1995).  Based 
on results of the cluster analysis, the North Pacific 
was divided into five major regions:  the eastern 
part, the central part, the northwestern part, the 
southwestern part, and the southern part (Fig. 7).  
Further analysis showed that changes in SSTA in 
the eastern and central North Pacific, and those in 
the northwestern and southwestern North Pacific, 
are out of phase.  For each region, time-series of 
area-averaged SST anomalies were calculated as 
the spatial average of the non-normalized 
detrended local time-series over the region 
specified by the corresponding cluster (Fig. 8).  
The use of these calculated time-series allowed us 
to obtain some information about the mechanisms 
governing large-scale SST fluctuations.  In 
particular, it was shown that variations in mean 
winter SSTA in two western regions are closely 
related to Western Pacific teleconnection pattern. 
 
 
Fig. 7 Results of cluster analysis for the SST 
anomaly field in the North Pacific.  Dots show the 
position of the 5°-latitude by 5°-longitude grid for 
the SST data. 
 
Fig. 8  Time-series of the detrended area-
averaged SSTA in Regions 1-2 in the North 
Pacific. 
58
In our research we used the area-averaged SSTA 
time-series not only to identify tendencies of 
changes and climatic regimes but mainly to search 
for teleconnections with physical characteristics in 
other regions of the Northern Hemisphere, e.g., in 
the North Atlantic, for a better understanding and 
explanation of the causes of climatic changes in 
the northwest Pacific. 
 
The second group of data contains information on 
ice cover area (in % from the total area of the sea).  
These data are available from 1929 onwards for 
the Sea of Okhotsk, from 1960 for the Bering Sea, 
and from 1951 for the Sea of Japan.  The old data 
are obtained with air reconnaissance.  Recent data 
are based on information from NOAA satellites 
and Japanese Meteorological Agency.  With the 
use of these data, a long-term forecast of thermal 
conditions in Far East Seas till 2020 was made.  
According to the forecast, the cold period that 
started there in 1998 will continue for about 20 
years. 
 
The third group of data includes a set of weekly 
and monthly maps of SST in the Okhotsk and 
Bering Seas and adjacent Pacific waters 
constructed at VNIRO, as a part of the program on 
the use of satellite and ship data to monitor the 
dynamics of SST in various fishing areas of the 
world ocean.  These data are available for May-
July of 1992-1993, April-November of 1994, and 
for the whole year from 1995 onwards.  On the 
basis of these maps, some non-traditional 
characteristics of thermal conditions, such as ice-
free areas, position of ice margins at different  
latitudes, duration of ice staying north or south of 
the given latitude, rates of spring warming and 
autumn cooling, etc., were calculated.  Some 
examples of these characteristics are given in 
Figure 9.  Though now these time-series are 
considered short, they are rather informative for 
describing and understanding changes in the 
development of seasonal processes from year to 
year.  For example, from 1995 to 2000, ice 
conditions in the Sea of Okhotsk became more and 
more severe, but the rates of spring-summer 
warming increased during this period. 
 
The fourth group of data consist of temperature and 
salinity time-series at several standard sections in the 
Far East Seas and Pacific waters (Fig. 10).  Coordi-
nates of stations and the period and frequency of 
observations at each section are presented in Tables 
3 and 4 respectively.  All these sections (except for 
Avachinsky conducted by KamchatNIRO) are 
carried out by TINRO-Centre vessels with depth 
resolution of 1 m during the last 10 years.  The 
Kamchatsky section is conducted jointly by TINRO-
Centre and KamchatNIRO.  Until 2000, CTD Mark 
II and later ICTD developed by Falmouth Scientific 
Inc. were used for sampling.  Only in recent years 
were the dates of cruises stabilized and sections were 
carried out at approximately the same time of year:  
Sangarsky and Trans-Okhotsk sections – in winter 
and summer;  Kamchatsky section and section along 
132°E - in summer and autumn;  Avachinsky –
mainly in June.  All temperature and salinity 
measurements are controlled by deepwater 
thermometers and salinometer  at each station.  
 
 
Fig. 9 Rate of spring-summer warming from 5°C to 8°C (in days) at point 49°N, 155°E (left panel), 
and duration of the ice period east of 148°E at 50°N (1) and south of 53°N off West Kamchatka (2) (right 
panel). 
59
Table 3 Coordinates of stations at standard sections. 
Sta. 
No. 
NW Pacific Trans-
Okhotsk Section
1 
Kamchatka Strait 
Section 
2
 
Sangarsky Section
3 
Section along 
149°E 
1
 
(Japanese) 
Section 
along  
132°E 
3
 
Section from Cape 
Mayachny
3
 
(Avachinsky) 
1 49°30'N 144°30'E 55°28'N 165°30'E 42°30'N 133°00'E 33° 00'N 43°00'N 52°30'N 159°36'E 
2 49°37'N 144°56'E 55°37'N 165°12'E 42°25'N 133°30'E 33° 30'N 42°55'N 52°20'N 160°00'E 
3 49°45'N 145°29'E 55°43'N 164°56'E 42°18'N 134°00'E 34° 00'N 42°50'N 52°06'N 160°40'E 
4 49°52'N 146°01'E 55°46'N 164°43'E 42°12'N 134°30'E 34° 30'N 42°40'N 52°48'N 161°20'E 
5 50°00'N 146°31'E 55°52'N 164°30'E 42°07'N 135°00'E 35° 00'N 42°30'N 51°30'N 161°66'E 
6 50°08'N 147°01'E 55°56'N  164°13'E 42°00'N 135°30'E 35° 30'N 42°25'N 51°04'N 163°56'E 
7 50°15'N 147°31'E 56°00'N  164°03'E 41°55'N 136°00'E 36° 00'N 42°20'N 50°37'N 163°53'E 
8 50°22'N 148°00'E 56°05'N 163°52'E 41°50'N 136°30'E 36° 30'N 42°10'N 50°10'N 164°50'E 
9 50°30'N 148°30'E 56°07'N 163°42'E   37° 00'N 42°00'N 
  
10 50°38'N 149°00'E 56°09'N 163°32'E   37° 30'N 41°50'N 
  
11 50°46'N 149°30'E     38° 00'N 41°40'N 
  
12 50°52'N 150°00'E     38° 30'N 41°30'N 
  
13 51°00'N 150°30'E     39° 00'N  
  
14 51°09'N 151°00'E     39° 30'N  
  
15 51°17'N 151°31'E     40° 00'N  
  
16 51°25'N 152°01'E     40° 30'N  
  
17 51°32'N 152°34'E     41° 00'N  
  
18 51°40'N 153°05'E     41° 30'N  
  
19 51°48'N 153°35'E     42° 00'N  
  
20 51°55'N 154°05'E     42° 30'N  
  
21 52°04'N 154°37'E     43° 00'N  
  
22 52°11'N 155°12'E       
  
23 52°19'N 155°44'E         
1 
sampling interval 0-1000 m;  
2 
sampling interval 0-1500 m;  
3
 sampling interval 0-500 m 
 
 
Fig. 10 Scheme of standard sections in the 
northwest Pacific. 
The combined analysis of all described data allowed 
us to make the following conclusion about the 
present situation in Far East Seas: 
 
1. Following the shift to a cold regime in the Sea of 
Okhotsk (since 1998), the cyclonic circulation in 
the sea strengthened.  The volume transport of 
its main currents increased by a factor of 3 
compared with the mid-1990s (warm regime).  
As a result, in contrast to the surface layer the 
warm regime was established in the intermediate 
layer of 500-1,000 m.  It seems that the heat loss 
in upper layer is compensated by its increase at 
intermediate depths.  This possibly allows a 
range of interannual variations in total heat 
budget of the sea to be smoothed, which is 
favorable for ecosystem stability. 
60
Table 4 Frequency of observations at standard sections in the NW Pacific. 
 
Years Vladivostok 
Section 
(along 132°E) 
Sangarsky 
Section 
Trans-Okhotsk 
Section 
 (Kamchatka-
Sakhalin) 
Kamchatsky 
Strait 
Avachinsky 
Section 
Section along  
149°E 
1953 5     1 
1954 5   1   
1955 1      
1956 2      
1957 5    1  
1958 6    1  
1959 1    1  
1960 5    1  
1961 3   1 1  
1962 4    1  
1963 7   1 1  
1964 6   2 1  
1965 5 1   1  
1966 4   2 1 7 
1967 6 1   1 5 
1968 7 1   1 7 
1969 2 1   1 10 
1970 2    1 8 
1971 10 1   1 6 
1972 7 1   1 7 
1973 6 1   1 8 
1974 3    1 4 
1975 5   2 1 9 
1976 10 2    3 
1977 4 2    1 
1978 2 1  1 1  
1979 6 1   1 2 
1980 13   1 1 1 
1981 16 1   1  
1982 11 3   1  
1983 19 5   1 4 
1984 28 15     
1985 25 18   1 7 
1986 10 25   1 2 
1987 7 18   1  
1988 33 38  1   
1989 22 30     
1990 10 21  2 1  
1991 10 11  1 1  
1992 7 11  1 1  
1993 5 4  1 1  
1994 7 1  1 1  
1995 3 5 1 1 1  
1996 5 1  2 1  
1997 2 2 1  1  
1998 3 2 1 2 1  
1999 2 1 1 1   
2000 2 2 2 3   
 369 227 6 27   
  
61
2. In the Bering Sea the period of weak water 
exchange with the North Pacific still continues.  
The transport of the Kamchatka Current in the 
layer of 0-1,500 m during summer is at a low 
level of about 2 Sv, while during the period of 
intensive water exchange it might be 10-15 Sv.  
But the autumn survey gave some hope on 
strengthening of water exchange in the near 
future. 
 
References 
 
Krovnin, A.S.  1995.  A comparative study of 
climatic changes in the North Pacific and 
North Atlantic and their relation to the 
abundance of fish stocks.  In Climate change 
and northern fish populations.  Edited by R. J. 
Beamish.  Can. Spec. Publ. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 
121, pp.181-198. 
Ward, J.H.Jr.  1963.  Hierarchical grouping to 
optimize an objective function.  J. Am. Stat. 
Assoc. 58: 236-244. 
 
 
On time-series observation programs in the northwestern Pacific in Russia 
 
Vyacheslav B. Lobanov 
V.I.Il’ichev Pacific Oceanological Institute, 43 Baltiyskaya Street, Vladivostok, Russia.  690041  E-mail: 
lobanov@poi.dvo.ru 
 
Existing and interrupted programs 
 
Hydrographic monitoring in Russia/USSR had a 
peak in the 1950-70s when “weather ships” and 
“centennial sections” programs were rapidly 
developed by the State Hydrometeorological 
Committee, State Committee on Fisheries, and 
Academy of Sciences.  Since the 1950s, a system of 
standard (“centennial”) sections with biannual or 
seasonal hydrographic observations was designed 
for the Japan and Okhotsk Seas.  A serious decline 
in observations began at the end of the 1980s, due 
to economical problems, but some remnants of the 
system survived.  These include two sections in the 
Japan Sea and two sections in the Okhtosk Sea (see 
A. Krovnin in this report).  Additionally, some 
information on Russian long-term series is 
presented below. 
 
Perhaps the most impressive time-series was a 
system of sections around Sakhalin Island that have 
been maintained by the local Hydrometeorological 
Administration and Sakhalin Fisheries Research 
Institute (SakhNIRO).  Luckily SakhNIRO is still 
managing to continue these observations (contact – 
Dr. Gennadiy Kantakov – okhotsk@sakhniro.ru).  
The principal area of monitoring covers waters in a 
100-mile zone around Sakhalin Island in the 
Okhotsk Sea and Tatar Strait (Fig. 11).  Hydrogra- 
 
 
Fig. 11 Scheme of continuing survey around 
Sakhalin Island (source:  G. Kantakov). 
 
phic parameters and plankton are observed twice 
yearly along the standard sections, down to 500-
1,500 m depth.  Results of historical observations 
since the 1950s were published as printed and 
electronic versions of an atlas by Dr. Vladimir 
Pishchalnik et al. 2000 (vpishchalnik@mail.ru).  
 
Another time-series is a repeated CTD survey of the 
Kuroshio area from 27 - 43°N and 132 - 149°E 
under the Russian Razrezi (Sections) program.  The 
sections were repeated seasonally (4 times a year) 
in the period 1980-1990, by the Far Eastern 
62
Regional Hydrometeorological Research Institute 
(FERHRI) (contact - Dr. Yuriy Volkov, director - 
hydromet@online.ru). 
 
In 1989, the Pacific Oceanological Institute started 
regular surveys of the Kuril Islands area on an 
annual or semiannual bases.  This included 
surveys implemented under the International 
North Pacific Ocean Climate Experiment 
(INROC) and observations that allow an 
examination of interannual variability in the 
Western Subarctic Gyre (see below). 
 
Operational satellite data are available for the 
northwestern Pacific, Japan, Okhotsk and western 
Bering Sea from the Far Eastern Regional 
Receiving Center in Khabarovsk (FERRC), which 
holds historical data from Russian Meteor, 
Kosmos, Ocean and Resurs and NOAA satellites 
series since the 1970s, and receives operational 
information.  The Inter-Institute Center for 
Satellite Monitoring of the Environment has been 
established in Vladivostok (contact - Dr. Emil 
Herbeck – ftp://herbeck.satellite.dvo.ru).  This 
Center has maintained time-series from NOAA 
AVHRR since January 1999. 
 
Monitoring of the Kuril area under INPOC and 
other programs  
 
One of the findings of the INPOC project is the 
important role of mesoscale eddies in water 
exchange and modification in the Kuril area.  A 
chain of anticyclonic eddies of 60-120 miles in 
diameter is regularly observed along the Kurils 
(e.g. Bulatov and Lobanov 1983; Yasuda et al. 
2000), as it is evident from satellite images  
(Fig. 12).  Intensity and location of the eddies 
influence the Kuril-Kamchatka Current and 
Oyashio branches’ development and volume 
transport, as well as water exchange between the 
Okhotsk Sea and the Pacific.  Correct sampling of 
the eddies and current branches is important for 
reliable estimation of mass and heat transport and 
their interannual variations in the area.  That is 
why detailed hydrographic observations based on 
operational satellite information on eddy locations 
were implemented during the INPOC surveys.  
These observations and the following occasional 
surveys allowed the tracing of characteristics of  
 
 
Fig. 12 Kuril eddies (A and B) on the NOAA 
satellite AVHRR image of May 29, 2001.  Light 
shades correspond to cold water, white are clouds. 
 
 
Fig. 13 Change of geopotential anomaly (upper 
panel) and diameter (lower panel) of the Kuril eddies 
off Bussol Strait during the recent decade. 
63
the eddies and determining the Oyashio volume 
transport over the decadal period of 1990-2000 
(Rogachev 2000).  The decrease in the size and 
intensity of the eddies located off Bussol Strait 
from 1990 by the mid-1990s, and subsequent 
increase again by 2000 (Fig. 13), corresponds well 
with variations in the volume transport of the off-
shore branch of the Oyashio and opposite changes 
in the coastal Oyashio.  It was also found that 
eddies might be a good indicator of interannual 
variability in the Western Subarctic Gyre.  Thus 
the monitoring of eddy characteristics could 
indicate changes of the whole large area.  This 
program would be recommended for continuation.  
However, at the present, it seems hardly possible 
to carry out these observations on a regular basis 
because of a funding deficit in Russia. 
 
Data holdings at POI 
 
Most Russian time-series data are archived at the 
National Oceanographic Data Center and also in 
local institutional databases.  Currently under a 
new federal program on development of the 
Integrated Information System on the World 
Ocean, all data storage should be combined.  The 
main oceanographic institutes in the Russian Far 
East, POI, FERHRI and TINRO, have prepared an 
inventory and electronic catalogues of the 
available oceanographic data.  At present, this 
information is being posted on web sites of these 
institutes: 
POI:  “www.pacific.marine.su” and “poi.dvo.ru” 
FERHRI:  “www.hydromet.com” 
TINRO:  “www.marine.su/TINRO” 
Other sites:  “www.meteo.ru”; and 
“www.fegi.ru/primorye” 
 
The POI database includes more than 750 cruises 
with around 360,000 stations taken from 1990 till 
now, from which around 125 cruises with 18,600 
stations were implemented by POI expeditions.  
 
References 
 
Bulatov N.V., and Lobanov, V.B.  1983.  
Investigation of mesoscale eddies east of Kuril 
Islands on the base of meteorological satellite 
data.  Soviet J. Remote Sens. 3: 40-47. 
Pischalnik V.M., and Bobkov, A.O.  2000.  
Oceanographic atlas of Sakhalin shelf. Part 1 
and 2. SakhGU: Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk. 
Rogachev K. A.  2000.  Recent variability in the 
Pacific western subarctic boundary currents 
and Sea of Okhotsk.  Progress in Oceanogr. 
47: 299-336. 
Yasuda I., S.Ito, Y., Shimizu, K., Ichikawa, K., 
Ueda, Honma, T., Uchiyama, M., Watanabe, 
K., Sunou, N., Tanaka K., and Koizumi, K.  
2000.  Cold-core anticyclonic eddies south of 
the Bussol Strait in the Northwestern 
Subarctic Pacific.  J. Phys. Oceanogr. 30: 
1137-1157. 
 
 
Physical and biophysical time-series originating from or used by Fisheries 
Oceanography Coordinated Investigations (FOCI) in the North Pacific Ocean 
and Bering Sea 
 
S. Allen Macklin  
Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory, 7600 Sand Point Way NE, Seattle, WA  98115-6349, U.S.A.  
E-mail: allen.macklin@noaa.gov 
 
North Pacific region 
 
Recent indicators suggest that the climate of the 
North Pacific region is changing.  Scientists 
think this may have started as early as 1989, 
when the Arctic Oscillation (AO) changed 
phase.  However, the most significant change is  
 
the cooling of coastal waters of the Pacific 
Northwest and Alaska since 1997-1998, when the 
Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO, see below) 
probably switched phase.  With coastal cooling 
came shifts in marine abundance, e.g., West Coast 
salmon that were suffering declines in abundance 
early in the 1990s appear to be recovering, while  
64
Alaska salmon abundance is waning.  The 
following sections discuss some of FOCI's 
climate and pollock abundance indicators in 
light of climate change. 
 
Interannual variability of atmospheric 
forcing 
 
The winter magnitude and position of the 
Aleutian Low explain much of the interannual 
variability of atmospheric forcing and physical 
oceanographic response of the North Pacific 
Ocean and Bering Sea.  The Aleutian Low is a 
statistical feature formed by averaging North 
Pacific sea level pressure for long periods.  
Because this is a region of frequent storms, the 
averaged pressure pattern describes a closed-
cell, low-pressure area over the North Pacific, 
much like an individual storm on a weather map.  
The amplitude and location of the Aleutian Low 
have a strong bearing on weather and ocean 
conditions in the region and are correlated with 
other climate indices such as ENSO (El Niño 
Southern Oscillation), AO, and PDO.  A strong 
Aleutian Low (low pressure) is accompanied by 
strong winds that drive warm water from the 
central Pacific into the coastal regions of Alaska 
and the Pacific Northwest.  Conversely, when 
the Aleutian Low is weak (higher pressure), 
winds are weak and coastal sea surface 
temperatures cool. 
 
A measure of the strength of the Aleutian Low is 
the North Pacific Index (NPI, Fig. 14).  It is the 
sea level pressure over the North Pacific 
averaged for January through February.  The 
index contains strong decadal variability.  For 
example, there is a shift from high to low values 
of the index in 1925, a return to high values in 
1946, and a shift back to low in 1977.  If the 
data are smoothed, secondary shifts appear (one 
and a half secondary shifts for each major shift) 
such as in 1958 and 1989.  In the past two years, 
NPI values have been higher, indicating a 
weaker Aleutian Low.  Consequently, wind-
driven advection of warm water from the central 
North Pacific into the coastal regions of Alaska 
and the U.S. Pacific Northwest has diminished, 
and local processes play a larger role in 
determining ocean temperature near the coast. 
 
Figure 15 shows the averaged monthly anomaly of 
sea surface temperature for the North Pacific during 
May 2000.  Note the relative cooling of the coastal 
waters.  This signature is indicative of a recent 
change in the PDO (see next section).  The cooling 
began in 1998 and has associated with the La Niña, 
but has persisted in the northeast Pacific, which is 
taken as an indicator of a change in the PDO.  Ocean 
temperatures throughout the North Pacific continued 
to cool during June relative to long-term 
climatology. 
 
Pacific decadal oscillation 
 
The Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO) Index  
(Fig. 16) is defined as the leading principal 
component of North Pacific monthly sea surface 
temperature variability.  The PDO is a long-lived, El 
Niño-like pattern of North Pacific Ocean climate 
variability.  Two main characteristics distinguish 
PDO from ENSO.  Firstly, 20th century PDO 
“events” persisted for 20 to 30 years, while typical 
ENSO events persisted for 6 to 18 months.  
Secondly, the climatic fingerprints of the PDO are 
most visible in the North Pacific/North American 
sector, while secondary signatures exist in the 
tropics - the opposite is true for ENSO.  Several 
independent studies find evidence for just two full 
PDO cycles in the past century:  “cool” PDO 
regimes prevailed from 1890-1924 and again from 
1947-1976, while “warm” PDO regimes dominated 
from 1925-1946 and from 1977 through (at least) the 
mid-1990s.  Some researchers have identified a cold 
phase starting in 1989, others point to 1997.  
Beginning in early 2000, it became apparent that a 
shift had occurred from changes in ocean 
temperature (Fig. 15) and distribution of salmon and 
other marine species.  A weaker Aleutian Low  
(Fig. 14) is certainly associated with this change.  
Major changes in northeast Pacific marine 
ecosystems have been correlated with phase changes 
in the PDO.  Warm eras bring enhanced coastal 
ocean biological productivity in Alaska and 
inhibited productivity off the west coast of the 
contiguous United States, while cold PDO eras 
produce the opposite north-south pattern of marine 
ecosystem productivity.  Causes for the PDO are not 
currently known.  Even in the absence of a 
theoretical understanding, PDO climate information 
improves season-to-season and year-to-year climate 
forecasts for North America because of its strong  
65
 
Fig. 14 The North Pacific Index (NPI) from 1900 through 2000 is the sea-level pressure averaged for 
January through February. 
 
 
Fig. 15 The pattern of sea surface temperature anomalies for May 2000 shows a return to cool coastal 
waters with warmer central Pacific waters. 
 
 
Fig. 16 Monthly and smoothed (black line) values of the Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO) index, 
1900-2000 (updated from Mantua et al. 1997) 
66
Precipitation-based pollock survival index
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
2000
1997
1994
1991
1988
1985
1982
1979
1976
1973
1970
1967
1964
Year
Value
Annual value
3-year running mean
 
Fig. 17 Index of pollock survival potential based on measured precipitation at Kodiak from 1962 
through 2000.  The solid line shows annual values of the index;  the dashed line is the 3-year running 
mean. 
 
tendency for multi-season and multi-year 
persistence.  From a societal perspective, 
recognition of PDO is important because it shows 
that “normal” climate conditions can vary over 
time periods comparable to a human's lifetime. 
 
Western Gulf of Alaska 
 
Seasonal rainfall at Kodiak 
 
Patches of larval walleye pollock have been 
located within mesoscale eddies.  For early larvae, 
presence within an eddy may be conducive to 
survival.  Eddies in Shelikof Strait are caused by 
baroclinic instabilities in the Alaska Coastal 
Current (ACC).  The baroclinity of this current 
fluctuates with the amount of fresh water 
discharged along the coast.  A time-series of 
Kodiak rainfall (inches) is a proxy for baroclinity, 
and thus an index for survival success of species 
such as walleye pollock that benefit from spending 
their earliest stages in eddies.  Greater than 
average late winter (January, February, March) 
precipitation produces a greater snow pack for 
spring and summer freshwater discharge into the 
ACC.  Similarly, greater than average spring and 
early summer rainfall also favor increased 
baroclinity after spawning.  Conversely, decreased 
rainfall is likely detrimental to pollock survival.  A 
pollock survival index based on precipitation is 
shown in Figure 17. Although there is large 
interannual variability, a trend toward increased 
survival potential is apparent from 1962 (the start 
of the time-series) until the mid-1980s.  Over the 
last 15 years, the survival potential has been more 
level.  Are the lower values of the last two years 
commensurate with a phase change of the PDO? 
 
Wind mixing south of Shelikof Strait 
Another survival index relates to first-feeding 
pollock larvae, a key survival stage when baby fish 
have exhausted their yolk sacs and need to capture 
food.  Possibly because increased turbulence 
interferes with larvae’s ability to feed, strong wind 
mixing events during the first-feeding period are 
detrimental to survival of pollock larvae.  A time-
series of wind mixing energy (W m
-2
) near the 
67
southern end of Shelikof Strait (at 57°N, 156°W) is 
the basis for a survival index (Fig. 18), wherein 
stronger than average mixing before spawning and 
weaker than average mixing after spawning favor 
survival of pollock.  As with precipitation at Kodiak, 
there is wide interannual variability with a less 
noticeable and shorter trend to increasing survival 
potential from 1962 to the late 1970s.  Recent 
survival potential has been high.  Monthly averaged 
wind mixing in Shelikof Strait has been below the 
30-year (1962-1991) mean for the last three January 
through June periods (1998-2000).  This may be 
further evidence that the North Pacific climate 
regime has shifted in the past few years. 
 
Wind-mixing-based pollock survival index
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
2000
1997
1994
1991
1988
1985
1982
1979
1976
1973
1970
1967
1964
Year
Value
Annual value
3-year running mean
 
Fig. 18 Index of pollock survival potential based on estimated wind mixing energy at a location south 
of Shelikof Strait from 1962 through 2000.  The solid line shows annual values of the index;  the dashed 
line is the 3-year running mean. 
 
Eastern Bering Sea 
 
Sea ice extent and timing 
 
The extent and timing of seasonal sea ice over the 
Bering Sea shelf plays an important role, if not the 
determining role, in the timing of the spring bloom 
and modifies the temperature and salinity of the 
water column.  Sea ice is formed in polynyas and 
advected southward across the shelf.  The leading 
edge continues to melt as it encounters above 
freezing waters.  The ice pack acts as a conveyor belt 
with more saline waters occurring as a result of brine 
rejection in the polynyas and freshening occurring at 
the leading edge as the ice melts.  Over the southern 
shelf, the timing of the spring bloom is directly 
related to the presence of ice.  If ice is present in 
mid-March or later, a phytoplankton bloom will be 
triggered that consumes the available nutrients.  If ice 
is not present during this time, the bloom occurs 
later, typically during May, after the water column 
has stratified. 
 
The presence of ice will cool the water column to  
1.7°C.  Usually spring heating results in a warm 
upper mixed layer that caps the water column.  This 
insulates the bottom water, and the cold water 
(<2°C) will persist through the summer as the “cold 
pool”.  Fish, particularly pollock, appear to avoid the 
very cold temperatures of the cold pool.  In addition, 
68
the cold temperatures delay the maturing of fish eggs 
and hence affect their survival. 
 
Figure 19 shows the presence of ice over the 
southeastern shelf between 57°N and 58°N during the 
last 28 years.  Figure 19 is divided into three panels, 
each representative of a climate regime:  1972-1976 
ice conditions occurred during a cold PDO phase, 
1977-1989 during a warm PDO and AO phase, and 
the years hence which seem to be in an intermediate 
regime reflecting a warm PDO and a cold AO.  The 
possible change in the PDO that may have occurred 
about 1997 is reflected in the extreme ice conditions 
observed in 2000.  During the first regime ice was 
common over this part of the shelf.  In the warm 
period thereafter, ice was less prevalent.  Since then, 
ice has been more persistent but not as extensive as it 
was prior to 1977.  Recently, 2000 had the most 
extensive seasonal sea ice pack since 1976.  There 
appears to be a slight reduction in ice cover during El 
Niño years, but the relationship is weak. 
 
Fig. 19 Percent ice concentration over the southeastern Bering Sea shelf between 57°N and 58°N from 
1972 through 2000.  The pink dots in the lowest panel are for 2000. 
69
Mooring 2:  The cycle in the middle shelf 
 
The cycle in water column temperatures is similar 
each year.  In January, the water column is well 
mixed.  This condition persists until buoyancy is 
introduced to the water column either through ice 
melt or solar heating.  The very cold temperatures 
(shown in black in Figure 20) that occurred in 1995, 
1997, 1998 and 1999, resulted from the arrival and 
melting of ice.  Shelf temperature during 1999 was 
the coldest, well below 1995 and 1996, and 
approaching the cold temperatures of the negative 
PDO phase of the early 1970s.  During 1996, ice was 
present for only a short time in February, however no 
mooring was in place.  A phytoplankton bloom 
occurs with the arrival of the ice pack in March and 
April.  If ice is not present during this period, the 
spring bloom does not occur until May or June, as in 
1996 and 1998.  Generally, stratification develops 
during April.  The water column exhibits a well- 
defined two-layer structure throughout the summer 
consisting of a 15 to 25 m wind-mixed layer and a 35 
to 40 m tidally mixed bottom layer (the cold pool if 
temperatures are sufficiently low).  Deepening of the 
mixed layer by strong winds and heat loss begins in 
August, and by early November the water column is 
again well mixed. 
 
The depth of the upper mixed layer and the strength 
of the thermocline contribute to the amount of 
nutrients available for primary production.  A deeper 
upper mixed layer makes available a greater amount 
of nutrients.  In addition, a weak thermocline (more 
common with a deeper upper mixed layer) permits 
more nutrients to be “leaked” into the upper layer 
photic zone and thus permits prolonged production.  
The temperature of the upper layer influences the 
type of phytoplankton that will flourish.  For 
instance, warmer sea surface temperatures (>11°C) 
during 1997 and 1998 may have supported the 
coccolithophorid bloom.  
 
Timing of the last spring storm 
 
One of the striking features of the atmosphere during 
1997 and 1998 was a change in the timing of the last 
storm and strength of summer mixing over the 
eastern Bering Sea.  This ecosystem is particularly 
sensitive to storms during May.  The spring bloom 
strips nutrients from the upper layer, and the stability 
of the water column isolates nutrients in the lower 
layer.  Thus mixing and deepening of the upper 
mixed layer by storms in mid-to late May provide 
important nutrients for continuation of blooms into 
summer.  June and July storms are less effective 
mixers because they are weaker and the thermocline 
has strengthened.  May storms also lessen the density 
difference between the two layers (entraining denser 
water into the upper layer), thus permitting 
subsequent minor mixing events to supply nutrients 
into the photic zone.  From 1986 to 1996, the 
weather during May was particularly calm;  during 
May 1999, winds were again light.  By contrast, May 
of 1997 and 1998 were characterized by strong 
individual wind events (Fig. 21).  These storms 
presented a pathway for greater nutrient supply, 
more prolonged primary production, and weaker 
stability of the water column than observed between 
1986 and 1996, and in 1999.  In addition to stronger 
 
 
Fig. 20 Ocean temperature (°C) as a function of 
depth (m) and time (month of year) and 
fluorescence as a function of time measured at 
mooring site 2 during 1995 through 1999. 
70
Fig. 21 Cube of wind speed (proportional to wind mixing energy) measured at St. Paul, Alaska.  The 
solid line is the daily average;  the dashed line is the 3-day average. 
 
winds in May, the summers of 1997 and 1998 had 
the weakest mean wind speed cubed (a measure of 
mixing energy) since at least 1955.  This allowed 
for a shallow mixed layer and thus higher sea 
surface temperatures.  A pattern of late spring 
storms and weak summer winds could change the 
phytoplankton community.  If production is 
prolonged into summer, the total productivity of 
the shelf could be enhanced, thereby affecting 
higher trophic levels. 
 
Cross-shelf advection 
 
Each spring and summer over the Bering Sea 
shelf, approximately half the nutrients are 
consumed.  These nutrients apparently are 
replenished during winter and early spring.  Cross 
shelf advection moves nutrient-rich basin water 
onto the shelf.  A reduction of onshelf flow will 
reduce the available nutrients and thus 
productivity of the shelf.  Understanding and 
monitoring the mechanisms that induce cross shelf 
flow are critical to management of the Bering 
Sea’s living resources. 
 
During the last ten years, FOCI released more than 
100 satellite-tracked drift buoys in the Bering Sea.  
Prior to 1996, drifters deployed in the southeastern 
corner of the Bering Sea typically revealed 
persistent northwestward flow along the 100-m 
isobath, with cross-shelf flow occurring 
intermittently.  In 1997, 1999 and 2000, flow 
along the 100-m isobath was weak or nonexistent, 
and there were no occurrences of onshelf flow.  
Flow patterns in 1998 are less well known as no 
drifters were deployed that year.  Indices of 
onshelf flow and strength of the 100-m-isobath 
flow are derived from trajectories of the satellite-
tracked drifters.  Such indices are important in 
determining changes in flow patterns, particularly 
if there has been a climate regime shift as some 
scientists believe occurred in 1998. 
 
FOCI time-series 
 
FOCI has six long-term monitoring operations in 
the Gulf of Alaska, seven in the Bering Sea, and 
21 years of hydrodynamic model results from 
Shelikof Strait.  These are summarized in Table 5.  
The first is Line 8, a series of seven stations across 
the southwestern end of Shelikof Strait.  This line 
has been occupied at least once each year since 
1985.  Measurements taken there include CTD, 
fine-mesh net (bongo) tows, and water samples for 
nutrients, chlorophyll and macrozooplankton.  In 
some years, FOCI also deployed moorings along 
line 8.  The second long-term measurement is a 
survey of abundance and distribution of late-stage 
pollock larvae.  This survey takes place during late 
May and early June and has been conducted 
71
continuously since 1987, with surveys also in 1982 
and 1985.  Besides pollock larvae, all other 
contents of bongo tows are also preserved and 
identified.  Additional measurements include 
water temperature and salinity.  Shelikof Strait 
transport is measured from moorings and satellite-
tracked drifters, and also inferred from a 
biophysical circulation and individual-based 
(IBM) model.  Finally, FOCI has measured flow in 
the Alaska Stream at locations ranging from 
Kodiak Island to the Aleutian Islands using ship-
mounted acoustic Doppler current profiles.  There 
are also seven years when moorings were placed 
in the Alaska Stream.  Time-series from long-term 
monitoring have been invaluable to FOCI in 
meeting its scientific and operational goals. 
 
Beginning in about 1992, FOCI began systematic 
monitoring in the southeastern Bering Sea.  Some 
measurements are available from earlier periods.  
The primary observations that are taken from three 
moorings (two on the shelf and one in the basin) 
and from three CTD survey locations (one across 
the shelf, one along the 70-m isobath, and one in 
Unimak Pass).  In addition, transport estimates are 
available from satellite-tracked drifters and 
moorings deployed in the region since 1992. 
 
In order to bring its science to the public table, 
FOCI synthesizes results from long-term 
measurements, process studies, and models.  One 
result of this synthesis is a conceptual model of 
pollock recruitment for Shelikof Strait.  The model 
emphasizes the environmental factors that affect 
the survival of pollock as they pass through their 
early developmental stages.  Examples of these 
factors are climate, circulation, wind mixing, and 
potential for eddies.  It is these elements that 
contribute to FOCI’s pollock recruitment forecast.  
The annual prediction is used by the National 
Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) to establish 
recruitment scenarios for their stock projection 
model.  Results from that model and other 
information produce a quota recommendation that 
NMFS delivers to the NPFMC. The forecast 
procedure is refined as FOCI learns more about 
the processes that determine recruitment.  FOCI 
presently is working with NMFS to incorporate 
the forecast mechanism directly into the stock 
projection model.  FOCI’s Bering Sea program is 
about to establish a similar forecast for that region. 
FOCI has developed a spatially explicit, individual 
-based (probabilistic) model of egg and larval 
development for the purpose of hindcasting the 
early life history of a population of walleye 
pollock near Shelikof Strait.  Such comparative 
hindcasts are used to suggest possible physical 
mechanisms contributing to interannual variability 
in recruitment success.  The behaviorally modified 
float-tracking algorithm for each individual uses 
daily velocity, salinity and temperature fields 
generated by a wind- and buoyancy-forced, 3-D 
hydrodynamic model.  The individual-based 
biological model includes processes such as 
consumption, energetics and growth, which differ 
by life stage (e.g., eggs, yolk-sac larvae, feeding 
larvae, and juveniles).  Representative years for 
hindcasts are chosen to span the observed range of 
interannual variability in meteorological 
conditions and recruitment success. Interannual 
differences in wind and freshwater runoff lead to 
interannual differences in the modeled spatial 
paths of individuals (e.g., their retention in 
mesoscale eddies), and the distribution of weights 
and lengths among the survivors.  Model output 
from the circulation model is available for the 
years 1978 through 1999 and will be updated 
annually. 
 
Other time-series 
 
FOCI and PMEL have other data series that could 
be useful for examining climate change in the 
North Pacific Ocean (Table 6).  For example, a 
data rescue project is currently in progress to 
archive more than 5,000 historical CTD and X-BT 
casts from the Northeast Pacific Ocean dating 
back to 1932.  Climate studies at PMEL use the 
long-term Sitka air temperature time series.  This 
series is of 5-month, winter-averaged (November-
March) air temperature measured at Sitka, Alaska, 
since 1829.  The North Pacific Index (NPI) is the 
average sea-level pressure over the North Pacific 
during January and February.  This index dates 
back to 1899.  Terry Whitledge at the University 
of Alaska Fairbanks has estimates for Bering Sea 
productivity (nutrients, chlorophyll, plankton) 
from the PROBES and modern eras.  PMEL's 
tsunami group maintains a series of bottom-
pressure recorders at various sites in the North 
Pacific.  Records begin in 1986 and the sensors  
 
72
Table 5 FOCI data series and other products. 
Series Name Location Variables Measured Times of Observation 
Line 8 Seven stations across 
the SW end of Shelikof 
Strait 
Ocean temperature, 
salinity, currents, 
nutrients, chlorophyll, 
zooplankton including 
pollock larvae 
1985 to present; most 
measurements in spring 
Late larval survey Western Gulf of Alaska 
shelf from Shelikof 
Strait to the Shumagin 
Islands 
Abundance and 
distribution of pollock 
larvae and additional 
species, water 
temperature profiles, 
other water properties 
1982, 1985, 1987 to 
present in late May and 
early June; 1986 in early 
May 
Shelikof Strait ocean 
transport 
Alaska Coastal Current 
in western Gulf of 
Alaska 
Drifter trajectories, 
currents from some 
moorings 
1985 to present, winter, 
spring, summer 
Shelikof Strait wind 
mixing 
Southwest end of 
Shelikof Strait 
Wind mixing energy 
estimates determined 
from synthetic winds 
Monthly since 1962 
Kodiak precipitation Kodiak, Alaska Monthly averaged 
measured rainfall 
Monthly since 1962 
Alaska Stream Kodiak Island to the 
Aleutians 
Current profiles from 
vessel-mounted ADCP 
and moorings 
1987 to present, usually 
in May 
Mooring 2 Bering Sea middle shelf Winds and currents, 
temperatures, salinity, 
chlorophyll, nitrates 
Near continuous since 
1995 
Mooring 3 Bering Sea middle shelf Winds, currents, 
temperatures, salinity, 
chlorophyll, nitrates 
1995-1999 spring and 
summer 
Mooring 6 Bering Sea basin north 
of Umnak Is. 
Currents, temperatures, 
salinity, chlorophyll, 
nitrates 
Near continuous since 
1996 
Cross-shelf survey Southeastern Bering Sea CTD, nutrient, 
phytoplankton and 
zooplankton samples 
Winter, spring, fall 
since 1996 
Along-shelf survey Southeastern Bering Sea 
(70-m isobath) 
CTD, nutrient, 
phytoplankton and 
zooplankton samples 
Winter, spring, fall 
since 1997 
Unimak Pass survey Unimak Pass, Aleutian 
Islands 
CTD, some nutrients, 
phyto- and zooplankton 
At least annually since 
1995 
Bering Sea ocean 
transport 
Bering Sea Drifter trajectories, 
currents from some 
moorings 
1992 to present, mostly 
during spring 
Shelikof Strait 
hydrodynamic model 
Shelikof Strait region, 
Gulf of Alaska 
Modeled currents, 
salinity at 40 m 
1978-1999 
73
sample at least once per minute.  Low-frequency 
instrument drift could interfere with detection of 
climate-scale signals.  PMEL was part of a 
collective effort under the National Ocean 
Parthership Program (NOPP) to observe ocean 
characteristics at Ocean Station Papa (50°N, 
145°W) during 1998 and 1999, and at station 
Mama (35°N, 165°W) during 1999.  
Measurements included atmospheric pressure, 
winds, temperature, radiation, rainfall, humidity, 
oceanic currents, temperatute and salinity.  At 
Station P, chemical and biological instruments 
also sampled the water column.  PMEL's VENTS 
programs has monitored ocean character in the 
vicinity of the Juan de Fuca and Gorda submarine 
ridges off the coast of Oregon since 1989.  This 
list is not exhaustive.  Other data series are 
available that are not mentioned here. 
 
Table 6 Other time-series and observations. 
Series Name Location Variables Measured Times of Observation 
North Pacific CTDs Northeast Pacific  Temperature, (salinity), 
depth 
1932 to present 
Sitka air temperature Sitka, Alaska Air temperature 1829-present 
North Pacific Index 
(NPI) 
North Pacific Average sea-level 
pressure during January 
and February 
1899-present 
Bering Sea 
productivity 
Southeastern Bering Sea Nutrients, chlorophyll, 
plankton 
1977-1981 
1997-2001 
Bottom Pressure Various stations in the 
North Pacific 
Ocean bottom pressure 1986 to present 
Ocean Stations Papa 
and Mama 
(50°N, 145°W) and 
(35°N, 165°W) 
Meteorological and 
oceanic parameters 
1998 & 1999; 
1999 
VENTS Hydrogaphy Juan de Fuca and Gorda 
Ridges 
Temperature, salinity, 
depth 
Various times since 
1989 
 
 
Gridded atmospheric re-analysis fields 
 
James E. Overland 
Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory, Oceanic and Atmospheric Research, NOAA, 7600 Sand Point 
Way NE, Seattle, WA, 98115-0070, U.S.A.  E-mail: James.E.Overland@noaa.gov 
 
A major resource for the study of climate variability 
of the North Pacific is the re-analyses fields for 1948 
to present, generated by the National Centers for 
Environmental Prediction (NCEP).  In a re-analysis, 
an atmospheric forecasting model is run for an 
extended period with no changes to the physical 
parameterizations.  Observational data from 
satellites, radiosondes, pilot reports and ground 
stations are assimilated into the model.  For basic 
atmospheric data such as temperatures and pressures, 
one can think of the re-analysis as a dynamic 
interpolation method where the model is used to 
extrapolate information into data sparse regions and 
to make sure that the analysis are internally 
consistent.  The model output goes beyond dynamic 
interpolation to provide secondary derived fields of 
quantities such as radiation and sensible heat flux 
fields and diagnostic terms such as vorticity, stream 
functions and various correlations.  23 variables and 
9 anomaly fields are available on 17 pressure levels 
from 1000 to 10 mb.  These include geopotential 
heights, temperatures, humidity and winds.  48 
variable fields and 15 anomaly fields are provided at 
one level.  These include:  net and upward long wave 
and short wave flux at the surface and top of the 
atmosphere, surface sensible and latent heat flux, and 
74
precipitation rate.  Secondary variables may not be 
as accurate as the primary variables, but because 
the model physics has not changed over the length 
of the run, they provide a major source of 
information for comparing spatial patterns of 
fluxes over decadal time scales.  Data are available 
four times a day, as daily means and as monthly 
means.  Data are available at the NCEP web site 
“wesley.wwb.noaa.gov/ncep_data/index.html”.  
This site also provides graphics capability and 
various smoothing formats for displaying fields.  
FERRET and other programs are designed to work 
with the data set.  Figure 22 was produced at the 
website showing the 1000 mb geopotential height 
anomaly field for February 2001.  Low heights 
(low sea level pressure) over the western Bering 
Sea and high heights (high pressure) in the Gulf of  
Alaska gave strong southwest winds and warm 
temperatures over the eastern Bering Sea and 
Alaska. 
 
Fig. 22 The geopotential height anomaly field 
for February 2001 in the Pacific region. 
 
 
Research on the physical-biological-chemical coupled numerical model in China 
 
Fangli Qiao 
First Institute of Oceanography, State Oceanic Administration, Xian-Xia-Ling Road, Qingdao, Shangdong, 
People’s Republic of China.  266061  E-mail: lagfd@public.qd.sd.cn 
 
This report introduces research on physical-
biological-chemical coupled numerical model and 
the 3-D baroclinic current model in China, and the 
Yellow Sea database.  
 
3-D marine ecosystem numerical model 
 
Based on the China-Japan cooperation from 1997-
2000, a 7-component physical-biological-chemical 
coupled numerical model was developed in two 
steps.  First, following two marine mesocosm 
experiments in the Yangtse River estuary area in 
October 1997 and May 1998, a 1-D biological-
chemical model, which includes nitrogen, phosphate, 
silicon, flagellate, diatom and detritus, was created, 
and the model results were compared with in situ 
data (Fig. 23).  Second, zooplankton was added to 
the above model, and the model was combined with 
a 3-D physical model of Jiaozhou Bay.  Located 400 
km from Qingdao, this bay is one of two marine 
ecosystem stations in China.  With this 3-D 7-
component coupled model, we simulated 4 years of 
observations and compared them with observations 
at 10 stations in the bay (Fig. 24). 
3-D baroclinic current model of the coastal seas 
of China and adjacent North Pacific  
 
Currents play an important role in transport of 
marine ecosystem elements and water temperature 
directly influences the ecosystem.  A 3-D 
baroclinic current model, mainly focused on the 
coastal seas of China and adjacent North Pacific, 
was developed based on the Princeton Ocean 
Model (POM).  The comparison of model results 
with observations shows our ability to predict 
physical elements in the North Pacific region  
(Fig. 25). 
 
Yellow Sea data set 
 
Six comprehensive cruises covering the whole 
Yellow Sea were carried out from the spring of 
1996 to the fall of 1997.  Collected data cannot be 
released until December 2002.  A list of cruises is 
given below (location of sampling stations is 
shown in Figure 26): 
75
 
Fig. 23 Comparison of in situ observations in Jiaozhou Bay and results from a 1-D 6-component 
coupled ecosystem model (time from 09:00 (GMY08) on October 11, 1997). 
 
 
Fig. 24 Comparison of observations in Jiaozhou Bay and results from a 3-D (Princeton Ocean Model)  
7-component coupled ecosystem model for phytoplankton (left panel) and zooplankton (right panel).  Red 
lines show model results and black lines show observed data. 
76
 
Fig. 25 Comparison of observations in the coastal seas of China and adjacent North Pacific and results 
from 3-D baroclinic current model for phytoplankton (left panel) and zooplankton (right panel).  Red 
lines show model results and black lines show observed data. 
 
0 1 2 3 4 5
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101112
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10111213 14
1 2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1 2 3 4 5 6
119
O
121
O
123
O
125
O
127
31
O
33
O
35
O
37
O
N
A
B
C
D
Q
E
F
b
 
Fig. 26 Cruise tracks in the Yellow Sea. 
1.1 spring of 1996:  CTD (71 stations), ADCP, 
chemical and biological observations (71 
stations); 
1.2 fall of 1996:  CTD (79 stations), ADCP, 
chemical and biological observations (79 
stations); 
1.3 summer of 1997:  CTD (73 stations), ADCP, 
chemical and biological observations (73 
stations); 
1.4 winter of 1997:  CTD (69 stations), ADCP, 
chemical and biological observations (69 
stations); and 
1.5 spring  of 1998 CTD (69 stations), ADCP, 
chemical and biological observations (69 
stations).
 
 
77
 
GROUP 2:  PHYTOPLANKTON, ZOOPLANKTON, MICRONEKTON, 
AND BENTHOS 
 
 
U.S. GLOBEC Northeast Pacific Program:  Observations, retrospective 
studies and model products 
 
Hal Batchelder 
College of Oceanic & Atmospheric Sciences, Oregon State University, 104 Ocean Administration Bldg., 
Corvallis, OR 97331-5503, U.S.A.  E-mail: hbatchelder@oce.orst.edu 
 
U.S. GLOBEC is supporting oceanographic and 
fisheries research in two regions in the northeast 
Pacific (NEP):  1) within the eastern boundary of the 
California Current upwelling system (CCS) off 
Oregon and Northern California, and 2) within a 
predominantly buoyancy-forced, downwelling 
ecosystem in the coastal domain of the northern Gulf 
of Alaska (CGOA).  Within these regions, GLOBEC 
is supporting:  (i) retrospective data analysis of 
existing medium-to-long term data sets spanning 
hydrography through lower trophic levels to fish, 
birds and mammals;  (ii) long-term observation 
programs (LTOPs, e.g., “monitoring”) - regular 
sampling of pre-selected ocean stations for 
parameters ranging from physics to higher trophics;  
(iii) process-focussed research cruises that estimate 
biological and physical rate processes, and provide 
detailed survey descriptions of ecosystem state 
variables (biomass, size structure, hydrography, 
transports);  (iv) moorings deployed at a few sites to 
provide time-series data of hydrographic conditions, 
transports, and selected biological fields;  (v) drifter 
deployments to examine cross-shelf and along-shelf 
flows, and in a few cases to provide time-series 
observations of biological rates;  and  (vi) nearly 
continuous HF radar (CODAR) observations of 
surface currents in selected regions.  Complementing 
these research elements are analysis of satellite 
derived ocean products (ocean color, SST, and sea 
level), and modeling of ocean circulation and the 
coupling of biological processes and state variables 
with physical processes.  Modeling approaches vary 
among research groups, ranging from highly 
idealized process-oriented biophysical coupled 
models with simple external forcing to realistic 
geometry/bathymetry simulations of ocean 
circulation in regional models coupled to basin or 
global-scale models. 
The U.S. GLOBEC program in the NEP has a 
limited duration of field observations (ca. 7±2 years) 
in both the CGOA and CCS.  These two regions in 
the past have had co-varying, but of opposite phase, 
salmon and zooplankton population abundances 
through time.  Since the program is interested in 
examining the role of climate variability on the 
structure and dynamics of the coastal marine 
ecosystems, and specifically in comparing the 
responses of these two regional systems, we realized 
that a short-duration study (<10 years) would be 
insufficient, by itself, to answer questions concerning 
longer-term, larger-scale variation.  Thus, U.S. 
GLOBEC has devoted substantial resources to 
retrospective analysis of existing, but perhaps, under-
exploited data sets, and to the development of 
coupled biophysical models.  The intent is that 
improved models will increase our ability to 
integrate biological and physical observations in 
coastal ecosystems generally, and specifically, to 
provide integrated assessments of the effect of 
environmental variability and climate change on 
coastal marine ecosystems within the NEP.  The data 
sets assembled and collected within the GLOBEC 
NEP program--including historical data, and newly 
collected data from LTOP and process studies--will 
provide a comparison to similar observations 
collected previously and provide a baseline for future 
data collections and comparisons. 
 
The GLOBEC principal investigators have identified 
a number of historical data sets that should be re-
evaluated and/or made generally available, and 
which would be of particular value for the NEP 
study (Table 1).  
 
Data collected within the 5-7 years of the program 
are numerous and include: 
79
1. CCS LTOP Program (5 cruises/year; July 
1997 – Nov. 2003) (Table 2). 
 
2. CGOA LTOP Program (6-7 cruises/year; 
Sept. 1997 – Dec. 2003) (Table 3 & Fig. 1). 
 
3. Process/Survey Cruises: 
3.1. CCS (spring and fall cruises, 2000 & 2002) 
(Fig. 2) 
• States:  temperature, salinity, fluores-
cence, zooplankton biomass and 
composition, fish, birds, and mammals; 
• Rates:  transports, zooplankton vital 
rates, feeding rates; and fish vital rates. 
3.2. CGOA (late-winter, spring, summer 
cruises, 2001 & 2003) (Figs. 3 and 4) 
• States: temperature, salinity, fluores-
cence, zooplankton biomass, and 
composition, fish, and birds; 
• Rates: transports, zooplankton vital 
rates, feeding rates; fish vital rates. 
 
4. Moorings: 
4.1. CCS (3 moorings:  Newport, Coos Bay, 
Rogue River):  Hydrography, velocities, 
backscatter, and fluorescence. 
4.2. CGOA (about 7 moorings; Seward Line, 
Gore Pt. Line):  Hydrography, velocities, 
multi-frequency backscatter, fluorescence, 
nitrate, and surface meteorology. 
 
5. Models: 
5.1. Physics 
• Idealized Process-Oriented: Spectral 
Element Ocean Model (SEOM) 
• Realistic Geometry & Bathymetry: 
Regional Ocean Modeling System 
(ROMS) 
5.2. Biology – Plankton 
• NPZ and NPZ+ models 
• Individual Based Models (IBMs) 
5.3. Biology  
• Fish:  Individual Based Models 
5.4. Ecosystem, esp. for higher trophics 
• ECOPATH 
• Numerical Simulation Models 
 
Table 1  Data base availability and needs for the U.S. GLOBEC NEP program. 
 
DATA SET AREA PERIOD SOURCE 
Upwelling Index 
 
Freshwater 
 
SST 
SST-GAK1 
Coastal Sea Level 
Sea Level Pressure 
Sea Level Pressure 
Air Temperature 
CalCOFI Hydrography/Chl-a 
CalCOFI ZP Biomass 
CalCOFI ZP Composition 
MicroZP abund/comp 
ZP Biomass 
ZP Biomass 
Satellite Color 
    CZCS 
    Sea WiFS 
    MODIS 
Satellite Altimetry 
Satellite SST 
Gridded Ocean Fields 
    COADS 
West Coast 
 
Gulf of Alaska 
Pacific NW 
No. Pacific 
GAK1 
West Coast 
Sitka, AK 
Other West Coast 
 
So. Calif Bight 
So. Calif Bight 
So. Calif Bight 
Line P 
Line P 
No. Pacific 
 
CCS 
Baja-50N 
? 
No. Pacific 
West Coast 
 
No. Pacific 
1946- (mo) 
1967-(6 h; daily) 
1931-(mo) 
 
1946-O 
1970-(mo) 
1945-(mo) 
1899-(mo) 
 
 
1980’s?- 
1951-(qtr) 
Spring; Reg, Avgs. 
1987-88; 93-99; 2-3X/yr 
1940-1981; intermittent since 
Before and after 76 regime shift 
 
78-83; 10-d composites; mo 
Sept. 97- (10-d composites) 
? 
 
1992- (<day) 
 
1945-(mo; seasonal climatologies) 
PFEG 
 
Tom Royer (ODU) 
 
Various 
Tom Royer (ODU) 
NOAA 
Tom Royer (ODU) 
 
 
SIO/MLRG 
Ohman/SIO 
Ohman/Reb stock/SIO 
Strom/WWU 
Canadians 
Brodeur 
 
Andy Thomas/Maine 
Andy Thomas/Maine 
Abbott/Letelier/OSU 
Ted Strub/OSU 
Ted Strub/OSU 
 
PFEG 
 
80
Table 2 GLOBEC long-term observation program in the California Current System. 
81
 
Fig. 1 Coastal Gulf of Alaska long-term observation program. 
(CTD, ADCP, nutrients, chlorophyll, zooplankton biomass, species 
composition, multi-frequency acoustics, fish abundance, 
composition, diet, along-track data:  S, T, F, winds, etc.). 
 
Fig. 2 A priori cruise lines for California Current mesoscale survey. 
 
Table 3  U.S. GLOBEC long-term observation program in the Gulf of Alaska. 
Year 97     98       99       00   
Month=> 10  3 4 5 7 10 12  3 4 5 8 10 12  3 4 5 8 10 12 
Seward X  X X X X X X  X X X X X X  X X X X X X 
Fairfield X  X X X X X X  X X X X X X  X X X X X X 
Cleare X  X X  X     X  X X   X  X X   
Hinchenbrook     X X  X     X  X    X X   
Clear SW X   X  X       X X         
82
 
Fig. 3 Proposed sampling lines for a May 2001 cruise in the Coastal Gulf of Alaska.  Squares (Seward 
Line) and triangles (Gore Pt. Line) are the proposed locations of moorings to be deployed on the shelf in 
May 2001.  Transect lines parallel to the Seward line will be occupied for CTD and plankton sampling.  
The grid of transect lines in Amatouli Trough will be occupied for CTD and plankton sampling.  Satellite 
tracked drifters will be released from locations in the vicinity of the moorings. 
 
 
 
Fig. 4 GLOBEC 2000:  Gulf of Alaska juvenile salmon distribution transects (Helle, Cokelet, Farley, 
Hollowed and Stabeno). 
83
Table 4 Satellite data sets. 
Primary Data Sets 
Available NOW 
Other Data Sets 
To be ADDED 
AVHRR SST 
• Pathfinder, 9-km SST, 18-63°N, 108-170°W, 
1992-98, will be continued 
• 1-km and 3-km pixel SST, 18-55°N (Calif. 
Current), all available data 1982-present;  
1982-1992:  sparse temporal coverage;  1992-
present:  2-4 images/day 
• http://coho.oce.orst.edu: get data using 
anonymous FTP 
SeaWiFS Surface Pigments in California Current 
Sept 1997-present;  8-day composites from Andrew 
Thomas (Marine);  single images from Scott Pegau 
(OSU) 
Altimeter SSH Fields from TOPEX and ERS-2 (on 
request from Ted Strub, OSU) 
QuikScat wind stress fields from Dudley Chelton, 
OSU (Feb.-Sept. 2000); anonymous FTP 
 
 
The Continuous Plankton Recorder survey of the North Pacific 
 
Sonia D. Batten
1
 and David W. Welch
2 
1 
Sir Alister Hardy Foundation for Ocean Science, 1 Walker Terrace, Plymouth, UK.  PL1 3BN   
E-mail: soba@wpo.nerc.ac.uk 
2
 Department of Fisheries and Oceans, Pacific Biological Station, 3190 Hammond Bay Road, 
Nanaimo, B.C., Canada.  V9R 5K6  E-mail: welchd@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
Two years of funding were approved to operate a 
CPR survey in the North Pacific during 2000 and 
2001.  The resources were allocated so that the 
route from Alaska to California was sampled 5 
times throughout the spring and summer of 2000, 
and the route from Vancouver west towards Japan 
was operated once in summer (Fig. 5).  The same 
sampling plan will operate in 2001 and perhaps 
into the future if further funding can be obtained. 
 
The CPR is towed behind merchant ‘ships of 
opportunity’ (in this case a crude oil carrier and a 
container ship) at a fixed depth of about 7 m.  The 
filtering mesh within the CPR is 270 µm and each 
sample is equivalent to 18 km and about 3 m
3 
of 
seawater filtered.   
 
1135 samples were collected during 2000, of 
which about 450 have been, or will be, fully 
processed.  The remaining samples will be 
archived.  On most deployments every 4
th
 sample 
was designated for processing, but on selected 
tows every 2
nd
, or even sequential, samples will be 
processed.  This will enable spatial scales of 
variability to be better resolved. 
Table 5 Taxonomic entities separately 
enumerated on the first 4 deployments of 2000, 
137 distinct taxa were recorded. 
Zooplankton  
Atlanta spp.  Harpacticoida 
Bryozoan larvae Hyperiidea  
Cephalopoda larvae Lamellibranch larvae 
Chaetognatha  Larvacea  
Cirripede larvae  Ostracoda  
Cladocera  Polychaete larvae 
Clione spp.  Radiolaria  
*Copepods  
– 38 species/genera 
Sergestidae  
Decapod larvae  Siphonophora  
Echinoderm larvae Thecosomes  
Euphausiidea  *Tintinnids - 4 genera 
Fish eggs/larvae Tomopteris 
Foraminifera   
  
Phytoplankton  
Coccolithophores
  
*Dinoflagellates  
– 28 species/genera 
*Diatoms  
– 39 species/genera 
Silicoflagellates 
84
-150 -145 -140 -135 -130 -125 -120
35
40
45
50
55
60
-150 -145 -140 -135 -130 -125 -120
35
40
45
50
55
60
-150 -145 -140 -135 -130 -125 -120
35
40
45
50
55
60
-150 -145 -140 -135 -130 -125 -120
35
40
45
50
55
60
-150 -145 -140 -135 -130 -125 -120
35
40
45
50
55
60
150 160 170 180 190 200 210 220 230
45
50
55
60
M ar ch 22- 26 Apri l 29- M ay 5
June 24 - Jul y 3 June 17- 22
Jul y 19- 24 August 23- 29
 
Fig. 5  The position of each processed CPR sample collected in 2000 (with dates of deployment). 
85
Taxonomic resolution of the plankton entities on a 
CPR sample varies between taxa, according to the 
preservation of the diagnostic features by the 
sampling process, so that copepods and 
dinoflagellates are generally identified to species, 
but some groups are identified only to the phylum 
level.  Table 5 indicates the taxonomic entities 
recorded so far on the 2000 samples. 
 
The CPR survey is not yet a time series, however, 
it is already possible to describe some seasonal 
and spatial distribution patterns.  The copepod 
Neocalanus plumchrus, for example, is one of the  
 
most numerous mesozooplanktonic organisms in 
the subarctic Pacific, and Figure 6 shows its 
abundance along the 5 north to south transects 
collected in 2000.  This species overwinters at 
depth, reproduces there and ascends to reach the 
surface as late naupliar stages in spring.  They 
mature through to copepodite stage 5, accumulate 
lipid and then descend again in late summer.  
Figure 6 clearly indicates that individuals were at 
the surface by late March in the Gulf of Alaska, 
with arrival probably peaking in April, and that 
maturation and descent started by June and was 
completed by late August.  
 
Mar ch Apr i l/May June JulyA u g u s t
Abundance Sampl e
-1
39
44
49
54
59
0 180 360
Lati t ude ºN
39
44
49
54
59
01 8 03 6 0
39
44
49
54
59
0 180 360
39
44
49
54
59
0 180 360
39
44
49
54
59
01 8 03 6 0
 
Fig. 6 The abundance of Neocalanus plumchrus (plus N. flemingeri) on each processed sample from 
the Alaska to California transect in 2000.  Copepodite stages 2 to 5 have been combined.  No individuals 
were found south of about 41ºN. 
 
 
Micronekton data sets in North Pacific 
 
Richard D. Brodeur 
College of Ocean & Atmospheric Sciences, Oregon State University, Newport, OR 97365-5296, U.S.A.  
E-mail: Rick.Brodeur@noaa.gov 
 
The members of the PICES Micronekton Working 
Group (WG 14) were asked to poll the researchers 
from their own countries who have conducted or 
are presently conducting a micronekton sampling 
program to provide data on potential time-series of 
observations.  Responses from Japan, Russia, 
China, Korea, and the United States have been 
received and compiled into the attached tables.  In 
86
Table 6 Summary of US sampling of micronekton in the North Pacific. 
Organization 
Principal 
Investigator Area Studied 
N of sampling 
times a year Years sampled Sampling gear used 
Main purpose of 
study 
Microneckon 
sampled 
NMFS/SWFSC 
Honolulu 
G. Boehlert/ 
M. Seki 
Southeast Hancock 
Seamount 1 
Summer 1984 
Winter 1985 1.8 m IKMT 
Micronekton fauna 
around seamounts Myctophids 
NMFS/SWFSC 
Honolulu C. Wilson 
Southeast Hancock 
Seamount 2 
Summer 1987 – Fall 
1998 1.8 m IKMT 
Interaction of currents 
and micronekton 
Maurolicus, 
Gnathophausia 
NMFS/SWFSC 
Honolulu J. Polovina 
Hawaiian 
Archipelago 1 to 2 
April 1988, June, 
October 1999 
100 m
2
 small mesh 
rope trawl 
Examine lobster 
larvae distribution 
Panularis 
phyllosoma 
NMFS/SWFSC 
Honolulu J. Polovina 
Hawaiian 
Archipelago 3 
January, July, October 
1991 
140 m
2
 small mesh 
Cobb trawl 
Examine lobster 
larvae distribution 
Panularis 
phyllosoma 
NMFS/SWFSC 
Honolulu 
W. Matsumoto/ 
M. Seki 
Subarctic Frontal and 
Transition Zone 1 August 1993 
140 m
2
 small mesh 
Cobb trawl 
Distribution and 
abundance of flying 
squid 
Ommastrephes 
bartramii 
NMFS/SWFSC 
Honolulu M. Seki 
Subarctic Frontal and 
Transition Zone 1 March-April 1992 
140 m
2
 small mesh 
Cobb trawl 
Examine micronekton 
in relation to oceanic 
fronts 
Mesopelagic fishes 
and squids 
NMFS/SWFSC 
Honolulu M. Seki 
Subarctic Frontal and 
Transition Zone 1 August 1991 
140 m
2
 small mesh 
Cobb trawl 
Examine micronekton 
in relation to oceanic 
fronts 
Mesopelagic fishes 
and squids 
NMFS/SWFSC 
Tiburon S. Ralston 
California Current off 
Central Calif. 3 May-June 1983-2001 
140 m
2
 small mesh 
Cobb trawl 
Examine juvenile 
fishes in relation to 
ocean conditions Sebastes 
NMFS/AFSC 
Seattle 
R. Brodeur/  
M. Wilson 
Eastern Bering Sea 
around Pribilof 
Islands 1 September 1994-1999 
140 m
2
 small mesh 
Cobb trawl 
Examine juvenile 
fishes in relation to 
tidal fronts 
Theragra 
chalcogramma 
NMFS/AFSC 
Seattle 
R. Brodeur/  
M. Wilson 
Eastern Bering Sea 
around Pribilof 
Islands 1 September 1994-1999 
Methot or IKMT 
trawl 
Examine juvenile 
fishes in relation to 
tidal fronts 
Theragra 
chalcogramma 
NMFS/AFSC 
Seattle/ Hokkaido 
Univ. 
R. Brodeur/  
L. Ciannelli/  
N. Shiga 
Eastern Bering Sea 
around Pribilof 
Islands 1 July 1995-2001 Methot Beam Trawl 
Examine shelf 
distribution of 
micronekton 
Theragra 
chalcogramma 
NMFS/AFSC 
Seattle 
E. Sinclair/  
P. Stabeno/  
T. Loughlin 
EBS, Unimak Pass, 
Pribilof Canyon 1 May 1999-2000 
Aleutian Wing Trawl 
with fine liner 
Examine habitat of 
mesopelagic fish and 
squid 
Stenobrachius, 
Bathylagus 
NMFS/AFSC 
Seattle 
C. Wilson/  
R. Brodeur 
California Current 
from Wash.-Calif. 1 
July-September 1995, 
1998 Methot trawl 
Mesopelagic taxa 
causing acoustic 
backscatter 
Stenobrachius, 
Diaphus, 
euphausiids 
Oregon State 
University 
W. Pearcy/  
R. Brodeur/ 
J. Shenker 
Oceanic Gulf of 
Alaska 1 July 1980-1985 
1.8 m IKMT and 
RMT 
Examine prey of adult 
salmon 
Mesopelagic fishes 
and squids 
87
Table 7  Summary of Japanese sampling of micronekton in the North Pacific. 
Organization 
Principal 
Investigator Area Studied 
N of sampling 
times a year Years sampled Sampling gear used 
Main purpose of 
study 
Micronekton 
sampled 
SNFRI (JFA) S. Ohshimo W Japan Sea 1 1993-1995 
Midwater trawl and 
acoustic 
SSE, jack mackerel 
and sardine 
Maurolicus 
japonicus 
(muelleri) 
SNFRI (JFA) S. Ohshimo 
E Eastern China 
Sea 2 1997-present 
Midwater trawl and 
acoustic 
SSE, jack mackerel 
and sardine Diaphus regani 
TNFRI (JFA) H. Sugisaki 
Off Pacific coast 
of N Honshu 4 1998-present 
MOCNESS 4 m
2
, 
MOHT net Micronekton N/S 
HU (HNFRI(JFA)) 
K. Miyashita  
(H. Honda) 
Off Pacific coast 
of NE Honshu 
and Hokkaido 2 1996-present Acoustic (EK500) Walleye pollock 
N/S (D. theta, L. 
jordani, S. 
leucopsarus) 
HU (Tottori Pref.) K. Miyashita Japan Sea N/A N/A 
70kHz), KFC3000 (38, 
120kHz) N/A 
Maurolicus 
japonicus 
(muelleri) 
TNFRI (JFA) (HU) 
D. Kitagawa  
(K. Uchikawa) 
Off Pacific coast 
of NE Honshu 1 1995-present Bottom trawl 
Sampling for bottom 
fishes 
Diaphus watasei, 
Diaphus theta, 
Lampanyctus 
jordani 
HNFRI (JFA) 
K. Nagasawa,  
A. Nishimura 
Bering Sea Basin 
and Shelf 1 1989-1991, 1994 
Acoustic, Midwater 
trawl 
Horizontal and 
vertical distribution 
of mesopelagic fishes 
Theragra 
chalcogramma, S. 
leucopsarus 
ORI (NFRI (JFA)) 
T. Kikuchi 
(YNU) 
Off Pacific coast 
of Honshu 1 1981-1984 KOC-net, KMT-net 
Radioactivities of 
marine organisms 
Mesopelagic 
shrimps 
Ori (jamarc) K. Kawaguchi 
Off Pacific coast 
of N Honshu 1 1994-1996 Midwater trawl Micronekton N/S 
TNFRI K. Taki 
37-41N, 142-
145E 4 1997-present 
130 cm Ring net, 1 m
2
 
MOCNESS 
Ecology of 
Euphausiids Euphausiids 
TNFRI H. Sugisaki 
36-42N, 141-
147E 1 1998-present 
130 cm Ring net, 1 m
2
 
MOCNESS 
Food availability for 
Cololabis saira N/S 
HNFRI A. Tsuda 
39-43N, 145-
147E 6 1988-present Bongo 
Ecology of 
zooplankton N/S 
HU 
Y. Sakurai,  
K. Uchikawa 
NW Pacific 
Ocean (155E, 
175.30E) 1 1995, 1997-2000 Beam trawl (5 m
2
) 
Ecology of 
micronekton and 
zooplankton N/S 
ORI K. Kawaguchi 
Subarctic Pacific, 
Bering Sea 1 1997 RMT 8+1, IKMT 
Community structure 
of zooplankton and 
micronekton 
Myctophids, 
shrimps, squids, 
zooplankton 
 
88
Table 8 Summary of Russian sampling of micronekton in the North Pacific. 
Organization 
Principal 
Investigator Area Studied 
N of sampling 
times a year Years sampled 
Sampling gear 
used 
Main purpose of 
study 
Micronekton 
sampled 
TINRO 
A. Balanov,  
V. Radchenko 
Western Bering 
Sea 1 1989, 1990 Midwater trawl 
Mesopelagic 
Ecosystem 
Bathylagidae, 
Myctophidae 
TINRO 
E. Illinsky,  
V. Lapko Okhotsk Sea 1 1989-1991 Midwater trawl 
Mesopelagic 
Ecosystem 
Surveys 
Bathylagidae, 
Myctophidae 
TINRO 
E. Illinsky,  
V. Lapko Okhotsk Sea 1 1998-1999 Midwater trawl 
Epipelagic 
Ecosystem 
Surveys  
TINRO O. Ivanov 
East of 
Kamchatka, 
Kuril Islands 1 
1987, 1989, 
1991-1995 
Acoustic 
Midwater trawl 
Scattering Layer 
Identification 
Myctophids, 
Cephalopods 
TINRO V. Savinykh 
NW Pacific, 
Transition, 
Subtropical 1 1990-1991 Midwater trawl 
Epipelagic 
Ecosystem 
Surveys  
TINRO V. Savinykh 
California 
Current 1 1988-1989 Midwater trawl 
Epipelagic 
Ecosystem 
Surveys 
Ceratoscopelus, 
Cephalopods 
TINRO E. Karedin 
North Pacific and 
Gulf of Alaska 1 1989 Midwater trawl 
Epipelagic 
Ecosystem 
Surveys  
 
 
 
Table 9  Summary of Chinese and Korean sampling of micronekton in the North Pacific. 
Organization 
Principal 
Investigator Area Studied 
N of sampling 
times a year Years sampled 
Sampling gear 
used 
Main purpose of 
study 
Micronekton 
sampled 
YSFRI 
Q, Tang, X, Jin, 
X, Zhoa 
Bering Sea, 
Aleutian Basin 1 June-August 
Acoustic  
(EK-400), 
midwater trawl 
Acoustic and 
trawl 
Stenobrachius, 
Bathylagids 
NFRDI/WSFRI 
Incheon W.D. Yoon Yellow Sea 6 
April 1997-
August 2000 
Omori type 
vertical obliqu 
Distribution, 
composition & 
biomass 
Euphausiids, fish 
larvae 
 
89
some cases, micronekton were not the primary 
targets of the sampling but were included because 
micronekton were routinely collected along with 
the target species.  Information on sampling since 
1980 has been requested but in many cases 
programs started much earlier (back in the 1960s -
sampling of Oregon State University (OSU), 
University of Washington (UW), Fisheries & 
Oceans Canada (DFO), Ocean Research Institute, 
Japan (ORI), and others).  The attached Tables 6-9 
should be considered only a provisional summary, 
as more data sets will be added in the coming 
months and hopefully augmented by data from the 
other WG 14 members.  It is envisioned that a 
final table will be provided for the Micronekton 
Working Group Final Report that is planned to be 
completed in 3 years. 
As shown in Tables 6-9, most of the studies were 
conducted over a period of less than 5 years and 
many are only 1-2 years in length.  Few surveys 
were conducted more than once per year so we are 
not able to evaluate seasonal differences in 
micronekton.  Due to these short time periods of 
observations for most of the studies, it will be 
difficult to examine interannual or decadal trends 
in biomass or species composition.  The only way 
to do this is to compare among different studies 
led by various investigators, such as that done for 
the Gulf of Alaska by Beamish et al. (Progress in 
Oceanography, 1999, 43 (2-4): 399-442).  The 
lack of data on long-term trends in micronekton 
abundance reinforces the need to maintain 
continuous sampling of these midwater organisms 
in the future. 
 
 
Zooplankton in the California Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries Investigations 
 
David M. Checkley, Jr. 
Marine Life Research Group, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, 9602 La Jolla Shores Drive, La Jolla, 
CA 92093-0218, U.S.A.  E-mail: dcheckley@ucsd.edu 
 
The California Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries 
Investigations (CalCOFI) was established in 1949.  
The goals of CalCOFI, restated in the 1980s, are: 
 
…to understand the physical and chemical 
environment and how it changes, to 
determine the productivity of the 
California Current ecosystem, and to make 
this information available …. The ultimate 
goal is to understand and predict 
fluctuations in marine populations and to 
provide a basis for the wise use of these 
resources.  (Hewitt 1988, p. 38) 
 
Here, I focus on the zooplankton, with only brief 
reference to the phyto- and ichthyoplankton.  
Since 1949, more than 55,000 zooplankton 
samples have been collected and archived in the 
Pelagic Invertebrates Collection of the Scripps 
Institution of Oceanography (Mark Ohman, 
personal communication).  In the following 
paragraphs, I present salient features of 
zooplankton work within CalCOFI, both historical 
and ongoing. 
 
Historical 
 
The following information is taken from Hewitt 
(1988).  Zooplankton collections and other 
collections and observations have been made off 
the coast of California since the 1920s.  The 
demise of the Pacific sardine (Sardinops sagax) in 
the late 1940s led to the creation of the Marine 
Research Committee in 1949, comprised of the 
California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG), 
the US Bureau of Commercial Fisheries (USBCF), 
the Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO), 
and the California Academy of Sciences.  Focus 
was on the sardine and the ecosystem in which it 
lives.  It was determined that “plankton and water 
samples be collected over a fixed grid of stations 
at periodic intervals”.  The sampling grid was 
adopted in 1951, following exploratory surveys in 
1949 and 1950.  Since then, sampling has occurred 
over varying intervals and extents.  In 1957, the 
present CalCOFI Committee was created, 
consisting of a member from each of the CDFG, 
USBCF (now NOAA), and SIO. 
90
Funding 
 
Primary costs of CalCOFI are shiptime, personnel 
and equipment.  Routine costs are borne primarily 
by the US government, through the Southwest 
Fisheries Science Center of NOAA, and the State 
of California, through the Marine Life Research 
Group of the University of California, San Diego, 
and the California Department of Fish and Game.  
Non-routine activities are supported, in general, 
extramurally, e.g. by NASA, NSF, ONR, or Sea 
Grant. 
 
Sampling changes 
 
The following is taken largely from Rebstock 
(2001).  As with other long-term monitoring 
programs, the CalCOFI program has undergone 
several method changes since its inception 
(Ohman and Smith 1995).  The extent of the 
spatial grid and the frequency of sampling have 
changed several times.  The depth of tow and type 
of net have also changed.  In 1951, the depth of 
plankton tows was changed from 70 m to 140 m 
and the current station spacing was adopted 
(Hewitt 1988). 
 
In the first three decades of the program, the 
geographic extent of the sampling grid varied, 
especially in the northward and offshore directions 
(Hewitt 1988).  In the mid-1980s, the grid was 
contracted to six lines, from north of Point 
Conception (line 77) to near the U.S.-Mexico 
boarder (line 93).  In 1997, the grid was expanded 
again north to Monterey Bay (line 67).  In almost 
all cruises, lines 77 to 93, the grid adopted in the 
mid-1980s, have been sampled. 
 
For the first ten years of the program, samples 
were collected monthly with very few exceptions. 
Sampling frequency was at least quarterly through 
the mid-1960s, when it was changed to every third 
year, monthly or every other month during part of 
the year.  Sampling returned to quarterly, every 
year, in the mid-1980s. 
 
The sampling depth was increased in 1969 from 
140 m to 212 m.  Also in 1969, the silk net was 
replaced with a nylon net with a similar mesh size.  
In 1978, the 1 m diameter ring net was replaced by 
a 0.71 m diameter bongo net.  The gear change 
coincided with a climatic shift in the Pacific basin 
that occurred in the winter of 1976-77.  It also 
coincided with a period of infrequent sampling, 
which makes it more difficult to resolve 
zooplankton changes that might be due to the 
regime shift. 
 
Present sampling 
 
Sixty-six stations are routinely occupied and 
continuous, underway measurements and sampling 
performed on a grid consisting of six lines (in 
order of occupation, from south to north, 93, 90, 
87, 83, 80, 77), as shown in Figure 7.  In addition, 
on some cruises (recently in winter and spring), 
continuous, underway measurements and samples 
are taken along lines 73, 70, and 67 and, 
occasionally, lines still further north. 
 
 
Fig. 7 CalCOFI station pattern.  Shown are 
stations occupied during current CalCOFI cruises. 
Continuous, underway measurements are made 
between stations, along lines 93 through 77, and, 
recently in winter and spring, along lines 73 to 67. 
 
1. Station sampling includes: 
1.1. CTD/rosette cast to 500 m (T, S, P; 
irradiance, transmission; nutrients; O
2
; 
Chl-a)  
1.2. Once daily primary productivity 
measurements 
91
1.3. Bongo net (505-micron mesh; oblique to 
212 m; since winter 1998, with Optical 
Plankton Counter on one side) 
1.4. Manta net (505-micron mesh; neuston) 
1.5. CalVET (125-micron mesh; 70 m to 
surface) 
 
2. Continuous, underway measurements include: 
2.1. CUDLS (Continuous, Underway Data 
Logging System; T, S, Chl-a) 
2.2. ADCP (Acoustic Doppler Current 
Profiler; currents, zooplankton 
backscatter) 
2.3. CUFES (Continuous, Underway Fish 
Egg Sampler; winter and spring only; 
pelagic fish eggs) 
2.4. Simrad EK-500 (Acoustic echo sounder; 
winter and spring only; since spring 
2000; fish) 
 
Routine sample and data analysis 
 
Physical and chemical samples are analyzed 
aboard ship during each cruise and ashore.  
Zooplankton samples (bongo) are fixed and 
preserved in buffered Formalin.  Ashore, dis-
placement volume is measured, ichthyoplankton is 
removed, and the sample is archived.  Fish eggs 
and larvae are removed from CalVET and CUFES 
samples as well. Only the ichthyoplankton is 
routinely identified. 
 
Data are analyzed by staff at SIO and the 
Southwest Fisheries Science Center of NOAA.  
Throughout, extreme care is taken to ensure that 
the quality of the data is maintained. 
 
Non-routine programs 
 
CalCOFI provides an excellent foundation for 
other plankton investigations.  Examples of such 
programs include: 
 
1. Bio-optics and remote sensing, including the 
phytoplankton 
2. Phytoplankton distribution, abundance, and 
physiology 
3. Functional studies of the zooplankton, 
including feeding, egg production, lipid 
dynamics, and diel and ontogenetic migration 
4. Distribution and abundance of the zoo-
plankton, both species and assemblages, and 
marine birds 
5. Water column support of paleological 
investigations of fish and plankton 
 
Products 
 
Routine products of CalCOFI include: 
 
1. Data Reports (one per two cruises; twice per 
year), available in hard copy and on the world 
wide web (http://www.calcofi.org/) 
2. CalCOFI Reports (annual) 
3. CalCOFI Atlas series (irregular) 
4. CalCOFI CD (to obtain, contact Jim 
Wilkinson: jwilkinson@ucsd.edu) 
 
Non-routine products come from special programs 
or analyses of routine data and are most often 
published in CalCOFI Reports or the peer-
reviewed literature.  Examples of such products 
germane to zooplankton time-series include: 
 
1. Hayward and Venrick (1998) 
2. Chelton et al. (1982)  
3. Roemmich and McGowan (1995) 
4. Mullin et al. (2000) 
5. Laveniegos and Ohman (1999) 
6. Checkley et al. 2000 
7. Rebstock (2001, in press a, b) 
 
Challenges and deficiencies 
 
Characteristics of the CalCOFI time-series that 
warrant consideration include: 
 
1. ‘Gappy’ time-series (uneven temporal 
coverage) 
2. Variable spatial coverage 
3. Method changes 
4. Lack of sampling of microzooplankton and 
picoplankton 
5. Lack of synthesis and modeling 
6. Linkage with other time-series 
7. Difficulty of maintaining support for time- 
series work 
92
Conclusion 
 
CalCOFI has routinely sampled the California 
Current Region since 1949, amassing time-series 
of physical, chemical, and biological samples and 
data.  These time-series have been augmented by 
non-routine investigations. Analysis has occurred 
and will continue to occur.  CalCOFI can be 
enhanced while simultaneously maintaining the 
continuity and integrity of the time-series. 
 
References 
 
Checkley, D.M., Dotson, R.C., and Griffith, D.A.  
2000.  Continuous, underway sampling of 
eggs of Pacific sardine (Sardinops sagax) and 
northern anchovy (Engraulis mordax) in 
spring 1996 and 1997 off southern and central 
California.  Deep-Sea Research Part II-Topical 
Studies in Oceanography 47: 1139-1155. 
Chelton, D.B., Bernal, P.A., and McGowan, J.A.  
1982.  Large-scale interannual physical and 
biological interaction in the California 
Current.  J. Mar. Res. 40: 1095-1125. 
Hayward, T. L., and Venrick, A.L.  1998.  Near-
surface pattern in the California Current: 
coupling between physical and biological 
structure.  Deep-Sea Research Part II-Topical 
Studies in Oceanography 45: 1617-1638. 
Hewitt, R.  1988.  Historical review of the oceanic 
approach to fishery research.  CalCOFI Rep. 
29: 27-41. 
Lavaniegos, B.E., and Ohman, M.D.  1998.  
Hyperiid amphipods as indicators of climate 
change in the California Current. Fourth 
International Crustacean Congress: 
Crustaceans and Biodiversity, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands, Brill. 
Mullin, M.M., Goetz, E., Beaulieu, S.E., and 
Lasker, J.M.  2000.  Comparisons within and 
between years resulting in contrasting 
recruitment of Pacific hake (Merluccius 
productus) in the California Current System.  
Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 57: 1434-1447. 
Rebstock, G.  2001.  Long-term changes in the 
species composition of calanoid copepods off 
southern California.  Ph.D. Dissertation, 
Scripps Institution of Oceanography. La Jolla, 
University of California, San Diego. 
Rebstock, G.  2001  An analysis of a zooplankton 
sampling-gear change in the CalCOFI long-
term monitoring program, with implications 
for copepod population abundance trends.  
Prog. Oceanogr. (in press). 
Rebstock, G.  2001  Long-term stability of species 
composition in calanoid copepods off southern 
California.  Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. (in press). 
Roemmich, D., and McGowan, J.  1995.  Climatic 
warming and the decline of zooplankton in the 
California Current.  Science 267: 1324-1326. 
 
 
Japan Sea time-series:  Qualitative study on lower trophic level ecosystem 
may reveal the process on climate - ecosystem interaction 
 
Sanae Chiba 
Frontier Research System for Global Change, Sumitomo-Hamamatsucho Building 4F, Hamamatsu-cho, 
Tokyo 105-0013, Japan.  E-mail: chibas@frontier.esto.or.jp 
 
Why the Japan Sea? 
 
Despite its small size, the Japan Sea is a so-called 
“Mini Ocean” as it has the characteristics of an 
ocean.  The average depth is over 1,000 m and its 
hydrographic conditions are influenced by large 
oceanic gyres.  Thanks to the small size and semi-
closed feature, the Japan Sea is a “Model Ocean” 
that may give us a good opportunity to study 
climate-ecosystem interaction. 
 
PM line observation 
 
Background 
 
Maizuru Marine Observatory of the Japan 
Meteorological Agency has conducted routine 
oceanographic research cruises along the PM line 
for more than 30 years (Fig. 8).  The description of 
the data set is given in Table 10.  We are 
conducting a study of decadal-scale ecosystem 
93
change at three of the PM stations, which are 
located in the offshore Tsushima Current area. 
 
How? 
 
In the Japan Sea, chlorophyll-a was reported to 
have declined with a corresponding water 
temperature decrease (upper water column mean) 
during the 1980s (Fig. 9).  This is the period when 
the climate/ecosystem regime shifts have been 
observed in vast areas of the North Pacific.  
Changes in zooplankton wet weight follow 
changes in water temperature.  However, the 
observed correlation does not explain PROCESS 
and CONSEQUENCE of the change.  By using 
diatoms and zooplankton species composition data 
of the PM line, we are trying to determine the 
PROCESS and CONSEQUENCE, and the “Let 
the plankton community tell their story” strategy. 
 
Preliminary results 
 
We observed a distinct change in the diatom 
community structure in spring during the 1980s.  
Chlorophyll-a concentration and Chl-a to cell ratio 
were markedly low (Fig. 10), and summer-adapted 
species including Pseudonitzschia seriata 
dominated the diatom community in spring during 
1980s (Fig. 11).  Mixed layer phosphate 
concentration was somewhat high in winter but 
 
Fig. 8 Location of the PM line. 
 
low in spring during the 1980s, indicating that 
nutrient depletion occurred earlier to a level that 
was limiting diatom growth (Fig. 12).  This change 
might subsequently cause a shift of the dominant 
diatom species from the eutrophic-adapted to the 
oligotrophic-adapted.  The water density profile 
between the surface and 300 m showed the 
thickness of the surface Tsushima Current and the 
cold sub-surface water decreasing and increasing, 
respectively, from the late 1970s to the late 1980s, 
resulting in more intensive stratification of the 
upper water column (Fig. 13a).  Increase in 
phosphate gradient between the surface and sub- 
 
Table 10  PM line oceanographic data set  [Source:  Maizuru Marine Observatory, Japan Meteorological 
Agency (JMA);  Ship Observation (Seifu-Maru II-III);  Station PM1 - 9 (location of the stations north of 
the PM6 changed in 1977 and 1996)]. 
Observation items Sampling 
depth 
Period Duration Frequency Sampling gear 
Hydrography 
* water temperature and salinity 
* DO, * pH 
* PO
4
, NO
3
, NO
2 
* Chl-a, pheopigment 
profile 
(0 – up to near 
bottom)   
1972 –  >29yr 4 times /yr Nansen cast or 
CTD cast with 
Niskin bottle 
 
 
Phytoplankton 
* diatom cell number 
* diatom species composition 
surface  
1972 –  
1972-98 
 
>29yr 
 27yr 
- ditto- bucket 
Zooplankton 
* plankton wet weight 
* Chaetognath species composition 
*composition of major 
  zooplankton taxa 
* Copepod comp. (species & size) 
0-150 m tot.  
1972-98 
1972-98 
1991-99 
 
1991-99 
 
27yr 
27yr 
 9yr 
 
 9yr 
- ditto- NORPAC net 
(mesh: 0.33 mm) 
94
 
Fig. 9 Interannual variability of Chl-a and 
water temperature (5 seasons running mean). 
 
 
Fig. 10 Interannual variability of spring Chl-a 
( ) and diatom cell number ( ). 
 
 
Fig. 11 Spatio-temporal distribution of spring 
diatom community.  Black area:  winter adapted 
species dominant;  gray area:  summer adapted 
species dominant. 
 
Fig. 12 (a) Winter PO
4
 within a mixed layer and 
spring Chl a and (b) Spring PO
4
 and Chl-a. 
 
 
Fig. 13 Water temperature (a) and PO
4
 (b) at 
three depths (0, 100, 200 m) (5 seasons running 
mean). 
 
 
surface layers (Fig. 13b) suggested that the 
intensification of stratification might reduce 
nutrient supply to the surface and be responsible 
for the early formation of summer-like conditions. 
 
The sizes of Pseudonitzschia spp. are generally 
smaller than centric diatoms which were 
Winter Type 
community 
Summer type 
community 
95
exclusively dominant before and after the 1980s.  
In addition, Pseudonitzschia spp. were reported to 
be unfavorable food for copepods, the major 
secondary producer.  Considering the decrease in 
particle size and grazing pressure by copepods, the 
functioning of the Biological Carbon Pump might 
be weakened during these periods.  As a next step, 
we will look into the zooplankton species 
composition to test the hypothesis. 
Collective Japan Sea data set 
 
The PM line plankton study is based on data taken 
only at 3 stations.  To reveal the climate change 
and its influence on upper water environment, we 
are collecting data taken in the whole area in the 
Japan Sea (Table 11).  Our goal is to compare the 
Japan Sea results with what happened in the other 
oceanic regions of the North Pacific, and to 
elucidate the large-scale interaction between the 
climate and upper water environment. 
 
Table 11  Japan Sea Collective data set (to be analyzed). 
Observation items Samplin
g depth  
Source Period Duration Sampling gear 
Hydrography 
* water temperature 
* salinity 
* DO, * pH 
* PO
4
, NO
3
, NO
2
,  
   SiO
2
 (less frequent) 
* Chl-a, pheopigment 
profile 
(0 – up 
to near 
bottom) 
Japan Oceanographic 
Data Center (JODC), 
JMA 
1966-98 
 
 
 
 
1974-98 
33yr 
 
 
 
 
25yr 
Nansen cast or 
CTD cast with Niskin 
bottle 
Plankton wet weight 0-150 m 
tot. 
National & local 
Fisheries Research 
Institutes etc. 
(summarized in Hirota 
& Hasegawa 1999,  
Fish. Oceanogr. 8) and 
JODC & JMA 
1966-98 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33yr Marutoku net or 
NORPAC net (mesh: 
0.33 mm) 
Climate 
* solar radiation 
* sea level pressure 
* wind speed, vector 
* wave height 
* cloudiness 
* precipitation (land) 
 JMA (collected by 
Volunteer ships) 
 
 
 
 
JMA, local observatories 
1961-96 36yr  
 
 
Phytoplankton data from the Gulf of Alaska, British Columbia and the Pacific 
coast of the U.S., with emphasis on harmful algal bloom species 
 
Rita Horner 
School of Oceanography, University of Washington, Box 357940, Seattle, WA 98195-7990, U.S.A.   
E-mail: rita@ocean.washington.edu 
 
Gulf of Alaska 
 
As part of the Alaskan Outer Continental Shelf 
Environmental Assessment Program (a program 
designed to provide baseline data on the Alaskan 
continental shelf prior to any possible petroleum 
development), Anderson et al. (1977) compiled 
the available baseline biological and associated 
physical and chemical data.  The objectives were 
to describe the temporal and geographic variation 
96
in phytoplankton standing stock (and species), 
primary production, and related physical and 
chemical factors, and use the data in a model of 
phytoplankton productivity tested with changes in 
physiological constants and external parameters.  
The data go back to 1958 and include cruises to 
Weather Station P from 1959-1970;  American 
Mail Line cruises along a great circle route from 
Seattle to Yokohama in 1968-1972;  and Japanese, 
Russian, and U.S. cruises at various times between 
1958 and 1974 (Fig. 14 and Table 12).  The area 
was divided into geographic zones (Fig. 15) and 
the phytoplankton data were tabulated by season 
for each zone (Fig. 16).  The data are available at 
NODC. 
 
SUPER (SUbarctic Pacific Ecosystem Research 
cruises) 
 
These cruises to Weather Station P (50°N, 145°W; 
Fig. 15, zone 33) in May and August 1984 and 
1988, and June and September 1987, were designed 
to determine why there are no sustained 
phytoplankton blooms in this high nutrient, low 
chlorophyll (HNLC) region.  The results of the 
phytoplankton sampling are found in Horner and 
Booth (1990) and Booth et al. (1993).  The results 
of the whole project are in Miller (1993).  All 
phytoplankton data have been submitted to NODC.   
 
Canadian cruises 
 
A series of cruises from 1950 to the present and 
often including the Station P Line (Fig. 17; 
between the entrance to the Strait of Juan de Fuca 
and Station P) involved Canadian Navy, Coast 
Guard and research ships (e.g., Stephens 1977).  
Both WOCE and Canadian JGOFS programs 
sampled these sites. 
 
Records from 802 samples collected along the 
British Columbia coast between 1980 and 1988 
were examined by Forbes and Denman (1991) 
for the presence of Pseudo-nitzschia species 
(formerly Nitzschia spp.).  These potentially 
toxic species were most frequently found in 
coastal waters inshore of the shelf break off the 
southwest side of Vancouver Island, and were 
rare in the Strait of Georgia and north of 
Vancouver Island (Fig. 18).  Pseudo-nitzschia 
spp., here including both P. pungens and P. 
multiseries, were most common between April 
and October. 
 
Washington cruises 
 
The Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) and 
Department of Energy (DOE) cruises were 
designed to obtain data for a year-around study of 
the water characteristics along the Washington and 
Oregon coasts, with special emphasis on the 
movement and dispersion of freshwater entering 
the system from the Columbia River, and on the 
probable fate of any radioactive material that 
might be associated with it.  Cruises occurred 
frequently between January 1961 and December 
1966 (Table 13).  Phytoplankton species samples 
were collected, but few were analyzed and the 
samples are no longer available.  Chlorophyll and 
primary productivity data have been submitted to 
NODC and are also available in UW Department 
of Oceanography Technical Reports. 
 
 
Fig. 14 Distribution of stations in the eastern 
subarctic Pacific where data were collected during 
one or more springs from 1958-1974 (from 
Anderson et al. 1974). 
 
Fig. 15 Cruises along the Washington/Oregon 
coasts between January 1961 and December 1966 
where biological data were collected. 
97
Table 12 Cruises in the eastern subarctic Pacific between June 1958 and July 1974 used by Anderson et 
al. (1974) in their analysis of the factors affecting the processes of production in the Gulf of Alaska (from 
Anderson et al. 1974). 
List of operations in the eastern subsrctic Pacific between June 1958 and July 1974 which yielded 
biological oceanographic data. [C=chlorophyll-a/m
3
, C’=chlorophyll-a/m
2
, Ph=phaeopigments/m
3
, 
Ph’=phaeopigments/m
2
, P=primary productivity/m
3
, P’=primary productivity/m
2
, Z=zooplankton, 
Sp=phytoplankton species, O=oxygen, N=nitrate, N’=nitrite, N’’=ammonia, Pp=phosphate, S=silicate, 
D=mixed layer depth, R=total incident radiation] 
 
Operation  Period  Zone   Type of Data  Source 
Weather Station “P” 
cruises 593 to 614 1959 to 1961 33   C C’ P P’ Z O S R  McAllister, 1962 
cruises 615 to 634 1961 to 1963 33   C C’ P P’ Z O S R  Stephens, 1964 
cruises 635 to 655 1964 to 1966 33   C P Z O N R  Stephens, 1966 
cruises 661 to 674 1966 to 1967 33   C P O N R   Stephens, 1968 
cruises 681 to 706 1968 to 1970 33   C P N R   Stephens, 1970 
 
Ships of Opportunity 
cruises 02 to 43 1968 to 1972 15, 19, 20, 22-34, 36-42 C P Sp N Pp S D R  Anderson, unpubl. 
       1958 
Brown Bear 199 June to July 20, 32, 37   O Pp D   Fleming, 1959 
H.M. Smith 46 Aug. to Sept. 24, 25, 29, 30, 31, 38, 39, 40 C P Z O   McGary and Graham, 1960 
Vityaz 29  Oct. to Dec. 19-21, 24, 27, 29, 30, 32, 35, P Z N Pp R  Koblentz-Mishke, 1969 
    37, 41, 42 
       1959 
Oshoro Maru 44 June  22, 25, 29   Z O Pp   Faculty of Fisheries, 1960 
Brown Bear 235 July to Aug. 15, 19, 20, 23, 24, 27, 28, 34 Sp Z O Pp S  Stephens, 1964 
36 
     1960 
Oshoro Maru 46 June to Aug. 18-20, 22-24, 29-32, 35, 37, 38 Sp Z O Pp S  Faculty of Fisheries, 1961 
Motoda and Kawamura, 1963  
       1961 
Oshawa 1961 June  19, 33, 36, 37  C O N S   Antia et al., 1962 
Oshoro Maru 048 June  22, 29   Z   Faculty of Fisheries, 1962 
Pioneer 66  Sept. to Oct. 22, 23, 26, 29, 30, 38, 39, 42 C P Z   Doty, 1964 
     1962 
Oshawa 1962 April  42   C N S   Antia et al., 1962 
       1964 
G. B. Reed 164 Jan. to Feb. 19, 20, 21, 24, 27, 28, 31-37 C   Stephens, 1964 
    4 2 
Agassiz Ursa Major Aug. to Sept. 16, 24, 27, 31, 40  C sp Z O N’ Pp S  University of California, 1967 
          Venrick, 1969 
       1965 
Oshoro Maru 014 June  22, 24, 25, 29  Z   Faculty of Fisheries, 1966 
       1966 
Argo Zetes I January  16, 24, 27, 31, 40  C Ph Sp Z O N N’ Pp S University of California, 1970 
          Venrick, 1969 
Straits of Georgia Feb. to Sept. 20   C P N N’ N’’ Pp S  Fulton, et al., 1967 
Kelez 166  March  22, 25, 29   C, C’ P, P’ Z Pp S D R Larrance, 1971b 
Saanich Inlet May to July 20   C P Z N N’ Pp S  Stephens, et al., 1967 
Paragon 266 June  22, 25, 29   C C’ P P’ Z Pp S D R  Larrance, 1971b 
Kelez 366  September  20, 22, 29-32, 37, 38  C C’ P P’ Z N Pp S D R Larrance, 1971b 
       1967 
Kelez 167  Jan. to Fed. 23, 26, 30   C C’ P P’ Z N Pp S D R Larrance, 1971b 
T. G. Thompson 012 Feb. to Mar. 17-19, 24, 27, 28, 34-36 C C’ P P’ O N Pp S  Anderson, unpubl. 
Kelez 367  April  19, 20, 36, 37  C D   Larrance, 1971b 
Kelez 567  June to July 16, 22-25, 29  C C’ P P’ Z N Pp S D R Larrance, 1971b 
Kelez 667  July  22   C C’ P P’ Z N Pp S D R Larrance, 1971b 
Kelez 767  August  22, 25, 29   C C’ P P’ Z N Pp S D R Larrance, 1971b 
       1968 
Kelez 268  May  23, 26, 30   C C’ Pp S D  Larrance, 1971b 
Oshoro Maru 028 June to July 17, 18, 22   Z O Pp   Faculty of Fisheries, 1969 
 
98
Table 12 (continued) 
 
       1969 
Endeavour Trans  March to April 20, 29-32, 37  C P P’ Z Pp N S D R  Anon, 1970 
Paciffic 
Vityaz 045  May to June 17, 18, 23, 35  C P P’   Anon, 1973 
Hakuho Maru 694 August  31   C Sp   Takahashi et al., 1972 
          Asaoka, unpubl. 
       1970 
Hakuho Maru 702 May  19, 32, 34, 37, 41  O N N’ Pp S  Horibe, 1971 
Oshoro Maru 037 June to July 16, 17, 18, 22- 24, 27, 31-34,  C Z Pp N N’ S  Faculty of Fisheries, 1972 
    36, 37 
A c o n a          G o e r i n g , S h i e l s , a n d P a t t o n 
Cruises 113, 117,  May to Dec. 17   C C’ P P’ Ph Ph’ Sp O N N’’ (1973) 
             122, 125      Pp S   Goering, Patton, and Shiels 
          (1973) 
          Hood and Patton (1973) 
       1972 
Acona 128, 131 March to April 17   C C’ P P’ Ph Ph’ Sp O N N’’ Muench and Nebert (1973) 
       P p S   H o r n e r et al., 1973 
T. G. Thompson 072 September  24, 27, 31, 40  C C’ P P’ Ph Ph’ O N N’ N’’ Anderson, unpubl. 
       P p S R    
       1973 
T. G. Thompson 082 August  32, 33, 41   C C’ Ph Ph’ O N N’ N’’ Anderson, unpubl. 
       P p S R   
       1974 
Hakuho Maru 742 May  29   C O N N’ N’’ Pp S  Kuroki, 1975 
T. G. Thompson 091 July  36   C Ph   Anderson, unpubl. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 16 Distribution of Pseudo-nitzschia sp. in the upper 10 m of the water column between January 
and July 1966 and 1969-1972 (from Anderson et al. 1974). 
 
99
Table 13 Cruises along the Washington/Oregon coasts between January 1961 and December 1966 where 
biological data were collected. 
List of AEC/DOE cruises, January 1961-December 1966:  Washington and Oregon coast.  Data have 
been submitted to NODC, also in University of Washington, Department of Oceanography Technical 
Reports.  Abbreviations:  T - temperature; Sal - salinity; O - dissolved oxygen; N - nitrogen; P - 
phosphate; S - silicate; Sp - phytoplankton species; PP - primary productivity; Ch - chlorophyll; Z - 
zooplankton. 
Cruise   Dates   Approx. Area   Variables Sampled 
Brown Bear 275  10-27/I 1961  44-48 N, 124-126 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          S p , P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 280  7-24/III 1961  45-48 N, 124-125 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S, 
          P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 287  8-24/V 1961  44-48 N, 124-127 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 288  9-16/VI 1961  45-48 N, 124-127 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 290  6-25/VI 1961  43-48 N, 124-128.5 W  T, Sal, O, N. P, S,  
         S p , P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 291  28/VII-13/VIII 1961 43-48 N, 124-127 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S, 
          S p , P P , C h 
Brown Bear 292  14-20/VIII 1961  45-48 N, 124-128 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S, 
          S p , P P , C h 
Brown Bear 293  14/IX-20/X 1961  40-48 N, 124-132 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S, 
          S p , P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 297  28/XI-18/XII 1961 42-48 N, 124-128 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          S p , P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 299  23/I-7/II 1962  44-48 N, 124-127 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 304  27/III-12/IV 1962 43-48 N, 124-128 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S, 
          P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 308  7-19/VI 1962  45-48 N, 124-126 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S, 
          P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 310  10-23/VII 1962  42-48 N, 124-130 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S, 
          P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 311  24/VII-14/VIII 1962 40-48 N, 124-132 W  T., Sal, O, N, P, S, 
          P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 312  14/IX-18/X 1962  42-48 N, 124-131 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S, 
          P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 318  27/II-20/III 1963  44-48 N, 124-130 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S, 
          P P , C h , Z 
Acona 6301-E  24-25/I 1963  44 50 N, 124-126 W  Sal, N, P, S, PP, Ch 
Oshawa 001  12-26/III 1963  43-48 N, 124-130 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S, 
          P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 320  28/III-10/IV 1963 44-48 N, 124-130 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S, 
          P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 322  16/IV-1/5 1963  43-48 N, 124-130 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 323  13-19/V 1963  45-47 50 N, 124-130 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 324  21/V-7/VI 1963  43 50-48 N, 124-128 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 326  13-23/VI 1963  45 50-48 N, 124-127 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          P P , C h , Z 
100
Table 13 (continued) 
 
Oshawa 003  17-30/VI 1963  41 50-46 N, 124-130 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 329  8-19/VII 1963  45 N, 130 W   T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          P P , C h , Z 
Hoh 73   7-25/VIII 1963  46 60-47 N, 124 W  T, Sal, O 
Brown Bear 331  12-24/VIII 1963  45-47 N, 124-126 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 332  24-28/VIII 1963  46 N, 124-130 W   T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 333  28/VIII-14/IX 1963 46-47 N, 124-124 60 W  T, Sal, O,  
Brown Bear 335  20/IX - 12/X 1963 43-48 N, 124-130 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 339  3-12/XII 1963  45 50-48 N, 124-125 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          P P , C h , Z 
Oshawa 004  10-20/XII 1963  44-48 N, 124-139 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 341  11-27/II 1964  46 50-48 N, 124-128 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          C h , Z 
Oshawa 005  13-25/II 1964  46 50-48 N, 124-128 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S 
Brown Bear 344  18/V-5/VI 1964  45-48 N, 124-145 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 345  7-10/VI 1964  46 N, 124-126 W   T, Sal, O 
Brown Bear 349  7-31/VIII 1964  45-48 N, 124-141 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          P P , C h , Z 
Oshawa 006  15-28/X 1964  45-48 N, 124-139 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 352  11-28/I 1965  45-48 N, 124-141 W  T, Sal, O, P, N, S,  
          P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 353  9-19/II 1965  46-48 N, 124-125 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S 
Brown Bear 354  19-26/III 1965  46 N, 124-125 W   T, Sal, O, N, P, S 
Brown Bear 355  29/III-6/IV 1965  46 N, 124-126 W   T, Sal, O, N, P, S 
Brown Bear 356  9-12/IV 1965  46 N, 124-125 W   T, Sal, O 
Brown Bear 357  14-28/IV 1965  45-47 50 N, 124-140 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 365  11-20/VI 1965  46-48 N, 124-125 W  T, Sal O, N, P, S 
Brown Bear 367  2-7/VII 1965  46.7-48 N, 124-126 W  T, Sal O 
Brown Bear 368  4-22/VIII 1965  45-48 N, 124-140 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          P P , C h , Z 
Brown Bear 371  14-26/IX 1965  46 N, 124-125 W   T, Sal, O, N, P, S 
Brown Bear 380  3-18/XI 1965  45-47 N, 124-140 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          P P , C h , Z 
Oceaneer 001  15-20/VI 1966  46 N, 123-124-40 W  T, Sal O, N, P, S 
Thomas G.   2-12/VIII 1966  44 50-48 N, 124-130 W  T, Sal O, N, P, S 
   Thompson 002         PP, Ch, Z 
Oceaneer 006  13-23/VIII 1966  46 N, 122-124 W   T, Sal, O, N, P, S 
Thomas G.  25/XI-1/XII 1966  46-48 N, 124-126 W  T, Sal, O 
   Thompson 005 
 
 
101
 
Fig. 17 Location of Ocean Weather Station P 
and Line P (from IOS website). 
 
The Energy Research and Development 
Administration (ERDA) sponsored a biological 
oceanography program emphasizing waters over 
the continental shelf off Washington (Table 14).  
Cruises between July 1974 and June 1982 
provided seasonal information on physical, 
chemical and biological properties.  The Copalis 
Line (Fig. 19) was a series of closely spaced 
stations along 47°07'N from about 2 km off 
Copalis Head to 126°30'W, about 185 km 
offshore.  Chlorophyll and primary productivity 
data have been submitted to NODC.  
Phytoplankton species samples were collected, but 
few were analyzed.  These samples are also no 
longer available.  The results of this study are in 
Landry and Hickey (1989). 
 
Surf diatom studies (1970-1982) 
 
Beach sampling of the surf diatom community 
occurred primarily at Copalis Beach, WA, from 
September 1970-1982 (Fig. 19).  This study was 
the first attempt to achieve a comprehensive 
understanding of surf-diatom blooms.  For most of 
that time, sampling was done every 3 weeks.  
From June 1977 to August 1978, 12 beaches in 
Oregon (Fig. 20) were sampled on a monthly 
basis.  A series of papers about the physiology and 
ecology of the surf diatoms was published starting 
in 1970 (see references in Lewin et al. 1989).  
During earlier studies on surf diatoms beginning in 
the 1920s and throughout the Lewin study, 
Pseudo-nitzschia was never mentioned as a genus 
in the surf samples.   
 
 
Fig. 18 Top panel:  Location of all phyto-
plankton samples collected from 1980 to 1988 
along the British Columbia coast.  Inset shows 
detail of the southern Vancouver Island area.  
Bottom panel:  Location of all samples containing 
Nitzschia pungens with abundances (cells L
-1
) 
indicated by circle diameters.  Inset as on top 
panel, with relative abundance indicated by circle 
diameters (from Forbes and Denman 1991). 
 
102
Table 14 Cruises along the Washington coast between July 1974 and June 1982 (primarily the Copalis 
Line) where biological data were collected. 
List of U.S. Energy Research & Development Administration (ERDA) cruises July 1974-June 1982, off 
the Washington (mostly Copalis line) and Oregon (few Newport line) coasts.  Data have been submitted 
to NODC, also in data reports from the School of Oceanography, University of Washington.  
Abbreviations for variables:  T - temperature; Sal - salinity, O - dissolved oxygen, N - nitrogen, P - 
phosphate, S - silicate, Sp - phytoplankton species, PP - primary productivity, Ch - chlorophyll, Z - 
zooplankton (no distinction is made here between macrozooplankton and microzooplankton), Nek - 
nekton. 
 
Cruise   Dates   Approx. Area   Variables Sampled 
 
TGT TT-091  8-29/VII 1974  47 07.4 N, 124 13-126 30 W T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          S p , P P , C h , Z , N e k 
Yaquina YA 199  10-13/I 1975  46 49-47 08 N, 124 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          S p , P P , C h 
TGT TT-096  29/III-3/IV 1975  47 07 N, 124 13-126 30 W T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          S p , P P , C h , Z 
TGT TT-100  11-18/VII 1975  47 07 N, 122-126 30 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          S p , P P , C h , Z  
TGT TT-105  23-27/X 1975  47 07 N, 124-125 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          S p , P P , C h , Z 
TGT TT-111  15/IX-5/X 1976  47 07 N, 124-126 30 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          S p ( g e n u s ) , P P , C h , Z 
TGT TT-112  7-13/I 1977  47 07 N, 124-126 30 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          S p ( g e n u s ) , P P , C h , Z 
TGT TT-116  14-22/IV 1977  47 07 N, 124-126 30 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S, Sp  
          ( g e n u s ) , P P , C h , Z 
TGT TT-122  5-11/VIII 1977  47 07 N, 124-126 30W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          S p ( g e n u s ) , P P , C h , Z 
Cayuse CY-378  30/III-5/IV 1978  47 07 N, 124-125 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          S p , P P , C h 
Cayuse CY 678  8-14/VI 1978  47 07 N, 124-126 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          S p , P P , C h 
Cayuse CY 978  6-11/IX 1978  47 07 N, 124-126 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          S p , P P , C h 
TGT TT-135  16-24/X 1978  47 07 N, 124-126 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          S p , P P , C h 
TGT TT-140  16/VII-2/VIII 1979 47 32 N, 124-125 45 W  T, Sal, O, N, P, S, 
      47 20 N, 124-125 45 W  Sp, PP, Ch, Z 
      47 07 N, 124-125 45 W 
Wecoma W8009c24/IX-13/X 1980   47 07-47 30 N, 124-125 45 W T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          S p , P P , C h , Z 
TGT TT-160  17/VIII-7/IX 1981 46 40-47 40 N, 124-125 20 W T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          S p , P P , C h , Z 
Cayuse C8206  9-26/VI 1982  46 40-47 50 N, 124-125 45 W T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          S p , P P , C h 
Wecoma W8206  11-25/VI 1982  44 40-47 07 N, 124-125 10 W T, Sal, O, N, P, S,  
          S p , P P , C h 
 
103
Horner/Postel beach samples 
 
Net samples were collected irregularly at 5 
beaches (Kalaloch North, Kalaloch South, 
Copalis, Ocean Shores, Grayland) from 1990 to 
May 1997, and twice monthly from May 1997 to 
January 2000 (Fig. 21).  The interest was 
primarily in potentially toxic species, e.g., 
Alexandrium spp. and Pseudo-nitzschia spp., but 
lists were made of all species present and 
dominant species identified for each sample.  No 
samples were collected for cell enumeration.  
Temperature, salinity and nutrients were 
measured at each site.  Pseudo-nitzschia spp. 
were regularly found from April through 
October, as in British Columbia, while 
Alexandrium spp. were rare from May through 
August.   
 
 
 
Fig. 20 Beaches sampled during surf-zone 
studies from 1970-1982 indicating the average cell 
density of the three dominant diatoms.  Note 
names have been changed recently:  Asterionella 
socialis is now Asterionellopsis socialis; 
Chaetoceros armatum is now Attheya armatus  
(from Garver 1979). 
 
Fig. 19 Location of Copalis Line transect 
sampled during ERDA cruises between July 1974 
and June 1982. 
 
 
Fig. 21 Beaches sampled by Horner and Postel 
from 1990-2000, and by ORHAB 2000-present. 
104
 
Fig. 22 Distribution of shellfish biotoxins in 
northern California during August 1997 (from 
California Department of Health Services Tech. 
Rep. No. 97-20, 97-21). 
 
ORHAB (Olympic Region Harmful Algal 
Bloom program) 
 
This program started in July 2000 and will run for 
at least 5 years.  The emphasis is on the 
occurrence of Pseudo-nitzschia spp. and domoic 
acid, because the beaches are all major razor clam 
(Siliqua patula Dixon) recreational harvesting 
sites.  Four beaches (4 of the 5 studied by Horner 
and Postel;  Fig. 20) are sampled twice per week 
in April through November, and twice per month 
in December through March.  In addition to 
species identification and cell numbers, domoic 
acid levels, chlorophyll concentration, 
temperature, salinity and nutrients are determined.  
The program is sponsored by NOAA. 
 
Fig. 23 Distribution of toxin-producing phyto-
plankton in northern California during August 
1997 (from California Department of Health 
Services Tech. Rep. No. 97-20, 97-21). 
 
California Department of Health Services 
 
A phytoplankton and toxin monitoring program 
was started in about 1993 by the California 
Department of Health Services.  Samples are 
collected on a weekly basis at a number of sites, 
ranging from about 24-40, depending on the 
availability of volunteer samplers. Samplers 
include state and federal agencies, academic 
institutions and shellfish growers.  Samples are 
sent to the DHS lab in Berkeley where they are 
analyzed for phytoplankton species.  A monthly, 
now quarterly, newsletter is published showing 
organism numbers and toxin levels by site  
(Figs. 22 and 23).  Few incidences of PSP toxins 
have been reported since the program started, but 
105
all were indicated by higher numbers of 
Alexandrium in the monitoring samples. 
 
Monterey Bay, CA, data 
 
Bolin and Abbott (1963) reported on hydrography, 
phytoplankton settling volumes, and some 
identifications to genus from early CalCOFI data 
(1954-1960).  Samples were collected more or less 
weekly at 6 stations throughout the bay.  They 
compared genus abundance with temperature and 
found no clear indication that total phytoplankton 
volumes were influenced by long-term temperature 
trends, but some genera were more abundant in 
warm years.  Garrison (1979) summarized early 
phytoplankton data and examined phytoplankton 
samples from 1976-1977.  Data are provided on 
chlorophyll, recurrent species groups, species 
succession and species diversity.  Additional data 
are to be found in Schrader (1981).  Villac et al. 
(1993a, b) provided information on the presence of 
Pseudo-nitzschia spp. from the U.S. west coast 
including Monterey Bay.  Walz et al. (1994) also 
included information on Pseudo-nitzschia spp.  
 
Toxin in shellfish monitoring 
 
Toxins produced by phytoplankton are monitored in 
shellfish (usually mussels) by state and provincial 
health agencies and lead to the closure of 
recreational and commercial harvests of shellfish 
when toxins reach 80 µg per 100 g of shellfish 
tissue for paralytic shellfish poisoning and 20 µg 
per gram of shellfish tissue for domoic acid.  The 
levels are used worldwide.  On the North American 
west coast, the regulatory agencies are the Alaska 
Department of Environmental Conservation, 
Canada Food Inspection Agency, Washington 
Department of Health, Oregon Department of 
Agriculture, and the California Department of 
Health Services. 
 
References 
 
Anderson, G.C., and Munson, R.E.  1972.  
Primary productivity studies using merchant 
vessels in the North Pacific Ocean.  In 
Biological Oceanography of the Northern 
North Pacific Ocean.  Edited by A.Y. 
Takenouti et al. Idemitsu Shoten, Tokyo, pp. 
245-251. 
Anderson, G.C., Lam, R.K. Booth, B.C., and 
Glass, J.M.  1977.  A description and 
numerical analysis of the factors affecting the 
processes of production in the Gulf of Alaska. 
Special Report No. 76, Department of 
Oceanography, University of Washington, 
Seattle. 321p.  
Bolin, R.L., and Abbott, D.P.  1963.  Studies on 
the marine climate and phytoplankton of the 
central coastal area of California, 1959-1960.  
CalCOFI. Rep. 9: 23-45. 
Booth, B.C.  1981.  Vernal phytoplankton 
community in the eastern subarctic Pacific:  
predominant species.  In  Proceedings of the 
Sixth Symposium on Recent and Fossil 
Diatoms.  Edited by R. Ross. Otto Koeltz 
Science Publ., Koenigstein, pp. 339-358. 
Booth, B.C., Lewin, J., and Postel, J.R.  1993.  
Temporal variation in the structure of auto-
trophic and heterotrophic communities in the 
subarctic Pacific.  Prog. Oceanogr. 32: 57-99. 
Clemons, M.J., and Miller, C.B.  1984.  Blooms of 
large diatoms in the oceanic subarctic Pacific.  
Deep-Sea Res. 31: 85-95. 
Forbes, J.R., and Denman, K.L.  1991.  
Distribution of Nitzschia pungens in coastal 
waters of British Columbia.  Can. J. Fish. 
Aquat. Sci. 48: 960-967. 
Garrison, D.L.  1979.  Monterey Bay 
phytoplankton. 1. Seasonal cycles of phyto-
plankton assemblages.  J. Plankton Res. 1: 
241-256. 
Garver, J.L.  1979.  A survey of surf diatom 
blooms along the Oregon coast.  M.S. thesis, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA. 167p. 
Horner, R.A., and Booth, B.C.  1990.  Temporal 
distribution of diatoms in the eastern subarctic 
Pacific Ocean.  In  Contributions to the 
Knowledge of Microalgae particularly 
Diatoms.  Edited by U. Geissler et al. J. 
Cramer, Berlin, pp. 189-197. 
Horner, R.A., and Postel, J.R.  1993.  Toxic 
diatoms in western Washington waters (U.S. 
west coast).  Hydrobiologia 269/270:197-205. 
Landry, M.R., and Hickey, B.M.  1989.  Coastal 
Oceanography of Washington and Oregon. 
Elsevier Oceanography Series 47, Elsevier, 
Amsterdam. 
Lewin, J., Shaefer, C.T., and Winter, D.F.  1989.  
Surf-zone ecology and dynamics.  In  Coastal 
Oceanography of Washington and Oregon 
106
Edited by M.R. Landry, and B.M. Hickey. 
Elsevier Oceanography Series 47, Elsevier, 
Amsterdam, pp. 567-594. 
Miller, C.B. (ed.)  1993.  Pelagic ecodynamics in 
the Gulf of Alaska.  Results from the SUPER 
Project.  Prog. Oceanogr. 32: 1-358. 
Schrader, G.C.  1981.  Seasonal cycles of 
phytoplankton in relation to the hydrography 
of Monterey Bay.  Moss Landing Mar. Lab. 
Tech. Publ. 81-2. 
Stephens, K.  1977.  Primary productivity data 
from weatherships occupying Ocean Station P 
1969 to 1975.  Can. Fish. Mar. Service Data 
Rep. No. 38.  88p. 
Villac, M.C., Roelke, D.L. Chavez, F.P., 
Cifuentes, L.A., and Fryxell, G.A.  1993a.  
Pseudonitzschia australis Frenguelli and 
related species from the west coast of the 
U.S.A.: Occurrence and domoic acid 
production.  J. Shellfish Res. 12: 457-465. 
Villac, M.C., Roelke, D.L., Villareal, T.A., and 
Fryxell, G.A.  1993b.  Comparison of two 
domoic acid-producing diatoms:  A review.  
Hydrobiologia 269/270: 213-224. 
Walz, P.M. and others.  1994.  Domoic acid 
producing diatom blooms in Monterey Bay, 
CA: 1991-1993.  Nat. Toxins 2:271-279. 
 
 
Physical and lower-trophic level data time-series in the Mixed Water Region 
 
Shin-ichi Ito  
Fisheries Oceanography, Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute, 3-27-5 Shinhama, Shiogama, 
Miyagi 085-080, Japan.  E-mail: goito@myg.affrc.go.jp 
 
Between the Oyashio and Kuroshio fronts, there 
are a lot of eddies and streamers and they make 
complicated ocean structures.  Thus, the Oyashio-
Kuroshio inter-frontal zone is called the Mixed 
Water Region (MWR).  Because the small-large 
scale frontal structures are good fishing grounds, 
many observations have been made in the MWR, 
of which many were cooperative.  For example, all 
temperature data observed in the MWR have been 
exchanged in near-real time within four major 
organizations: Japan Meteorological Agency, 
Japan Coast Guard, Japan Defense Force, and 
Japan Fisheries Agency.  Using these data, 
Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute 
(TNFRI) has prepared the MWR temperature 
maps and identified some indices for the major 
ocean structures in the MWR.  TNFRI has also 
maintained some historical observation lines and 
stations.  These time-series are introduced below. 
 
Physical oceanographic data time-series 
 
Off-Tohoku temperature maps and gridded data 
 
TNFRI has produced the off-Tohoku temperature 
maps (Tohoku is the district name of the north-
eastern part of the main island in Japan - Honshu) 
using all temperature data observed in the MWR.  
The target domain is 140-159°E and 34-45°N 
(Fig. 24).  Historically, 100 m depth isotherms 
have been drawn monthly by hand since 1944.  
Now we are archiving “paper” data sets to 
magnetic computer devices.  From archived data, 
we are making grid data sets with a 5-minute 
resolution for both longitude and latitude using the 
flex Gaussian interpolation method (Ito and 
Shimizu 1997).  We are also re-drawing the 
temperature maps at 0 m, 50 m, 200 m, 300 m, and 
400 m, using those gridded data.  Some 
temperature maps and the locations of observation 
points (Fig. 25) are already available on our web 
site (http://ss.myg.affrc.go.jp/~goito/temp/temp. 
html). 
 
Time-series of indices for the water mass fronts 
 
From the off-Tohoku temperature maps, we have 
created indices for the major water mass fronts:  
the southern limit latitude and its longitude of the 
Oyashio First and Second Intrusions, the northern 
limit latitude of Kuroshio Extension, and the 
eastern limit longitude of Tsugaru Warm Water 
Current.  Kawai (1972) reported that the values of 
the isotherm, which indicate the Oyashio front, 
change seasonally from 5 to 8ºC at 100 m depth.  
But TNFRI has used a simpler definition of the 
107
Oyashio front:  a 5ºC isotherm at 100 m depth.  
We have identified the southern limit latitude and 
its longitude of the Oyashio First and Second 
Intrusions, as well as the southern limit latitude 
and its longitude of Oyashio water in the Oyashio 
First and Second Intrusion area (Figs. 26 and 27).  
The seasonal and interannual variability of the 
southern limit latitude of the Oyashio First 
Intrusion has already been investigated by Ogawa 
(1987, 1989), and the time-series presented here is 
the extended version of his time-series. 
 
 
Fig. 25 An example (September 1999) of the 
distribution of observation points in the Mixed 
Water Region. 
 
 
Fig. 26 Time-series of the Oyashio southern 
limit latitude index for First Intrusion (a), Second 
Intrusion (b), Oyashio water in the First Intrusion 
area (c), and Oyashio water in the Second 
Intrusion area (d). 
42
40
38
36
42
40
38
36
42
40
38
36
42
40
38
36
Latitude (˚N) Latitude (˚N) Latitude (˚N) Latitude (˚N)
1960	 1970	 1980	 1990	 2000
1960	 1970	 1980	 1990	 2000
1960	 1970	 1980	 1990	 2000
1960	 1970	 1980	 1990	 2000
Longitude (°E)
146
144
142
140
146
144
142
140
150
148
146
144
150
148
146
144
Longitude (°E) Longitude (°E) Longitude (˚E)
1960	 1970	 1980	 1990	 2000
1960	 1970	 1980	 1990	 2000
1960	 1970	 1980	 1990	 2000
1960	 1970	 1980	 1990	 2000
 
Fig. 27 Time-series of the longitude index of 
Oyashio southern limit points for First Intrusion 
(a), Second Intrusion (b), Oyashio water in the 
First Intrusion area (c), and Oyashio water in the 
Second Intrusion area (d). 
 
Fig. 24 An example of a off-Tohoku 
temperature map by TNFRI.  This map shows 
temperature at 100 m depth in September 1999. 
44
42
40
38
36
108
 
Fig. 28 Time-series of the northern limit latitude 
of the Kuroshio Extension in the Japan coastal 
area (west of 164°E). 
 
 
Fig. 29 Time-series of the eastern limit 
longitude of the Tsugaru Warm Water Current. 
 
 
Fig. 30 Repeated observation lines in the Mixed 
Water Region.  Red lines denote nearly-monthly- 
repeated observed lines, green lines denote 
seasonally-repeated observed lines, and the black 
line denotes annually observed line.  
The northern limit latitude of Kuroshio Extension 
(KE) (Fig. 28) has been identified using a 14ºC 
isotherm at 200 m depth according to Kawai 
(1969).  The characteristics of this KE index were 
investigated by Kawai (1969) and Murakami 
(1993).  The eastern limit longitude of the Tsugaru 
Warm Water Current (Fig. 29) has also been 
identified from the strongest temperature gradient 
at 100 m depth. 
 
Repeated observation line 
 
TNFRI has maintained a repeated observation line 
along 37ºN, which extends from the coast of Japan 
to 164ºE.  The line has been observed once a year 
(May-June) since 1983.  TNFRI also set a repeated 
observation line named OICE (Oyashio Intensive 
observation line off Cape Erimo) that coincides 
with the TOPEX/POSEIDON orbit.  Other 
organizations have also maintained repeated 
observation lines:  A-line (Hokkaido National 
Fisheries Research Institute), 144ºE-line (Hako-
date Marine Observatory), and PH-line (Hakodate 
Marine Observatory).  Many prefectural fisheries 
institutions have maintained coastal observation 
lines around Japan since 1965, and these data are 
archived in JODC and NODC (Fig. 30). 
 
Phytoplankton time-series data 
 
On the 37ºN-line, we have observed surface Chl-a 
concentrations once a year (May or June) since 
1988.  We have routinely measured surface and 
sub-surface nutrients and Chl-a concentrations, 
and optionally observed other biological 
parameters (phytoplankton species, primarily 
production, micro-zooplankton abundance, 
zooplankton species, micronekton, etc.) on the 
OICE-line since 1997.  Other organizations have 
also maintained repeated observation lines: A-line 
(Hokkaido National Fisheries Research Institute), 
PH-line (Hakodate Marine Observatory), and 
144ºE-line (Hakodate Marine Observatory).   
 
Ito et al. (2001) have analyzed the interannual 
variability of Chl-a concentrations along the 
144ºE-line by using a principal components 
analysis.  The results showed strong spring blooms 
in 1991 and 1992 in the Oyashio region (Fig. 31).  
In those years, the Oyashio flowed narrowly in the 
 
109
Latitude (˚N)
1960	 1970	 1980	 1990	 2000
Longitude (˚E)
 
Fig. 31 The first principal component for the 
spring Chl-a concentrations on 144ºE-line and its 
variability.  The contribution of the first 
component is 67%. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
Fig. 32 Composite temperature field on the 
144ºE-line for strong boom years (a) and the other 
years (b). 
coastal region of Hokkaido, and the cold 
intermediate water penetrated in the sub-surface 
layer, while the Oyashio broadened offshore, and 
the area of the cold intermediate water shrunk in 
the other years (Fig. 32).  This result shows the 
importance of the Oyashio structure to the spring 
bloom in the Oyashio region.  Thus, the repeated 
observation lines for both physical and biological 
parameters are needed to clarify the mechanism of 
the lower trophic level activities in the MWR. 
 
Zooplankton time-series data 
 
TNFRI and other organizations have collected 
zooplankton samples since 1951.  The samples 
were taken by vertical hauling of a conventional 
net, the so called Marutoku net (net opening 45 
cm, mesh aperture 0.33 mm) from 150 m depth to 
the surface.  Odate (1994) compiled a total of 
17,242 zooplankton samples in the Tohoku Sea 
area between 1951 and 1990, and examined the 
seasonal and interannual variability of wet weight.  
The data was also archived on a CD-ROM by 
MIRC (Marine Information Research Center) as 
“Dataset of Zooplankton Biomass in the Western 
North Pacific Ocean 1951-1990 - K. ODATE 
Collection” (the distribution of the sampling points 
is shown in Figure 33).  These observations had 
been carried out until 1994, but since 1997, only a 
small portion of observations has been maintained.  
Though this kind of long-term monitoring should 
be done by a suitable organization, in reality a few 
people or only one person maintains the activity 
solely.  The system should be reconstructed to 
maintain the monitoring systems for the long-term. 
 
References 
 
Ito, S., and Shimizu, Y.  1997.  Distribution 
patterns of temperature data and a method to 
draw isotherms in the Tohoku Offshore Area.  
Bull. TNFRI 59: 163-170. 
Ito, S., Miyao, T., and Kishi, M.  2001.  
Interannual variability of Chl-a concentration 
and its relation to the coastal Oyashio 
intrusion (in preparation). 
Kawai, H.  1969.  Statistical estimation of 
isotherms indicative of the Kuroshio axis.  
Deep-Sea Res., Suppl. 16: 109-115. 
 
110
 
Fig. 33 Distribution of the Odate data (after “Dataset of Zooplankton Biomass in the Western North 
Pacific Ocean 1951-1990 - K.ODATE Collection”) 
 
Kawai, H.  1972.  Oceanography of Kuroshio and 
Oyashio.  Physical Oceanography II: 129-321. 
Murakami, M.  1993.  On the 100 meter depth 
temperature indicative of the Kuroshio 
Extension axis in Tohoku area.  Umi no 
Kenkyu 2: 343-349. 
Odate, K.  1994.  Zooplankton Biomass and its 
Long-Term Variation in the Western North 
Pacific Ocean, Tohoku Sea Area, Japan. Bull. 
TNFRI 56: 115-173. 
Ogawa, Y., Hirai, M., and Yasuda, I.  1987.  
Fluctuations of the First Oyashio Intrusion and 
it’s influences on coastal fishery-resources.  
Bull. TNFRI 49: 1-15. 
Ogawa, Y.  1989.  Variations in latitude at the 
southern limit of the First Oyashio Intrusion.
 
 
Monitoring system and long-term trend of zooplankton in the Korean waters 
 
Young-Shil Kang 
National Fisheries Research and Development Institute, 408-1 Shirang-ri, Kijang-gun, Pusan 619-900, 
Republic of Korea.  E-mail: yskang@haema.nfrda.re.kr 
 
Monitoring system 
 
Oceanographic surveys have been conducted at 
175 stations (22 lines) in the Korean waters since 
1965 (Fig. 34).  The surveys are focused on 
understanding oceanographic conditions and 
finding fishing grounds.  Additionally, many 
special environmental and oceanographic surveys 
were carried out in the limited coastal area, the 
East-China Sea and the Bering Sea etc., for a 
shorter time.  These surveys were not only for 
extending and evaluating potential fishing 
111
45˚N
125˚E	 130˚E	 135˚E	 140˚E	 145˚E	 150˚E	 155˚E	 160˚E	 165˚E	 170˚E	 175˚E	 180˚E
40˚N
35˚N
30˚N
25˚N
20˚N
grounds, but also to assess marine environmental 
quality.  Table 15 summarizes monitoring 
activities in the Korean waters. 
 
The oceanographic surveys in the Korean waters 
are very useful for elucidating the climate effects 
on the marine ecosystem.  These surveys have 
been conducted bimonthly, in February, April, 
June, August, October and December, 
simultaneously in the East, West and South Seas 
of Korea, to reduce difference in time-dependent 
oceanographic conditions. 
 
During the survey, temperature, salinity and 
dissolved oxygen were estimated at the standard 
depths:  surface, 10 m, 20 m, 30 m, 50 m etc., with 
thermometer and CTD.  The zooplankton were 
collected with NORPAC net (mouth size:  0.45 m 
and mesh size:  0.33 mm) from the bottom (in the 
West and South Seas shallower than 100 m), or 
100 m depth (in the East Sea) to the surface at a 
speed 0.5-1.0 m/sec.  Zooplankton samples were 
immediately preserved with 5-10% 
formalin.  Zooplankton biomass was calculated 
based on the wet weight of zooplankton smaller 
than 3 cm/m
3
.  The four major zooplankton  
 
 
Fig. 34 Oceanographic survey area and 
sampling stations in the Korean waters. 
 
 
Table 15 Oceanographic surveys conducted by Korea. 
Site Period Oceanographic factors Gears 
Korean 
waters 
 
 
 
East-China 
Sea 
 
 
 
 
Bering Sea 
 
 
 
 
 
Southern 
coastal area 
of Korea 
 
Others 
1965 – Present  
(6 times per year) 
 
 
 
1995 – Present  
(4 times per year) 
 
 
 
 
1994 – 1995 
(once a year) 
 
 
 
 
1972 – 1981 
(10–12 times per 
year) 
 
Less than 1 – 2 years 
Temperature, salinity, DO, 
zooplankton, nutrients (from 
1995), Chl-a (from 1995 in the 
South Sea of Korea) 
 
Temperature, salinity, DO, 
zooplankton, nutrients, Chl-a, 
fish larvae and eggs, currents 
 
 
 
Temperature, salinity, DO, 
zooplankton, nutrients, Chl-a, 
fish larvae and eggs, 
 
 
 
Temperature, salinity, DO, 
phytoplankton, zooplankton 
 
 
Temperature, zooplankton  etc.  
CTD, NORPAC net, water 
sampler, ADCP, field 
fluorometer, multi plankton 
sampler 
 
CTD, NORPAC net, water 
sampler, ADCP, field 
fluorometer, multi-plankton 
sampler, drifting buoys, 
Bongo net 
 
CTD, NORPAC net, water 
sampler, ADCP, field 
fluorometer, multi-plankton 
sampler, drifting buoys, 
Bongo net 
 
CTD, NORPAC net, 
Kidahara net, water sampler 
 
 
CTD, NORPAC net etc. 
112
41N
E
groups:  Copepoda, Amphipoda, Chaetognatha 
and Euphausiid, have been individually counted 
since 1978. 
 
Data obtained from the surveys have been 
published as “Annual report of oceanographic 
observations” and are available through the web 
site of the Korean Oceanographic Data Center 
(KODC). 
 
Long-term trend of zooplankton  
 
The observations clearly indicate that sea surface 
temperature in the Korean waters is steadily 
getting warmer in winter (December and 
February) since the late 1980s (Fig. 35).  
 
The Korean waters are included into two sub-
regions of PICES, the Sea of Japan (SJP) and the 
East China Sea (ECS).  In the East Sea of Korea 
(PICES SJP sub-region), zooplankton biomass 
shows an increasing trend and major zooplankton 
groups reveal the alteration trend in their 
composition since the early 1990s.  The trend in 
zooplankton biomass is more explicit in the north 
and offshore waters compared to the south and 
inshore areas (Fig. 36).  Macro-zooplankton, such 
as chaethognaths, euphausiids and amphipods, 
gradually increased after the early 1990s.  
Zooplankton biomass has a large peak in February 
and then keeps the similar value.  Among the four 
major zooplankton groups, copepods have their 
peak in April, whereas euphausiids show their 
peak in June. 
 
In the West Sea of Korea (PICES ECS sub-
region), zooplankton biomass has increased since 
the late 1980s with three large peaks in 1991, 1993 
and 1997-1998.  Among the four major 
zooplankton groups, copepods are predominant 
and slightly increased from the mid-1980s to the 
late 1990s.  Zooplankton biomass exhibits 
seasonal variations with a large peak in June and a 
small peak in October.  Copepods show similar 
seasonal variations while other zooplankton 
groups do not (Fig. 37).  Chaetognaths occupy the 
next position in abundance after copepods and 
have a peak in August.  Amphipods and 
euphausiids are most abundant in August and 
June, respectively.  Judging from these facts, it is 
assumed that copepods are closely related to 
chaetognaths as prey and predator (Fig. 37). 
 
 
Fig. 35 Long-term changes in sea surface 
temperature anomaly in the Korean waters. 
 
 
Fig. 36 Long-term changes in zooplankton 
biomass in the East Sea of Korea (SJP). 
 
 
Fig. 37 Seasonal variations in abundance of 
zooplankton groups in the West Sea of Korea 
(ECS).
 
113
Zooplankton
Biomass
180° ° ° ° longitude – Oceanographic time-series information 
 
Toru Kobari
1
 and Tsutomu Ikeda
2 
1  
Miyagi Prefecture, Fisheries Research and Development Center, Japan Science and Technology Co., 
97-6 Sodenohama, Watanoha, Ishinomaki, Miyagi 986-2135, Japan.  E-mail: toru.k@f3.dion.ne.jp 
2  
Faculty of Fisheries, Hokkaido University, 3-1-1 Minato-cho, Hakodate, Hokkaido 041-8611, Japan.  
E-mail: tom@pop.fish.hokudai.ac.jp  
 
Sampling data 
 
Hokkaido University has 5 sampling lines (155°E, 
170°E, 175°30'E, 180° and 145°W longitude) in 
the North Pacific (Fig 38).  The 180°-line is the 
longest time-series of oceanographic and fisheries 
data collected by T/S Oshoro-Maru.  Zooplankton 
samples were collected at stations between 37° 
and 51°N in the summers (mid-June) of 1979-
2000 (22 years) (Table 16).  Corresponding to the 
space of sampling stations (<1°), number of 
stations ranged from 15 to 32.  At each station, a 
vertical tow was made from 150 m depth to the 
surface with NORPAC net (45 cm mouth 
diameter, 0.35 mm mesh size).  In some years, 
additional zooplankton samples were collected 
with a MTD, IKMT and Fish-larva nets.  In the 
land laboratory, zooplankton wet weight was 
measured.  Simultaneously with zooplankton 
sampling, hydrographic data (temperature, salinity 
and Secchi depth) were observed.  Chlorophyll-a 
concentrations were estimated from Secchi depths 
using an empirical equation of Falkowski and 
Wilson (1992).  The 180° time-series data sets 
have been published in the Data Record of 
Oceanographic Observation and Exploratory 
Fisheries Nos. 23-43 (Hokkaido University 1980-
2000). 
 
Example of data analysis 
 
In most previous analyses of long-term variability 
of subarctic Pacific, zooplankton was considered 
as a single entity; e.g., biomass, which comprises a 
mixture of various species at diverse trophic levels 
(Shiomoto et al. 1997; Sugimoto and Tadokoro, 
1997).  However, the effects of long-term climate 
changes on a given zooplankton species' 
population are likely to be species-specific  
(Fromentin and Planque 1996; Planque and 
Fromentin 1996).  Thus, it is assumed that analysis 
based on individual species rather than on total 
zooplankton biomass is more sensitive to climate 
impacts and the results are more useful for 
understanding pelagic ecosystems. 
 
 
 
Fig. 38 Sampling lines conducted by Hokkaido University. 
114
Table 16 Sampling data of T/S Oshoro-Maru time-series along 180° longitude.  FL - Fish-larva net, 
IKMT - Isaacs-Kidd mid water trawl net, Z - Secchi depth. 
Year Dat e Position Station Zooplankton sampling Other samplings Oceanic observation 
number Me t ho d Dept h Gear Mesh size 
1979 12-19 June 39 
o 
00'-46 
o 
00'N 15 Vertical haul 0-150m NORPAC 0.35mm, 0.1mm CTD, Z d 
1980 12-21 June 39 
o 
00'-49 
o 
00'N 15 Vertical haul 0-150m NORPAC 0.35mm FL, MTD, IKMT CTD, Z d 
1981 11-22 June 39 
o 
00'-50 
o 
50'N 25 Vertical haul 0-150m NORPAC 0.35mm FL CTD, Z d 
1982 12-22 June 39 
o 
00'-51 
o 
00'N 24 Vertical haul 0-150m NORPAC 0.35mm MTD, IKMT CTD, Z d 
1983 11-19 June 39 
o 
03'-47 
o 
30'N 16 Vertical haul 0-150m NORPAC 0.35mm FL CTD, Z d 
1984 11-16 June 38 
o 
59'-49 
o 
00'N 21 Vertical haul 0-150m NORPAC 0.35mm FL CTD, Z d 
1985 13-18 June 39 
o 
00'-49 
o 
00'N 21 Vertical haul 0-150m NORPAC 0.35mm FL CTD, Z d 
1986 12-20 June 37 
o 
00'-50 
o 
00'N 26 Vertical haul 0-150m NORPAC 0.35mm, 0.1mm FL, MTD CTD, Z d , Chl- a 
1987 11-19 June 37 
o 
00'-48 
o 
00'N 22 Vertical haul 0-150m NORPAC 0.35mm FL CTD, Z d , Chl- a 
1988 13-20 June 37 
o 
03'-49 
o 
00'N 25 Vertical haul 0-150m NORPAC 0.35mm FL CTD, Z d , Chl- a 
1989   9-20 June 37 
o 
00'-49 
o 
00'N 24 Vertical haul 0-150m NORPAC 0.35mm FL CTD, Z d 
1990   9-18 June 37 
o 
01'-50 
o 
50'N 22 Vertical haul 0-150m NORPAC 0.35mm FL CTD, Z d 
1991   9-17 June 36 
o 
59'-50 
o 
50'N 24 Vertical haul 0-150m NORPAC 0.35mm FL CTD, Z d 
1992   8-19 June 37 
o 
00'-50 
o 
10'N 30 Vertical haul 0-150m NORPAC 0.35mm FL CTD, Z d 
1993 10-21 June 36 
o 
00'-50 
o 
50'N 28 Vertical haul 0-150m NORPAC 0.35mm FL CTD, Z d 
1994   9-20 June 35 
o 
00'-50 
o 
50'N 30 Vertical haul 0-150m NORPAC 0.35mm FL CTD, Z d 
1995   9-20 June 36 
o 
00'-50 
o 
50'N 32 Vertical haul 0-150m NORPAC 0.35mm FL CTD, Z d 
1996 10-21 June 37 
o 
00'-50 
o 
50'N 29 Vertical haul 0-150m NORPAC 0.35mm FL CTD, Z d , Chl- a 
1997 10-21 June 37 
o 
30'-50 
o 
50'N 28 Vertical haul 0-150m NORPAC 0.35mm FL CTD, Z d , Chl- a 
1998 9-16 June 38 
o 
00'-50 
o 
50'N 17 Vertical haul 0-150m NORPAC 0.35mm FL CTD, Z d , Chl- a 
1999 9-15 June 37 
o 
00'-50 
o 
50'N 15 Vertical haul 0-150m NORPAC 0.35mm FL CTD, Z d , Chl- a 
2000 9-14 June 37 
o 
00'-50 
o 
50'N 18 Vertical haul 0-150m NORPAC 0.35mm FL CTD, Z d , Chl- a 
 
Neocalanus copepods are the most predominant 
components of zooplankton biomass in the 
subarctic Pacific and its marginal seas, and the 
key species in the subarctic marine ecosystems 
of the North Pacific.  We analyzed interannual 
variations in abundance and body size of 
Neocalanus species (N. cristatus, N. plumchrus 
and N. flemingeri) using 180° time-series 
samples from the North Pacific. 
 
Environment 
 
According to Favorite et al. (1976) and Anma et 
al. (1990), the 180° time-series extends over 5 
sub-areas, as determined by water temperature 
and salinity profiles:  Alaska Current System 
(AS), Subarctic Current System (SA), Northern 
Transition Domain (TN), Southern Transition 
Domain (TS) and Subtropical Current System 
(ST).  There were quasi-decadal variations in the 
locations of oceanic sub-areas and their 
boundaries (Fig. 39).  The Transition Domain 
expanded southward in the late 1980s and 1990s 
due to a southward shift of the Transitional Front 
and Subarctic Boundary.  Sea surface temperature 
(SST) had ENSO time-scale variations (higher in 
1982, 1987-1988, 1993 and 1996) (Fig. 40).  The 
year-to-year patterns were more pronounced in 
the southern areas.  On the other hand, SST 
anomalies revealed decadal variation (higher in 
the late 1980s and 1990s) rather than ENSO time-
scale variation (Fig. 41).  Although an anomaly 
for chlorophyll-a concentrations and zooplankton 
wet weight did not indicate distinct changes  
(Fig. 41), the spatial patterns between chloro-
phyll-a and zooplankton wet weight were weakly 
negative: high zooplankton biomass and low 
chlorophyll-a were observed in the Transition 
Domain (Fig. 40). 
 
Neocalanus 
 
Neocalanus (C5) abundance was high in the 
Transition Domain (Fig. 42).  Although C5 
abundance anomaly showed less pronounced 
year-to-year variation for N. cristatus throughout 
the study period, decreasing trends of the 
anomalies were detected for N. plumchrus and N. 
flemingeri from the 1980s to 1990s (Fig. 41).  
The interannual variabilities were quite similar 
for N. plumchrus and N. flemingeri (r
2
=0.942, 
P<0.001).  Neocalanus size (C5 prosome length) 
decreased gradually southward (Fig. 43).  
Biennial variations (larger in odd year, smaller in 
even year) were predominant for all three species 
but interannual variations were less pronounced 
in the southern areas (Fig. 41).  Biennial variation 
was synchronized (r
2
=0.360-0.669, P<0.01) with
115
Latitude (˚N)
Year
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
Northern boundary
   of Transition Domain
Transition Front
Subarctic Boundary
Alaska Current System
(AS)
Subarctic Current System
(SA)
Northern Transition Domain
(TN)
Southern Transition Domain
(TS)
Subtropical Current System
(ST)
 
Fig. 39 Interannual variations in the locations of the oceanic sub-areas and their boundaries in the 
summers of 1979-1998. 
 
37
39
41
43
45
47
49
51
1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998
37
39
41
43
45
47
49
51
1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998
Latitude (˚N)
37
39
41
43
45
47
49
51
1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998
Year
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
1.5
1.0
0.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
SST
Chlorophyll a
Zooplankton Biomass
 
Fig. 40 Interannual variations in sea surface 
temperature (
o
C), Chl-a (mg/m
3
) and zooplankton 
biomass (log mgWW m
-3
) in 1979-1998. 
-1
0
1
SST
-1
0
1
Anomaly
Chlorophyll
-1
0
1
Zooplankton wet weight
-4
0
4
Abundance anomaly
N. plumchrus
-4
0
4
N. flemingeri
-0.2
0
0.2
Size anomaly
N. plumchrus
-0.2
0
0.2
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000
Year
N. flemingeri
-1
0
1
N. cristatus
-0.3
0
0.3
N. cristatus
 
Fig. 41 Interannual variations in anomalies of 
environmental parameters and abundance and 
body size of Neocalanus species in 1979-1998. 
116
    
51
1 978 1 980 1 982 1 984 1 986 1 988 1 990 1 992 1 994 1 996 1 998 
Year 
37 
39 
41 
43 
45 
47 
49 
51 
1 978 1 980 1 982 1 984 1 986 1 988 1 990 1 992 1 994 1 996 1 998 
37 
39 
41 
43 
45 
47 
49 
51 
1 978 1 980 1 982 1 984 1 986 1 988 1 990 1 992 1 994 1 996 1 998 
Latitude (˚ N)
 
N. cristatus 
1 
2 
3 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
N. plumchrus 
37 
39 
41 
43 
45 
47 
49
          
1 
2 
3 
5 4 
N. flemingeri 
6 
 
Fig. 42 Interannual variations in C5 abundance 
[(n+1)
1/2
inds/m
3
] of Neocalanus species in 1979-
1998. 
 
37
39
41
43
45
47
49
51
1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998
37
39
41
43
45
47
49
51
1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998
Latitude (˚N)
37
39
41
43
45
47
49
51
1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998
Year
6.4
3.5
3.7
3.6
3.8
3.9
3.1
3.0
3.2
3.3
3.4
N. cristatus
N. plumchrus
N. flemingeri
5.8
6.2
6.0
7.0
7.4
7.2
6.8
 
Fig. 43 Interannual variations in C5 prosome 
length (mm) Neocalanus species in 1979-1998. 
the three species.  In the correlation analysis, there 
were no parameters affecting the abundance and 
size variations of each Neocalanus species. 
 
Analyzing the 180° longitude time-series, we 
detected more pronounced interannual variations 
in the dominant zooplankton species than in the 
total zooplankton biomass.  The synchronized 
interannual variation patterns of Neocalanus 
species may be due to their identical trophic 
position (all grazers) and similar life history 
(annual life cycle and ontogenetic vertical 
migration) (Miller et al. 1984; Miller and Clemons 
1988; Kobari and Ikeda 1999a, b; Tsuda et al. 
1999).  Although no significant driving force was 
evident, the synchronized interannual variation 
patterns may be mediated by common 
environmental variable(s) operating on large 
spatial and temporal scales in the North Pacific. 
 
In conclusion, observations along the 180°-line are 
useful for analysis of interannual variability and 
climate impacts in the North Pacific ecosystem 
because: 
- it is a long-dated time-series; 
- interannual variation patterns are comparable 
regionally;  and 
- high- and low-frequency components are 
detectable. 
 
References 
 
Anma, G., Masuda, K., Kobayashi, G., 
Yamaguchi, H., Meguro, T., Sasaki, S and 
Ohtani, K.  1990.  Oceanographic structure 
and changes around the transition domain 
along 180
o
 longitude, during June 1979-1988.  
Bull. Fac. Fish. Hokkaido Univ. 41: 73-88. 
Falkowski, P.G., and Wilson, C.  1992.  
Phytoplankton productivity in the North 
Pacific ocean since 1900 and implications for 
absorption of anthropogenic CO2.  Nature 
358: 741-743. 
Favorite, F., Dodimead, A.J., and Nasu, K.  1976.  
Oceanography of the subarctic Pacific region, 
1960-1971.  Bull. Int. North Pacific Fish. 
Comm. 33: 1-187. 
Fromentin, J.M., and Planque, B.  1996.  Calanus 
and environment in the eastern North Atlantic.  
II. Influence of the North Atlantic Oscillation 
117
on C. finmarchicus and C. helgolandicus.  
Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 134: 111-118. 
Hokkaido University.  1980-2000 Data Record of 
Oceanographic Observations and Exploratory 
Fishing. 23-43. Faculty of Fisheries, Hokkaido 
University, Hakodate. 
Kobari, T., and Ikeda, T.  1999.  Vertical 
distribution, population structure and life cycle 
of Neocalanus cristatus (Crustacea: 
Copepoda) in the Oyashio region, with notes 
on its regional variations.  Mar. Biol. 134: 
683-696. 
Kobari, T., and Ikeda, T.  2001a.  Life cycle of 
Neocalanus flemingeri (Crustacea: Copepoda) 
in the Oyashio region, western subarctic 
Pacific, with notes on its regional variations.  
Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser (in press). 
Kobari, T., and Ikeda, T.  2001b.  Ontogenetic 
vertical migration and life cycle of 
Neocalanus plumchrus (Crustacea: Copepoda) 
in the Oyashio region, with notes on regional 
variations in body sizes.  J. Plankton. Res. (in 
press). 
Miller, C.B., and Clemons, M.J.  1988.  Revised 
life history analysis for large grazing copepods 
in the subarctic Pacific Ocean.  Prog. 
Oceanogr. 20: 293-313. 
Miller, C.B., Frost, B.W., Batchelder, H.P., 
Clemons, M.J. and Conway, R.E.  1984.  Life 
histories of large, grazing copepods in a 
subarctic ocean gyre: Neocalanus plumchrus, 
Neocalanus cristatus, and Eucalanus bungii in 
the northeast Pacific.  Prog. Oceanogr. 13: 
201-243. 
Planque, B., and Fromentin, J.M.  1996.  Calanus 
and environment in the eastern North Atlantic. 
I. Spatial and temporal patterns of C. 
finmarchicus and C. helgolandicus.  Mar. 
Ecol. Prog. Ser. 134: 101-109. 
Shiomoto, A., Tadokoro, K., Nagasawa, K., and 
Ishida, Y.  1997.  Trophic relations in the 
subarctic North Pacific ecosystem: possible 
feeding effect from pink salmon.  Mar. Ecol. 
Prog. Ser. 150: 75-85. 
Sugimoto, T., and Tadokoro, K.  1997.  
Interannual-interdecadal variations in 
zooplankton biomass, chlorophyll 
concentration and physical environment in the 
subarctic Pacific and Bering Sea.  Fish. 
Oceanogr. 6: 74-93. 
Tsuda, A., Saito, H. and Kasai, H.  1999.  Life 
histories of Neocalanus flemingeri and 
Neocalanus plumchrus (Calanoida: Copepoda) 
in the western subarctic Pacific.  Mar. Biol. 
135: 533-544. 
 
 
Phytoplankton time-series in the California Current 
 
Carina Lange 
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0244, U.S.A.  E-mail: 
clange@ucsd.edu 
 
The Scripps Pier time-series 
 
Previous observations 
 
The Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO, La 
Jolla Bight; 32°50'N, 117°10'W) has been a site of 
ocean monitoring since 1905, and was established 
as a year-round marine laboratory in 1912.  
Continuous records of sea surface temperature 
(SST) and salinity (SSS) measured at the SIO Pier 
have been made since 1916.  Concurrently, 
continuous surveys were made for diatom and 
dinoflagellate populations (Allen, 1917-1946), and 
semi-continuous for occurrences of red tides 
(Sweeney, 1950-1960), and total phytoplankton 
biomass (Food Chain Group, 1960-1974).  From 
1983-2000, near-surface water samples were 
collected twice weekly at the SIO Pier for 
measurements of nutrients and chloro-phyll-a 
concentrations (“SIO Pier sampling program”).  
The sampling program also included collection 
and preservation of water samples for 
phytoplankton studies on a continuous, twice-
weekly basis since February 1992, and for non-
continuous years 1983-1991.  However, the 
organisms in this recent collection have not yet 
been identified and/or enumerated except for a few 
intermittent studies. 
118
Recent and ongoing observations from Scripps 
Pier 
 
C. Lange and M. Latz are principal investigators 
for a new project analyzing an 8-year time-series 
(1992-2000) of variability in the biodiversity and 
abundance of diatoms and thecate dinoflagellates 
from Scripps Pier.  The scope of this pilot project 
is limited to the generation of a biological database 
structured to follow Ocean Biogeographical 
Information System (OBIS) standards, for 
eventual inclusion in the Census of Marine Life 
(CoML) program (http://core.cast.msstate.edu/ 
censhome.html).  This time-series will lead to an 
updated descriptive record of regional diatom and 
dinoflagellate species. 
 
This dataset will exist in spreadsheet format.  It 
will include:  (1) a complete list of diatom a nd 
dinoflagellate species identified from the SIO Pier 
samples;  (2) updated nomenclature including 
complete Latin names, synonyms for each species 
and authorship;  (3) citations;  (4) abundance data 
for total diatoms and total thecate dinoflagellates;  
(5) abundance data for individual species;   
(6) data on diatom and dinoflagellate diversity; 
and  (7)  photographic documentation of species 
by means of light microscopy illustrations, and to 
a limited extent, scanning electron micrographs. 
 
Retrospective analyses of Scripps Pier samples 
and comparisons with other coastal stations 
 
In the early 1900s, W.E. Allen collected 
phytoplankton samples on a daily basis, 
enumerated species and provided weekly counts 
(generated by mixing aliquots of daily samples) of 
diatoms and dinoflagellates for several coastal 
stations along the California coast.  The longest 
(20+ years) of Allen's time-series data were 
obtained from SIO (1917-1939) and Port Hueneme 
(1923-1939) piers.  Daily hydrographic data (SST 
and SSS) complement his phytoplankton data 
(these can be accessed through SIO FTP and web 
sites, http://meteora.ucsd.edu/weather.html). Allen 
published several papers using these time-series.  
Particularly noteworthy are two summaries:  a  
10-year statistical study of Southern California 
diatoms (Allen 1936) and a 20-year statistical  
study of dinoflagellates from these waters (Allen 
1941).  Thomas et al. (1998) also published an 
analysis of Allen's time-series (Fig. 44). 
 
0
5
10
15
1920 1925 1930 1935 1940
Year
Ln Diatom Abundance
SIO PH
EN
LN LN
 
Fig. 44 Variability of diatom abundance 
measured at the SIO (thick lines and solid 
symbols) and Port Hueneme (thin lines and open 
symbols) piers (from Thomas et al. 1998).  
Abundance data are natural log transformed.  
Lines represent a 12-month running average for 
the data.  Note synchrony of fluctuations at both 
sampling stations.  EN = El Niño (1926); LN = La 
Niña (1929 and 1939). 
 
Lange and Hewes (manuscript in prep.) have 
recently applied PCA ordination to the full 
species-identification time-series, and found that 
groups of diatom species (e.g. Upwelling, Warm 
Neritic, Warm Oceanic, Temperate Oceanic, etc.) 
cluster strongly in ordination space.  The upwel-
ling group was the dominant diatom group, many 
times composing more than 50% of the total 
assemblage.  The specific composition of the 
diatom assemblage of Allen's time is similar to 
that of the 1980s and 1990s observed by Reid et 
al. (1985) and Lange et al. (1994).  However, a 
major difference between the early and late part of 
the 20th century lies in the abundance of species, 
which are commonly associated with warm water 
masses (Lange et al. 1990, Lange and Hewes in 
prep.).  While their average relative abundance in 
the Southern California Bight during 1920-40 
never exceeded 6% of the total assemblage, their 
average contribution has increased to 10% in the 
past three decades (Lange, unpubl. observation). 
 
119
Ongoing projects at the Scripps Pier 
 
1. A 1983-2000 dataset of twice weekly 
measurements of temperature, salinity, 
chlorophyll and nutrients collected by J.A. 
McGowan. 
2. Continuous measures which are obtained by 
sensor array:  air temperature, relative 
humidity, barometric pressure, wind direction 
and velocity, water temperature, rainfall, tide 
level, wave height and period, and 
photosynthetically active radiation.  Sponsored 
by Center for Coastal Studies and Climate 
Research Division at SIO. 
3. Plant pigment analysis to determine 
phytoplankton community structure by R. 
Goericke at SIO.  This is a biweekly time-
series of taxon-specific pigments as measured 
by HPLC which started in the summer of 
1997.  For the last 5 months an ADCP was 
added to measure internal bores and relate 
these to blooms. 
4. Flow cytometer measurements of the 
cyanobacterium Synechococcous and 
picoeukaryote abundance by B. Palenik at 
SIO.  This work has included a continuous, 
weekly sampling since September 1997.  
5. A study of bacteria and viral abundance, 
bacterial species composition, and bacterial 
production by F. Azam at SIO.  This includes 
weekly sampling for 1997-98, and irregular 
sampling over the past decade.   
6. The California Department of Health Services 
carries out a Marine Biotoxin Monitoring 
Program designed to detect toxin-producing 
species of phytoplankton in ocean water 
before they impact fisheries and consumers.  
 
CalCOFI Program, California Current 
 
The California Cooperative Fisheries 
Investigations (CalCOFI) program is an ongoing 
oceanographic program carried out by the 
California Department of Fish and Game, the 
National Marine Fisheries Service of NOAA, and 
SIO.  It is concerned with all of the elements of the 
pelagic ecosystem that can be measured routinely 
on a quarterly basis.  It allows for spatial 
averaging of time series, covers a large oceanic 
area off California and Mexico, and is of a 50-year 
duration (Fig. 45).  Frequencies of change from 
monthly to decadal periods are resolved with these 
data, which are now available on-line 
(NEMO.ucsd.edu).  Abundances and distributions 
of phytoplankton species from CalCOFI stations 
for designated depths and times of the year are 
being studied by E. Venrick at SIO.  Satellite-  
 
 
 
Fig. 45 The present CalCOFI sampling region.  
Top panel:  station plan showing station 
designations (digits before the decimal point 
indicate line numbers;  digits following the 
decimal give station numbers).  Bottom panel:  
locations of the three environmental regimes 
defined by Hayward and Venrick (1998).  The 
near-surface chlorophyll concentrations at stations 
within each regime have similar patterns of 
fluctuations over time.  The boundary between 
regimes fluctuates, so that 16 stations (open 
circles) are alternately in one regime or another 
and cannot be classified.  Santa Barbara Basin 
station refers to trap site and CalCOFI sta. 82.47.  
120
derived chlorophyll concentrations for the SCB 
and the CalCOFI grid are being examined by B.G. 
Mitchell at SIO. 
 
Santa Barbara Basin (SBB) – Water column 
 
SBB sediment traps  
 
An ongoing trapping program in the SBB  
(34°14'N, 120°02'W) is being carried out by the 
University of South Carolina (PI: R. C. Thunell): 
(i) to monitor seasonal changes in sediment fluxes,  
(ii) to evaluate seasonal and interannual variability 
in response to El Niño (La Niña) events, and  
(iii) to appraise sediment formation and 
accumulation in the SBB.  Weinheimer and Lange 
have been involved in this project since 1993, 
currently funded in part by Vetlesen and Tode 
Foundations.  Another trapping program in the 
SBB (34°15.33'N, 119°56.29'W) was active from 
June 1995 to August 1999 (PIs: A. Alldredge, M. 
Brzezinski and J. Kennett).  Trap samples were 
analyzed for POC, PON, CaCO
3
, lithogenic and 
biogenic silica, TEP, foraminiferal flux and stable 
isotopes, and trace metals.  In addition, the 
program consisted of bi-weekly water sampling of 
the upper 75 m for chlorophyll-a, nutrient 
concentrations, temperature, salinity and density.  
 
Near-surface flora of the Santa Barbara Basin 
 
This project is being carried out by E. Venrick at 
SIO, who is studying abundances and distributions 
of phytoplankton species in the mixed layer from 
CalCOFI station 82.47 in the SBB, since October 
1993.  
 
Plumes and Blooms:  Studying the color of the 
Santa Barbara Channel 
 
The Plumes and Blooms project is a coordinated 
time-series project of field observations and 
satellite imagery analysis, with the goal of 
understanding the driving mechanisms and 
impacts of sediment plumes and phytoplankton 
blooms in the Santa Barbara Channel.  In situ 
optical quantities and in-water constituents are 
collected since 1996, along a seven-station 
transect across the Santa Barbara Channel.  
Scientists involved in this effort include D.A. 
Siegel, R.C. Smith, M. Brzeziniski, L. Mertes, 
D.A. Toole, L. Washburn, D. Fernamburg, O. 
Polyakov and J. Warrick.  Information about this 
program can be found at http://www.icess.ucsb. 
edu/ PnB/PnB.html. 
 
Santa Barbara Coastal LTER 
 
The Santa Barbara region (34°N, 119°W) has 
recently been selected as one of the major sites 
within the LTER effort.  Research includes  (i) the 
effects of land use on the processing and transport 
of nutrients and carbon to the coastal ocean;  
(ii) the role of runoff and oceanic forcing in 
structuring kelp forest communities;  and (iii) 
controls on reef food webs by nutrients and 
predation.  Site Principal Investigator is D.C. Reed 
(UCSB).  Most relevant sampling includes basin 
wide surveys of the SBB using a combination of 
CTD rosette casts and a towed fish to assess the 
distribution of chemical, physical and biological 
variables across the basin.  LTER measures 
primary production and characterizes the 
particulate matter three times a year, in the spring, 
summer and fall, within a grid of stations spanning 
the entire Basin.  Analyses include nutrients 
(nitrate, phosphate, silicate), chlorophyll, biogenic 
and lithogenic silica, particulate carbon and 
particulate nitrogen (Mark Brzezinski, D. Siegel, 
L. Washburn, UCSB).  
 
Santa Barbara Basin – Paleoclimatology and 
paleoceanography from laminated sediments 
 
For the past 10+ years, T. Baumgartner, J. 
Kennett, C.B. Lange, A. Schimmelmann, R.C. 
Thunell, A. Weinheimer, and several others, have 
been involved in studies (funded by NSF, NOAA, 
and DOE) of the varved sediments of the SBB 
(Fig. 46) to appraise sediment formation and 
accumulation.  These include:  varve chronology, 
preservation of biogeochemical signals, land-
derived components and flood events, and 
interannual-centennial variability of siliceous 
(diatoms, silicoflagellates, radiolarians) and 
calcareous (foraminifers) microplankton. 
 
References 
 
Allen, W.E.  1936.  Occurrence of marine 
plankton diatom in a ten years series of daily 
121
catches in Southern California.  Amer. Jour. 
Botany 23: 60-63. 
Allen, W.E.,  1941.  Twenty years statistical 
studies of marine plankton dinoflagellates of 
southern California.  Am. Midl. Nat. 26: 603-
635. 
Lange, C.B., Reid, F.M.H., and Vernet, M.  1994.  
Temporal distribution of the potentially toxic 
diatom Pseudonitzschia australis at a coastal 
site in Southern California.  Mar. Ecol. Prog. 
Ser. 104: 309-312. 
Lange, C.B., Burke, S.K., and Berger, W.H.  1990.  
Biological production off Southern California 
is linked to climatic change.  Climatic Change 
16: 319-329. 
Reid, F.M.H., Lange, C.B., and Whitem, M.M.  
1985.  Microplankton species assemblages at 
the Scripps Pier from March to November 
1983 during the 1982-1984 El Niño event.  
Botanica Marina 28: 443-452. 
Thomas, W.H., Hewes, C.D., and Zavoico, T.  
1998.  Historical phytoplankton species time-
series data (1917-1939) from the North 
American Pacific coast.  SIO Ref: No. 98-17. 
 
Fig. 46 Color photograph showing exposed 
varved structure of a piston core from the Santa 
Barbara Basin.  This particular sediment is about 
250 years old, with increasing age from left to 
right.  Each varve is composed of one dark/light 
couplet.  Scale is in cm.  From http://php.indiana. 
edu/~aschimme/. 
 
 
 
Canadian activities and plans for zooplankton, phytoplankton, micronekton, 
and benthos monitoring in the Pacific Ocean 
 
David L. Mackas 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Institute of Ocean Sciences, P.O. Box 6000, Sidney, B.C., Canada.   
V8L 4B2  E-mail: MackasD@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
Geographic distribution, time-series duration, 
and present sampling frequency 
 
Sustained time-series are located in three regions 
(Table 17, Fig. 47): 
 
1. The Alaska Gyre, primarily at Station P (50°N 
145°W) and at 5 locations along Line P 
(between Stn P and the mouth of Juan de Fuca 
Strait).  The Stn. P zooplankton time-series 
dates back to 1951, although sampling 
frequency has varied greatly.  Dedicated Line 
P cruises now usually occur 3 times per year 
(May-June, August-September, and February).  
Instrumented sequencing sediment trap 
moorings are maintained at Stn P and at Line 
P04 (continental slope). 
 
2. British Columbia outer continental margin 
(continental shelf, shelf break and slope).  Net 
tow and water sampling, 2-4 dedicated surveys 
per year along a set of cross-shelf lines 
extending seaward of Vancouver Island, plus 
opportunistic sampling at additional locations. 
 
3. “Inland seas” - primarily the Strait of Georgia, 
Juan de Fuca, and a few adjoining inlets.  
Frequent sampling surveys since the mid-
1990s, plus various instrumented moorings. 
 
122
Table 17 Regions, variables, and temporal coverage for Canadian lower trophic level time-series in the 
NE Pacific. 
Region Variables/Platforms Duration Frequency Comments 
Alaska Gyre 
    
Line P- Stn P  research cruises: 
macro-nutrients (N, P, Si) 
mesozooplankton 
pigments and productivity 
 
moorings: 
sequential sediment trap 
1970-present 
1956-present 
1959-present 
 
 
1982-present 
3/year 
 
 
 
 
 
2/month 
methodology changes 
during time series 
pigment/productivity data 
have many gaps, winter-
fall nutrient drawdown 
used to estimate annual 
new production 
Trans-Pacific 
ships of 
opportunity 
surface nutrients, pCO
2
, chl 
 
 
1995-present approx. 
monthly 
MV Skaugran; some 
earlier data from other 
platforms 
British Columbia 
continental margin 
(outer coast of 
Vancouver Island 
at present) 
Research cruises: 
mesozooplankton 
macro-nutrients 
chlorophyll & prim. prod. 
seabird reproductive biology 
 
 
Ocean color: CZCS, SeaWIFS  
 
 
Offshore met buoy network 
 
1985-present 
(as above, 
but gaps) 
1975-present 
 
 
 
 
mid 1980s; 
late 1990s 
 
 
4-5/year Good zoopl. seasonal 
climatology and anomaly 
time series for west coast 
of Vancouver Is.; other 
data 1978-1985. 
 
Local archival & 
analysis; quantification 
bias issues re cloud cover 
and high pigment regions 
 
Opportunity (not yet 
exploited) for addition of 
biological sensors 
British Columbia 
continental margin 
(central and 
northern BC) 
Mesozooplankton, occasional 
macro-nutrients (opportunistic 
sampling from research and 
stock assessment cruises) 
1990-present  1-3 /year Very sparse spatial and 
temporal coverage, 
especially pre-1998 
Inland seas and 
inlets (mostly 
Strait of Georgia) 
Research cruises: 
mesozooplankton 
nutrients 
phytoplankton biomass and 
productivity 
1966-68, 
1975-77, 
1990s-
present 
4+ /year Changes in sampling grid 
and methodologies 
 
In most cases, funding of time-series sampling 
programs has been year-to-year.  Maintenance of 
the time-series has therefore been largely at the 
initiative of individuals or small teams of 
researchers, and often under a sequence of project 
names and funding sources.  There is a growing 
awareness among science managers that this 
funding model is precarious and unsatisfactory, 
and Canada is now planning/proposing a sustained 
monitoring program for the Pacific. 
 
 
Fig. 47 Location of Canadian lower-trophic-
level time-series, in relation to other North Pacific 
monitoring programs (adapted from Welch, this 
report). 
123
Methodology and archival status for different 
trophic levels 
 
Phytoplankton 
 
Research cruise surveys of Line P-Stn P, the 
continental margin of Vancouver Island, and the 
Strait of Georgia obtain measurements of 
phytoplankton biomass as in vivo fluorescence 
profiles, plus occasional bottle samples for 
floristic analysis and extracted fluorescence.  For 
the Strait of Georgia, pilot studies are exploring 
fluorescence monitoring using moored buoys and 
vessels of opportunity.  All programs suffer from 
serious spatial and temporal aliaising of 
phytoplankton bloom dynamics.  Alternate 
approaches, useful in offshore regions where 
spatial gradients and advection are weaker, use 
seasonal depletion of upper layer nutrients 
(Whitney et al. 1998) and seasonal sediment flux 
(Wong et al. 1999) as indicators of variability in 
cumulative new production. 
 
Zooplankton 
 
For microzooplankton, there is at present no time-
series sampling program.  For the mesozoo-
plankton, time-series samples are primarily 
vertical net tows with 0.2 mm mesh nets.  For 
consistency with past practice in each region, 
depth ranges for net hauls are 0-150 m for open 
ocean (Alaska Gyre) sites, 0-250 m or 0-near 
bottom for coastal and continental margin sites.  
Additional deep (0-1,000 m) and vertically 
stratified (usually 8 layers 0-250 m) samples have 
been collected to aid interpretation of vertical 
distributions.  An electronic-format archive of the 
1956-1980 Stn P time-series has been published 
by Waddell and McKinnell (1995).  For more 
recent data, continental margin, and LineP-Stn P 
samples from 1985-present, identification and 
enumeration data are available as a Microsoft 
Access database (S. Romaine and D. Mackas, 
Institute of Ocean Sciences).  Two completed 
analyses have demonstrated important interannual-
decadal zooplankton variability:  Mackas, 
Goldblatt and Lewis (1998) described changes in 
seasonal timing of the Alaska Gyre zooplankton 
maximum, and Mackas, Thomson and Galbraith 
(in press) described long-scale annual anomalies 
of zooplankton community composition for 
continental shelf and slope regions off the 
southwest coast of Vancouver Island (Fig. 48).  
Prerequisites for useful zooplankton anomalies 
include a prior description of the average 
zooplankton seasonal-cycle, and a relatively large 
number of independent samples each year (about 
20-30) to average out “noise” from small-scale 
spatial and temporal patchiness. 
 
Fig. 48 Annual zooplankton anomalies for the 
British Columbia continental margin, averaged 
within groups of similar species (adapted from 
data in Mackas et al. in press). 
 
Micronekton 
 
At present, there is no Canadian time-series 
sampling of micronekton, except for estimates of 
euphausiid biomass and species/stage composition 
124
obtained using hydroacoustics and zooplankton 
net tows.  This is a topic in which Canadians have 
considerable scientific interest, but relatively little 
scientific capacity. 
 
References 
 
Mackas, D.L., Thomson, R.E., and Galbraith, M.  
2001.  Changes in the zooplankton community 
of the British Columbia continental margin, 
and covariation with oceanographic 
conditions, 1985-1999.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. 
Sci. (in press). 
Mackas, D.L., Goldblatt, R., and Lewis, A.J.  
1998.  Interdecadal variation in developmental 
timing of Neocalanus plumchrus populations 
at Ocean Station P in the subarctic North 
Pacific.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 55: 1878-
1893. 
Waddell, B.J., and McKinnell, S.  1995.  Ocean 
Station 'Papa' detailed zooplankton data: 1956-
1980. 
Whitney, F.A., Wong, C.S., and Boyd, P.W.  
1998.  Interannual variability in nutrient 
supply to surface waters of the NE Pacific 
Ocean.  Mar. Ecol. Progr. Ser. 170: 15-23. 
Wong, C.S., Whitney, F.A., Crawford, D.W., 
Iseki, K., Matear, R.J., Johnson, W.K., Page, 
J.S., and Timothy, D.  1999.  Seasobnal and 
interannual variability in particle fluxes of 
carbon, nitrogen and silicon from time series 
of sediment traps at Ocean Station P, 1982-
1993: relationship to changes in subarctic 
primary productivity. 
 
 
Monitoring of coastal pelagic ecosystems off Oregon, Washington and N. 
California - Hydrographic and plankton time-series 
 
William T. Peterson, Julie Keister, Leah Feinberg and Cheryl Morgan 
Estuarine & Ocean Ecology, Hatfield Marine Science Center, National Marine Fisheries Service, 2030 S. 
Marine Science Drive, Newport, OR  97365, U.S.A.  E-mail: bill.peterson@noaa.gov 
 
Surveys off Newport Oregon – 1960s 
 
Oceanographic time series data are available from 
the Newport Hydrographic Line (44°40'N, Fig. 49) 
due to efforts by scientists from the Oregon State 
University (Corvallis, Oregon) and the National 
Marine Fisheries Service (Newport, Oregon).  
Frequent sampling of the hydrography and 
plankton occurred during the 1960s and early 
1970s.  Climatology of the salinity, temperature 
and density from 1961-1971 can be seen at the 
website: http://ltop.oce.orst.edu/~ctd/index.html. 
 
Euphausiids and larger zooplankton were sampled 
at night from 1962-1967, at monthly intervals at 
stations located 5 miles to 85 miles from shore 
with a 1 m diameter 570 m mesh net (Smiles and 
Pearcy 1970).  From 1974 through 1995, a very 
limited number of CTD measurements and 
plankton tows were made off the Oregon coast.  
However, beginning in 1996, the Newport Line 
was once again sampled on a regular basis.  Thus 
we have available for study a disjunct time-series 
of physical oceanographic data and plankton 
abundances that represents two time periods, the 
1960s-early 1970s, and the late 1990s to present.  
 
High-frequency sampling off Newport 
 
Hydrographic stations located 1, 3, 5, and 10 miles 
offshore of Newport OR, were sampled for 
zooplankton and ichthyoplankton at biweekly 
intervals from June 1969-August 1972 (Peterson 
and Miller 1975, 1976).  Water depths at these 
stations are 20 m, 45 m, 60 m, and 80 m.  In 
addition zooplankton were sampled on a biweekly-
monthly basis during May-September 1973, May 
and August 1974, July-August 1977, May-August 
1978, and May-September 1983.  Most of this 
work was carried out using 20 cm bongo nets 
fitted with 240 µ m mesh nets and towed obliquely 
throughout the water column.  The only 
hydrographic data available are sea surface 
temperature and salinity.  In addition, the 5-mile 
station was sampled year-round in 1991 and 
during summer months of 1990 and 1992, using 
0.75 m diameter 333 µ m mesh nets towed 
vertically (Fessenden, 1992). 
125
Newport
Coos Bay
C r escent Ci t y
Eur eka
Cape
  Bl anco
-125W -124W -123W
40N
41N
42N
43N
44N
45N
150m
150m
 
Fig. 49 Newport Hydrographic (NH) line and 
stations sampled during the 1960s and early 1970s.  
The line is now regularly sampled with 5 cruises 
per year along the whole line and biweekly cruises 
to five of the innermost shelf stations.  The U.S. 
GLOBEC samples transect lines off Newport, 
Coos Bay and Crescent City three times per year; 
scientists at Humboldt State University sample off 
Eureka during spring and summer.   
 
Sampling off Newport Oregon (44°40'N) resumed 
in May 1996, with sampling at stations 1, 5, 10 
and 15 miles from shore at biweekly intervals  
(Fig. 49).  The work will continue at least through 
2004.  At each station a CTD profile is made with 
a Seabird-19 CTD, Secchi depth is measured and a 
water sample is collected from the sea surface with 
a bucket for later analysis of nutrients (nitrate, 
nitrite, phosphate, silicate) and chlorophyll.  
Zooplankton is sampled with a 50 cm diameter 
202 µ m mesh net hauled vertically from near the 
sea floor to the sea surface at a speed of 30 m/min.  
Zooplankton is also sampled with a 1-m diameter 
333 µ m mesh net that is towed obliquely from  
20 m to the surface.  Beginning in 2001, the 1-m 
net was replaced with a 60 cm Bongo net with  
200 µ m mesh. 
 
Fig. 50 Ordination of zooplankton samples 
collected from 1969-1973 and 1996-2000 at the 
station NH-5 (five miles off Newport OR).  Upper 
panel compares the 1970s (open symbols) to the 
late 1990s (closed symbols);  lower panel shows 
each year separately.  Samples from the “warm 
period” of the 1990s cluster on the right side of the 
ordination;  samples from the “cool period” of the 
1970s and 1999/2000 cluster to the left side of the 
ordination. 
 
We analyzed a subset of these data (1969-1973 
and 1996-2000) using Non-Metric Multidimen-
sional Scaling (an ordination technique) and found 
differences in the zooplankton community 
structure between the two time periods.  This 
technique calculates a similarity index for each 
sample, groups samples by the degree of 
similarity, then orders all samples in species space 
using the Sorensen Distance Measure.  Figure 50 
shows that the community observed from 1969-
1973 was fundamentally different from the 
community observed from 1996-1998.  
Examination of the species abundance data shows 
that the community in the 1970s was composed of 
species with sub-arctic affinities, whereas the 
community observed from 1996-1998 was 
composed of a mixture of species of sub-arctic and 
126
sub-tropical affinities.  This is attributed to an 
extended period of El Niño conditions that 
persisted along the Pacific Northwest waters from 
1992 through 1998, 1999 was a period of 
transition, and 2000 showed that the zooplankton 
community switched to one dominated by sub-
arctic species.  
 
Figure 51 shows the seasonal cycle of chlorophyll 
concentration and the abundance of one of the 
dominant copepod species, Calanus marshallae at 
the five-mile station (designated NH 5).  The 
annual spring bloom occurs in April;  large blooms 
occur during summer associated with relaxation of 
coastal upwelling (July/August);  and in some 
years there is a fall bloom, in September or 
October.  Changes in abundance of C. marshallae 
track phytoplankton biomass in that the initial 
increase in copepod numbers is in spring, possibly 
in association with the spring bloom.  Peak 
numbers are seen during the summer upwelling 
season.  The population disappears from the water 
column during the first week of October, 
presumably because individuals enter diapause. 
 
Quarterly broad-scale surveys off 
central/southern Oregon and northern 
California 
 
4 transect lines off Oregon and northern California 
are sampled three times per year as part of the U.S. 
GLOBEC program (Fig. 49), in April, July and 
September.  The time series began in July 1997 
and will continue through 2003.  Transect lines 
include Newport OR (44°40'N), Coos Bay OR 
(43°13'N), Rogue River OR (42°30'N) and 
Crescent City CA (41°54'N).  The transect lines 
extend beyond the continental shelf to 160 km 
from shore (2900 m water depth) off Newport;  
Coos Bay to 63 km from shore (1700 m);  Rogue 
River to 64 km from shore (3060 m depth);  and 
Crescent City to 150 km from shore (3400 m 
depth).  At each station CTD casts are made.  At 
most stations nutrients and chlorophyll are 
sampled from 9 discrete depths, and zooplankton 
is sampled with the vertical tow net from 100 m to 
the surface as described above.  Bongo tows were 
made at most stations in 1998 and 1999.  
Beginning in March 2000, we collected 
zooplankton from discrete depths using a 1 sq. m 
MOCNESS system.  WOCE drifters are released 
at five stations along the Newport Line (10, 15, 25, 
45 and 65 miles from shore).  On each cruise, 
underway measurements are made of currents 
(ADCP), and fish and zooplankton acoustics using 
an HTI 244 system.  In addition to the coast-wide 
sampling, the Newport Line is sampled in 
February and November, giving us five visits per 
year to the deep ocean along that line.   
 
 
Fig. 51 Seasonal cycle of chlorophyll and 
Calanus marshallae (Copepoda) at NH 5 in the 
late 1990's. 
 
 
Juvenile salmonid and zooplankton surveys in 
the vicinity of the Columbia River plume 
 
Juvenile salmonids are sampled along 5-8 
transects off the Washington and Oregon coasts 
in May, June and September (Fig. 52).  This work 
began in 1998 and will continue for 
approximately five more years.  Pelagic fish are 
sampled with a Nordic 264 rope trawl (30 m wide 
127
by 20 m high by 200 m long) fitted with a 0.8 cm 
cod end liner.  At each trawl station, zooplankton 
is sampled with a 0.5 m diameter 202 µ m mesh 
net towed vertically from 100 m to the surface, 
with a 1-m
2
 mouth neuston (manta) net (333 µ m 
mesh net) and with a 1-m diameter 333 µ m mesh 
net from 20 m to the surface.   
 
Zooplankton sampling off Northern California 
 
Scientists from Humboldt State University (Arcata 
CA) conduct cruises off Eureka CA (40°50'N) 
during spring and early summer, as part of a 
program which trains undergraduates in 
oceanographic techniques.  Cruises are carried out 
approximately monthly, weather permitting.  
Several stations over the continental shelf are 
sampled (out to a distance of 25 miles from shore).  
At each station standard measurements are taken 
including CTD profiles, Secchi depths, and 
chlorophyll.  Zooplankton is sampled with a 60 cm 
bongo net fitted with 333 µ m mesh nets.  
 
Broad-scale zooplankton surveys in 1994-1998 
 
Fish eggs and larvae and zooplankton were 
sampled along 15-20 transect lines off the 
southern Washington and Oregon coasts, from 2 to 
100 miles from shore by Bob Emmett (NMFS, 
Newport OR) during July 1994 and 1995, June 
1996, and July 1997 and 1998.  The purpose of the 
cruises was to map the distribution and abundance 
of anchovy and sardines eggs and larvae in 
relation to hydrography and zooplankton 
abundance (Bentley et al. 1996).  Plankton 
sampling was done with a 25 cm CalVET net 
fitted with 150 µ m mesh nets.  CTD casts to 70 m 
were done and nutrient and chlorophyll samples 
were collected from 3 m depth at each station. 
 
Zooplankton species from three of these cruises 
have been compared using ordination techniques 
(the NMS technique described above).  We found 
distinct zooplankton communities on the shelf as 
compared to deeper water offshore -- there was a 
regular progression of change in community 
structure along a bathymetric gradient (Fig. 53). 
 
125° W 124° W 123° W
    BPA Pl ume Study
Target St at i on Locati ons
45° N
46° N
47° N
48° N
LaPush
Ast ori a
Ti llam ook
Newpor t
LP-4
LP-6
LP-9
LP-12
LP-17
LP-22
LP-27
G H -3
G H -6
G H -10
G H -16
G H -21
G H -26
G H -31
G H -36
W B-5
W B-9
W B-14
W B-19
W B-23
W B-30
C R -4
C R -7
C R -10
C R -15
C R -20
C R -25
C R -30
C F-1
C F-3
C F-7
C F-10
C F-15
C F-20
C F-25
C F-30
C M -1
C M -3
C M -5
C M -10
C M -15
C M -20
C M -25
C H -1
C H -2
C H -5
C H -10
C H -15
C H -20
C H -25
N H -3
N H -5
N H -10
N H -15
N H -20
N H -25
C P-1
C P-3
C P-10
C P-15
C P-20
C P-25
W ashi ngton
Oregon
Cape Per pet ua
Newport
Cascade Head
C ape M ear es
Col umbi a River
Wi llapa B ay
G r ays H ar bor
LaPush
Ca pe Fa l con
 
Fig. 52 Chart showing location of stations 
sampled during surveys of hydrography, nutrients, 
chlorophyll, zooplankton and juvenile salmon in 
May, June and September of each year. 
 
Temp
Long
Axi s 1
Axi s 2
Depth Range (m)
60
90
180
Onshel f
300
500
1000
2000
5000
Of f shel f
 
Fig. 53 Ordination of zooplankton samples 
collected in July 1994, June 1996 and July 1997, 
showing distinct changes in copepod community 
structure along a gradient extending from shallow 
(left side of ordination) to deep water (right side). 
128
References 
 
Bentley, P.J., Emmett, R.L., Lo, N.C.H., and 
Moser, G.  Egg production of Pacific sardine 
(Sardinops sagax) off Oregon in 1994.  
CALCOFI Rep. 37: 193-200. 
Fessenden, L.M.  1995.  Calanoid copepod diet in 
an upwelling system: phagotrophic protists vs. 
phytoplankton.  Ph.D. Thesis, Oregon State 
University, 136p. 
Peterson, W.T., and Miller, C.B.  1975.  Year-to-
year variations in the planktology of the 
Oregon upwelling zone.  Fish. Bull. U.S. 73: 
642-653. 
Peterson, W.T., and Miller, C.B.  1976. 
Zooplankton along the continental shelf off 
Newport Oregon, 1969-1972:  distribution, 
abundance, seasonal cycle and year-to-year 
variations.  Oregon State University Sea Grant 
College Program, Pub. No. ORESU-T-76-002, 
111p. 
 Smiles, M.C., and Pearcy, W.G.  1971.  Size 
structure and growth rate of Euphausia 
pacifica off the Oregon coast.  Fish. Bull. U.S. 
69: 79-86. 
 
 
East-west variability of primary production in the subarctic North Pacific 
derived from Multi-Sensor Remote Sensing during 1996-2000 
 
Sei-ichi Saitoh and Kosei Sasaoka 
Laboratory of Marine Environment and Resource Sensing, Graduate School of Fisheries Sciences, 
Hokkaido University, 3-1-1 Minato-cho, Hakodate, Hokkaido 041-8611, Japan.  E-mail: 
ssaitoh@salmon.fish.hokudai.ac.jp 
 
The two gyres in the subarctic North Pacific are 
known as Western Subarctic Gyre (WSG) in the 
NW subarctic, and Alaskan Gyre (AG) in the NE 
subarctic Pacific.  Comparative studies on the 
primary production of the WSG and AG have been 
carried out in order to grasp the different effects of 
iron (Harrison et al. 1999).  Understanding the role 
of iron fertilization of HNLC (High Nutrients Low 
Chlorophyll) water, satellite monitoring of 
temporal-spatial variability of chlorophyll-a  
(Chl-a) distribution is very important (e.g. 
Abraham et al. 2000). 
 
Ocean color remote sensing is a new useful tool 
for continuous monitoring temporal and spatial 
variability of Chl-a concentration.  OCTS on 
ADEOS satellite (Saitoh 1995) provided valuable 
data from November 1996 to June 1997.  
SeaWiFS on orbview2 (Hooker and Esaias 1993) 
launched successfully on August 1997, and its 
operation is very stable so far.  In the past, Banse 
and English (1994, 1999) have already discussed 
phytoplankton seasonality in this region using 
CZCS data sets.  Recently, Shiomoto et al. (1998, 
1999a and 1999b) have described the distribution 
pattern of Chl-a and primary productivity in this 
region based on ship observations.  However, 
some questions still remain about seasonal 
changes and year-to-year variability of Chl-a 
distribution and primary productivity in this area 
at long-term scale.   
 
Now, we have ocean color data sets of OCTS and 
SeaWiFS for about three years.  The objectives of 
this study are:  to grasp the temporal and spatial 
variability of Chl-a distribution and primary 
productivity in the subarctic North Pacific, and to 
understand the mechanisms regulating Chl-a 
distribution in 1996-2000. 
 
Satellite observations 
 
Temporal and spatial distributions of Chl-a in the 
study area (Fig. 54) were analyzed using the 
OCTS and SeaWiFS data.  We employed OCTS 
Level3 Binned Map (weekly and monthly mean 
images) from November 1996 to June 1997, and 
SeaWiFS level3 gridded data (8-day and monthly 
mean images) from September 1997 to June 2000.  
The OCTS and SeaWiFS data were provided by 
NASDA and NASA-DAAC, respectively.  The 
AVHRR/NOAA data were applied to study the 
distribution and temporal variability of sea surface 
temperature from January 1996 to June 2000.  
129
Data sets were provided by NASA JPL PO-
DAAC.  In addition, we attempted to calculate 
primary productivity by a modified VGPM Model 
(Behrenfeld and Falkowski 1997) developed by 
Kameda and Ishizaka (2000) using ocean color 
and SST satellite data sets.  The Special Sensor 
Microwave Imager (SSM/I) data were applied to 
study the distribution and temporal change of wind 
stress from January 1996 to June 2000.  Monthly 
sea wind speed anomalies were calculated from 
wind data sets obtained from the SSMI data web 
site ( http://www.ssmi.com) ( Remote Sensing 
Systems). 
 
Ship observations 
 
Ship observations were carried out by R/V Mirai, 
T/S Oshoro-Maru and T/S Hokusei-Maru in the 
northern North Pacific and the Bering Sea during 
1996 to 2000 (Fig. 54).  From June 1998 to May 
2000, Station KNOT has been visited monthly 
except for winter season.  To match in situ Chl-a 
and satellite-estimated Chl-a, ship observations 
were also carried out by other research vessels in 
adjacent seas around Japan. 
 
Salinity, temperature and depth were measured 
using a CTD profiler.  Water samples for Chl-a 
and pheopigment determinations were collected 
using Niskin bottles attached to a rosette on the 
CTD instrument.  200 ml of seawater was filtered 
through a Whatman GF/F filter on board for Chl-a 
and phaeophytin measurements.  Filtered samples 
were extracted in 6 ml of N,N-dimethylformamide, 
under cold and dark conditions for a later analysis.  
Chl-a and phaeophytin were determined by the 
fluorometric method (Parsons et al. 1984) with a 
Turner Designs Fluorometer (Model 10-AU).  
 
: R/V MIRAI
: T/S Hokusei-Maru
: T/S Oshoro-Maru
 
Fig. 54 Map of ship observation stations in the northern North Pacific. 
 
The relationship between SeaWiFS and in situ 
Chl-a concentration 
 
Figure 55 shows comparison between in situ Chl-a 
and the weekly SeaWiFS Chl-a concentration for 
waters around Japan including the NE Pacific, NW 
Pacific, Kuroshio Region, Japan Sea, and offshore 
Sanriku.  Total number of samples and r
2
 are 77 
and 0.77, respectively.  Chl-a concentration 
estimated by SeaWiFS has a tendency to be lower 
than in-situ Chl-a concentration in the NW Pacific 
and to be higher in the NE Pacific.  However, 
there is small scattered pattern between SeaWiFS 
Chl-a and in situ Chl-a.  In fact, we can conclude 
that a SeaWiFS in-water algorithm is working well 
in this study area, and the results support the 
validation of the algorithm. 
 
Time-series observation using ocean color data 
sets 
 
Figure 56 shows variability of Chl-a in the WSG 
(50°N, 165°E) and at Station Papa (50°N, 145°W) 
obtained from the OCTS and SeaWiFS weekly 
data sets from November 1996 to November 1999.  
Chl-a concentration in the WSG and at Stn. P was 
relatively low (about 0.3 - 0.8 mg/m
3
) throughout 
the year, and there is no signal of a spring and fall 
bloom at both stations.  S easonal variability of 
Chl-a in the WSG is greater than that at Stn. P.  It 
130
is probably due to the appearance of the spring 
bloom in the WSG.  Chl-a in the WSG (about  
0.5 mg/m
3
) was relatively high compared to that at 
Stn. P (about 0.3 mg/m
3
) in spring.  Remarkable 
peaks of Chl-a were observed at Stn. P in October 
1997 and in the WSG in September 1998.  High 
Chl-a concentration (1.0 mg/m
3
) in the WSG 
continued for about two months from August to 
October in 1998.  Spring blooms were observed 
only in the WSG and fall blooms were observed at 
both Stn. P. and WSG, as it was pointed out earlier 
by Banse and English (1999).  SST anomaly at 
 
 
 
Fig. 55 Comparison between insitu and satellite 
chlorophyll-a concentration. 
 
 
Fig. 56 Variability of Chl-a in the WSG (50  N, 
165  E) and at Stn. P (50  N, 145  W) obtained by 
the OCTS and SeaWiFS weekly data sets from 
November 1996 to November 1999. 
Stn. P in August 1997 was relatively high (about 
2°C) compared with other years.  SST in the WSG 
in August 1998 was also relatively high compared 
with other years.  SST variability corresponded to 
Chl-a variability in each region. 
 
Figure 57 shows variability of primary 
productivity (PP) obtained from the OCTS and 
SeaWiFS monthly data sets from January 1998 to 
October 1999.  In spring, from February to May, 
PP at Stn. P was relatively high compared to that 
in the WSG.  First peak of PP in the WSG 
appeared in July, and one month later the peak of 
PP at Stn. P appeared in August of both years.  A 
remarkable peak in the WSG was observed in 
September 1998.  From May to June, PP at Stn. P 
was clearly decreasing. 
 
Shiomoto et al. (1998) pointed out that Chl-a 
concentration is higher in the west and lower in 
the east in the subarctic North Pacific during 
spring and summer.  However, primary produc-
tivity does not always show the same trend and 
daily primary productivity was not substantially 
different between the western region (278-1397 
mgC/m
2
/d) and eastern region (290-1550 
mgC/m
2
/d).  These satellite observations support 
Shiomoto et al. suggestions.  In order to 
understand the mechanism of year-to-year 
variability of ocean color, we must apply OGCM 
(Ocean General Circulation Model) and wind 
stress data sets to grasp physical processes in this 
region, especially during the 1997-1998 El Niño 
(Mutrugudde et al. 1999). 
 
:Northwestern Pacific
:Northeastern Pacific
:Kuroshio Region
:Japan Sea
:Offshore Sanriku
Surface Chlorophyll-a (mg/m
3
)
PP (gC/ml/month)
1.5
1.0
0.5
1.5
1.0
0.5
 
Fig. 57 Time-series variability of primary 
productivity (PP) from satellite obtained by OCTS 
and SeaWiFS monthly data sets from January 
1998 to October 1999. 
131
Long-term variations of plankton biomass in the North Pacific 
 
Kazuaki Tadokoro 
Ecosystem Change Research, Frontier Research System for Global Change, 1-18-16 4F, Hamamatsu, 
Minato-ku, Tokyo 105-0013, Japan.  E-mail: denden@frontier.esto.or.jp 
 
There are many papers published on the long-term 
variations of plankton biomass in the eastern 
subarctic North Pacific related to the 1976/1977 
climatic regime shift.  However, to estimate the 
effect of the climate change on biological 
productivity in the whole area of subarctic North 
Pacific, one must consider the geographical 
differences in this parameter.  Therefore, I analyzed 
and compared regional differences in long-term 
variations of the plankton biomass related to the 
1976/1977 climatic regime shift in the subarctic 
North Pacific. 
 
Data and methods 
 
Long-term variations of plankton biomass in the 
eastern, central Pacific, and eastern Bering Sea 
(Fig. 58) were estimated using data published by 
the University of Hokkaido (1956-2000).  Details 
of data processing are described in Sugimoto and 
Tadokoro (1997).  Three data sets were used to 
analyze long-term variations of plankton biomass 
in the Oyashio water (Fig. 58):  data collected by 
the Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute; 
data set by the Hakodate Marine Observatory;  and 
data downloaded from the JODC web site.  
Description of these data sets is given in Table 18. 
 
Results 
 
After the 1976/77 climatic regime shift, Chl-a 
concentration of the central and western North 
Pacific (Fig. 59, upper panel) and the Oyashio 
water (Fig. 60, upper panel) decreased.  On the 
other hand, Chl-a concentration in the eastern 
Bering Sea increased (Fig. 59, lower panel).  
Annual mean Chl-a concentrations at Stn. P were 
taken from Brodeur et al. (1996).  Although their 
paper only indicated 4 or 5 years of observations 
after the regime shift, all Chl-a concentrations 
after 1976 are lower than the total mean (Fig. 61). 
 
Zooplankton biomass in the central North Pacific 
(Fig. 62, upper panel) and in the eastern Bering 
Sea (Fig. 62, lower panel) gradually decreased 
after the regime shift.  On the other hand, 
zooplankton biomass in the eastern North Pacific 
(Gulf of Alaska) increased after 1980 (Fig. 63: 
Brodeur and Ware 1992).  Zooplankton biomass in 
the Oyashio water decreased since 1976 but 
showed a tendency to increase after 1982/83  
(Fig. 60). 
 
 
Fig. 58 Observation area and sub-regions: 
Oyashio water (OY), western North Pacific (WP), 
central North Pacific (CP), eastern North Pacific 
(EP), and eastern Bering Sea (EB). 
 
 
Fig. 59 Interannual variations of summer Chl-a 
concentration in the North Pacific.  Original figure 
from Sugimoto and Tadokoro (1997). 
132
 
Fig. 60 Interannual variations of integrated  
Chl-a (0-200 m) in April, and meso-zooplankton 
biomass from April to June in the Oyashio water. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 62 Interannual variations of summer 
zooplankton biomass in the North Pacific.  
Original figure from Sugimoto and Tadokoro 
(1997). 
 
 
Fig. 61 Interannual variations of Chl-a 
concentration at the Ocean Stn. P.  Original figure 
from Brodeur et al. (1996). 
 
 
Fig. 63 Distribution of zooplankton biomass in 
the Gulf of Alaska for 1956-1959 (A), 1960-1962 
(B), and 1980-1989 (C).  Original figure from 
Brodeur and Ware (1992). 
133
Table 18 Description of the data sets used for the study of long-term variations of plankton biomass in the Oyashio water. 
 
 
 
Fig. 64 Interannual variations of spring SST in the eastern North 
Pacific.  Original figure from Minobe (1997). 
 
Fig. 65 Interannual variations of spring SST in the Oyashio water. 
134
Discussion 
 
After the climatic regime shift, zooplankton 
biomass increased in the eastern North Pacific, but 
decreased in the central North Pacific, eastern 
Bering Sea, and Oyashio water.  Why did the 
regional differences occur?  Here, we mainly 
compare the west-east differences in zooplankton 
biomass in the subarctic North Pacific. 
 
The subarctic circulation is counterclockwise, and 
supplies warm water to the eastern subarctic 
Pacific from the south and cold water to the 
western subarctic Pacific from the north.  The 
Aleutian Low is a driving force for the subarctic 
circulation, and therefore, the intensification of the 
Aleutian Low accelerated the subarctic circulation 
at the time of the 1976/77 regime shift.  
Consequently, warm water was transported to the 
eastern North Pacific from the southern area (Fig. 
64), and cold water form the northern area was 
transported to the Oyashio water (Fig. 65).  
Polovina (1995) hypothesized that the shallower 
MLD after the regime shift caused the increase in 
plankton biomass in the eastern Pacific, because 
the solar radiation is a limiting factor for primary 
production in the Central and North Pacific.  If this 
is correct, we can explain the west-east differences 
in zooplankton biomass in the subarctic Pacific 
(Fig. 66).  El Niño also results in higher SST and 
shallower MLD in the eastern subarctic Pacific; 
however, primary production decreases during an 
El Niño period (Whitney et al. 1998).  Therefore 
the warming and related changes in MLD will not 
cause an increase of zooplankton biomass in the 
eastern North Pacific. 
 
Iron is the limiting micronutrient for large 
phytoplankton in the subarctic waters.  Wong et al. 
(1996) suggested that stronger atmospheric 
circulation, due to the intensification of the 
Aleutian Low, could enhance the iron input with 
dust and aerosols from the Chinese desserts and 
thus would increase.  However, there is no 
evidence to support this hypothesis.  The supply of 
iron to the eastern North Pacific may also come 
from iron-rich coastal waters transported by 
mesoscale eddies formed on the edge of the 
continental shelf of Alaska and west coast of 
Canada. 
 
 
Fig. 66 Effect of climatic regime shift on the North Pacific ecosystem (schematic diagram). 
135
 
Fig. 67 Interannual variations of timing of peak 
zooplankton biomass in the Oyashio water and at 
Stn. P. 
 
Interannual variations of Chl-a concentration 
correspond to changes in zooplankton biomass in 
the central North Pacific and the Oyashio water, 
but have an inverse relationship with zooplankton 
biomass in the eastern North Pacific and the 
eastern Bering Sea.  The subarctic North Pacific is 
a HNLC (High Nutrients Low Chlorophyll) area, 
and interannual variations of Chl-a may not reflect 
those in primary production in this region (Banse 
and English 1999; Tadokoro 2000). 
 
Timing of peak biomass shifted earlier after the 
regime shift in both the Oyashio water and eastern 
Pacific Ocean (Fig. 67).  The period from 1965-
1975 having a late peak timing also had high 
zooplankton biomass in the Oyashio water.  On 
the other hand, there is no clear relationship 
between timing of the peak and zooplankton 
biomass at Stn. P. 
 
References 
 
Banse, K., and English, D.C.  1999.  Comparing 
phytoplankton seasonality in the eastern and 
western subarctic Pacific and the western 
Bering Sea.  Prog. Oceanogr. 43: 235-288. 
Brodeur, R.D., and Ware, D.M.  1992.  Long-term 
variability in zooplankton biomass in the 
subarctic Pacific Ocean.  Fish. Oceanogr. 1: 
32-38. 
Brodeur, R.D., Frost, B.W., Hare, S.R., Francis, 
R.C., and Ingraham. W.J. Jr.  1996.  
Interannual variations in zooplankton biomass 
in the Gulf of Alaska, and covariation with 
California Current zooplankton biomass.  
CalCOFI Rep. 37: 80-99. 
Hokkaido University.  1956-2000.  Data record of 
oceanographic observations and exploratory 
fishing No.1-43. 
Mackas, D.L., Goldblatt, R., and Lewis, A.G.  
1998.  Interdecadal variation in developmental 
timing of Neocalanus plumchrus populations 
at Ocean Station P in the subarctic North 
Pacific.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 55: 1878-
1893. 
Minobe, S.  1997.  A 50-70 year climatic 
oscillation over the North Pacific and North 
America.  Geophs. Res. Lett. 24: 683-686. 
Polovina, J.J., Mitchum, G.T., and Evans, G.T.  
1995.  Decadal and basin-scale variation in 
mixed layer depth and the impact on 
biological production in the Central and North 
Pacific, 1960-88.  Deep-Sea Res. 42: 1701-
1716. 
Sugimoto, T., and Tadokoro, K.  1997.  
Interannual-interdecadal variations in 
zooplankton biomass, chlorophyll 
concentration and physical environment in the 
subarctic Pacific and Bering Sea.  Fish. 
Oceanogr. 6: 74-93. 
Tadokoro K.  2000.  Geographical variation of 
Chl-a seasonality in the subarctic North 
Pacific Ocean.  Bull. Plankton Soc. Japan 47: 
111-115 (in Japanese with English abstract). 
Whitney, F.A., Wong, C.S., and Boyd, P.W.  1998.  
Interannual variability in nitrate supply to 
surface waters of the Northeast Pacific Ocean.  
Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 170: 15-23. 
Wong, C.S., Whiteney, F.A., Iseki, K., Page, J.S., 
and Zeng, J.  1995.  Analysis of trends in 
primary productivity and chlorophyll-a over 
two decades at Ocean Station P (50
o
N, 
145
o
W).  In  Subarctic Northeast Pacific 
Ocean.  Edited by R.J. Beamish.  Can. Spec. 
Publ. Fish. Aquat. Sci. Ottawa: National 
Research Council of Canada, pp. 107-117. 
 
136
GROUP 3:  FISH, SQUID, CRABS AND SHRIMPS 
 
 
North Pacific multispecies and ecosystem models of the Alaska Fisheries 
Science Center (and selected others) 
 
Kerim Aydin 
Alaska Fisheries Science Center, 7600 Sand Point Way NE, Seattle, WA 98115, U.S.A.  E-mail: 
Kerim.Aydin@noaa.gov 
 
Single-species stock assessment models that 
include predation 
 
So far two models have been developed:  one for 
EBS (Eastern Bering Sea) pollock (Livingston and 
Methot 1998) and one for GOA (gulf of Alaska) 
pollock (Hollowed et al. 2000).  Another one for 
Aleutian Islands Atka mackerel might be 
developed in the future.  The purpose of these 
models is to understand more clearly the sources 
and time trends of natural mortality for pollock, by 
explicitly incorporating predation mortality 
induced by their major predators into an age-
structured fish stock assessment model.  We have 
learned that not only natural mortality at younger 
ages is much higher than for adults, but also that it 
varies across time depending on time trends in 
predator stocks.  This has given us better ideas 
about the influences of predation on fish 
recruitment over time and helps to separate 
predation and climate related effects on 
recruitment.  Now we can more effectively show 
the demands of other predators such as marine 
mammals for a commercially fished, and how it 
might influence the dynamics of that stock 
(although we still need to make progress in 
understanding the effects on the marine 
mammals). 
 
Bering Sea Multispecies Virtual Population 
Analysis (MSVPA) 
 
We presently have a multispecies virtual 
population analysis model (MSVPA) for the 
Bering Sea (Livingston and Jurado-Molina 2000).  
This model includes predation interactions among 
several commercially important groundfish stocks, 
and also predation by arrowtooth flounder and 
northern fur seal on these stocks.  This model can  
give a better idea of the predation interactions 
among several stocks.  Outputs from this type of 
model can help to understand what the possible 
multispecies implications are of our single-species 
oriented fishing strategies.  Results from these 
forecasting exercises show that a particular fishing 
strategy may have an effect that is opposite to 
what was intended if multispecies interactions are 
taken into consideration.  We have also done 
multispecies forecasting with this model using 
different hypotheses about regime shifts and 
associated fish recruitment patterns. 
 
Boreal Migration and Consumption Model 
(BORMICON) for the eastern Bering Sea 
 
We have developed the first version of a spatially 
explicit model of pollock movement and 
cannibalism in the Eastern Bering Sea to 
understand the differences in spatial overlap of 
predators and prey, and how that affects the 
population dynamics of each.  The model we have 
modified for the Bering Sea is one being used in 
other boreal ecosystems, BORMICON (Boreal 
Migration and Consumption Model).  Migrations 
are prescribed at present with the hope that we can 
prescribe movement based on physical factors in 
the future.  The influence of spatial overlap of 
cannibalistic adult pollock with juveniles on the 
population dynamics of pollock is investigated.  
Hypotheses about larval drift positions and the 
resulting overlap and cannibalism are also being 
explored.  This model could be linked in the future 
to an individual-based larval pollock model and to 
NPZ model that could prescribe zooplankton 
abundance by area as alternate food for adults and 
as the primary food for juveniles. 
 
137
Analytical approach to evaluating alternative 
fishing strategies with multiple gear types 
 
The analytical approach for simulating current 
groundfish management in the North Pacific U.S. 
EEZ involves considering interactions among a 
large number of species (including target, non-
target, and prohibited), areas, and gear types.  To 
evaluate the consequences of alternative 
management regimes, modeling was used to 
predict the likely outcome of management 
decisions using statistics on historical catch of 
different species by gear types and areas.  
Management of the Alaska groundfish fisheries is 
complex given the large numbers of species, areas, 
and gear types.  The managers schedule fisheries 
openings and closures to maximize catch subject 
to catch limits and other constraints.  These 
actions are based on expectations about the array 
of species likely to be captured by different gear 
types and the cumulative effect that each fishery 
has on the allowable catch of each individual 
target species and other species groups.  
Management decisions were simulated by an in-
season management model that predicts capture of 
target and non-target species by different fisheries 
based on historical catch data by area and gear 
type.  Groundfish abundance for each alternative 
regime was forecast for a five-year period 
beginning from the present.  This approach 
provides a reasonable representation of the current 
fisheries management practice for dealing with the 
multi-species nature of catch in target fisheries. 
 
In addition to the model and its projected results, 
agency analysts also used the scientific literature, 
ongoing research, and the professional opinion of 
fishery experts in their respective fields to perform 
qualitative assessments. 
 
Influence of advection on larval pollock 
recruitment 
 
This model investigates the environmental 
relationship between surface advection during the 
post-spawning period (pollock egg and larval 
stages) and pollock survival.  Wespestad et al. 
(1997) found that during years when the surface 
currents tended north-north westward along the  
shelf, year-class strength was improved compared 
to years when currents were more easterly.  They 
used the OSCURS surface advection model to 
simulate drift.  Subsequently (Ianelli et al. 1998) 
their analysis was extended to apply within a stock 
assessment model.  The model uses surface 
advection over a 90-day period to determine the 
“goodness” of the advective field for juvenile 
pollock. 
 
Shelikof Pollock Individual-Based Model (IBM) 
 
This IBM was designed to run in conjunction with 
the 3-D physical model (SPEM) and the Shelikof 
NPZ model.  Its purpose is to examine, at a 
mechanistic level, hypotheses regarding 
recruitment of pollock in Shelikof Strait, 
especially as these relate to transport, growth and 
(somewhat) mortality of pollock from spawning 
through the fall of the 0-age year. 
 
GLOBEC Nutrient-Phytoplankton-Zooplank-
ton (NPZ) 1-D and 3-D Models 
 
This modeling effort (the 3-D NPZ model coupled 
with a physical model of the circulation of the 
region) is designed to test hypotheses regarding 
the effect of climate change/regime shifts on 
production in the coastal region of the Gulf of 
Alaska, including effects on cross-shelf transport, 
upstream effects, local production, and effect on 
suitability of the region as habitat for juvenile 
salmon. 
 
Steller Sea Lion Individual-Based Model (IBM) 
 
This IBM will be designed to examine how sea 
lion energy reserves change through foraging and 
bioenergetics depending on the distribution, 
density, patchiness and species composition of a 
dynamic prey field (as influenced by factors such 
as potential local depletion by fishing).  It should 
be applicable to any domain surrounding a specific 
sea lion rookery or haul-out in the Bering Sea, 
Aleutian Islands or Gulf of Alaska.  Sea lion 
characteristics such as age, location, lifestage, 
birthdate, etc., are recorded.  Caloric balance is the 
main variable followed for each individual. 
 
138
Shelikof Nutrient-Phytoplankton-Zooplankton 
(NPZ) Model, 1-D and 3-D versions 
 
This NPZ model was designed to produce a 
temporally and spatially explicit food source 
(Pseudocalanus stages) for larval pollock, and to 
be input to the pollock IBM.  This set of coupled 
(biological and physical) models was constructed 
to be used to examine hypotheses about pollock 
recruitment in the Shelikof Strait region. 
 
Gulf of Alaska Walleye Pollock Stochastic 
Switch Model 
 
This model was developed as a mathematical 
representation of a conceptual model presented in 
Megrey et al. (1996).  It is a numerical simulation 
of the recruitment process.  A generalized 
description of stochastic mortality is formulated as 
a function of three specific mortality components 
considered important in controlling survival 
(random, wind mixing events, and prevalence of 
oceanic eddies).  The sum total of these, under 
some conditional dependencies, determines the 
overall survival experienced by the recruits.  
 
North Pacific Ecosystem Model for under-
standing regional oceanography (NEMURO) 
 
This model was designed to determine the 
minimum state variables needed to represent a 
generic NPZ marine ecosystem model for the 
North Pacific.  Ecosystem fluxes are tracked in 
units of both nitrogen and silicon.  Carbon flux 
process equations have been added recently.  The 
purpose is to examine the effects of climate 
variability on the marine ecosystem, through 
regional comparisons by means of using the same 
ecosystem model structure and process equations. 
 
Mass-Balance Ecosystem Models (ECOPATH) 
for North Pacific regions of interest (multiple 
models) 
 
Mass-balance food web models provide a way for 
evaluating the importance of predator/prey 
relationships, the roles of top-down and bottom-up 
forcing in modeled ecosystems, and the changes in 
ecosystem structure resulting from environmental 
perturbations (natural or anthropogenic).  
Additionally, the models may allow comparing 
natural predation mortality with respect to predator 
biomass and fishing levels, and determining the 
quality of data available for a given system. 
 
Eastern Bering Sea Shelf ECOPATH Model 1 
 
Although many of these models were done in the 
past for the Alaska region, the most up-to-date 
published model is Trites et al. (1999) for the 
Eastern Bering Sea.  These models are highly 
aggregated over age groups and species groups 
and best highlight our gaps in understanding of 
how ecosystems function and our lack of data on 
certain ecosystem components.  Walleye pollock 
is broken into two biomass groups:  pollock ages  
0-1 and pollock age 2 and older.  The model is 
useful for testing ecosystem hypotheses about 
bottom-up and top-down forcing and to examine 
system level properties and energy flow among 
trophic levels.  The Eastern Bering Sea model 
extent includes the main shelf and slope areas 
north to about 61°N and excludes near-shore 
processes and ecosystem groups. 
 
Eastern Bering Sea Shelf Model 2 and Western 
Bering Sea Shelf ECOPATH Model 
 
The second Eastern Bering Sea Shelf model 
breaks down the earlier model into more detailed 
species groupings to tease apart the dynamics of 
individual species, especially in the commercially 
important groundfish.  Spatial extensions to the 
model include sub-dividing into Inner, Middle, 
and Outer Biophysical Domains.  The model will 
be calibrated with respect to top-down and 
bottom-up forcing using “checkpoint” food webs 
for several years in the 1990s, and using 1979-
1998 time-series of trawl data and MSVPA/other 
assessment analyses.  The primary purpose of this 
model is to investigate the relative role of natural 
and anthropogenic disturbances on the food web 
as a whole.  A Western Bering Sea Shelf Model, 
build as a joint US/Russian Project, is currently 
being completed. 
 
Gulf of Alaska, continental shelf and slope 
(excluding fjord, estuarine and intertidal) 
ECOPATH Model 
 
Throughout the 1990s, there have been extensive 
commercial fisheries in the GOA for groundfish, 
139
as well as crab, herring, halibut, and salmon.  
Removals of both the target species and bycatch 
by these (and historical) fisheries have been 
suggested as a possible cause for the decline of the 
western stock of Stellar sea lions, which are now 
listed as an endangered species.  An 
ECOPATH/ECOSIM model for the GOA could 
test the hypothesis that fishery removals of 
groundfish and bycatch during the 1990s have 
contributed to the continued decline of Stellar sea 
lions. 
 
In addition, a community restructuring in which 
shrimp populations declined dramatically and 
commercial fish populations increased between 
the 1960s and the 1990s may have occurred, 
according to small mesh trawl surveys conducted 
by National Marine Fisheries Service and Alaska 
Department of Fish & Game.  An additional 
hypothesis, which could be tested with this model, 
is that this trophic reorganization has had a 
negative impact on marine mammal and bird 
populations in the GOA.  Finally, the effects on an 
apparent increase in shark populations on their 
prey and the relative importance of these effects in 
the whole system could be evaluated with an 
ECOPATH model. 
 
Aleutian Islands and Pribilof Islands 
ECOPATH models 
 
While the Eastern Bering Sea and Gulf of Alaska 
model may capture broad-scale dynamics of 
widespread fish stocks, their scale is too large to 
address local depletion.  This may be an important 
issue for island-based fish such as Atka mackerel, 
and may be critical for determining the effect that 
changes in the food web may have on the 
endangered Steller sea lion.  This smaller-scale 
ECOPATH model will be used in conjunction 
with larger-scale models to examine the possibility 
of linking the models across scales. 
 
Prince William Sound (PWS), Alaska 
ECOPATH model 
 
An ECOPATH model of Prince William Sound 
was constructed by a collaboration of experts from 
the region during 1998-1999 (Okey and Pauly 
1999).  The Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Trustee 
Council (EVOS) funded this effort for the purpose 
of “ecosystem synthesis”.  The project was 
coordinated by the UBC Fisheries Centre and 
overseen by NMFS Office of Oil Spill Damage 
Assessment and Restoration.  Prince William 
Sound is well defined geographically; spatial 
definition of the system consisted of drawing lines 
across Hinchenbrook Entrance, Montague Strait, 
and smaller entrances.   The time period 
represented by the model is 1994-1996, as this is 
the post-spill period with the broadest and most 
complete set of ecosystem information.  This food 
web model consists of 48 functional groups 
ranging from single ontogenetic stages of special-
interest species to highly aggregated groupings.  A 
variety of hypotheses are being addressed with the 
PWS model—most relate to the 1989 EVOS and 
the fisheries in the area.   
 
Table 1 summarizes region, time period, contact 
person and status for models developed by the 
Alaska Fisheries Research Center and Table 2 
provides information on model special domains, 
inputs and outputs. 
 
References 
 
Hollowed, A., Ianelli, J.N., and Livingston, P.  
2000.  Including predation mortality in stock 
assessments: A case study for Gulf of Alaska 
pollock.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 57: 279-293. 
Ianelli, J.N., Fritz, L., Honkalehto, T., Williamson, 
N., and Walters, G.  1998.  Bering Sea-
Aleutian Islands Walleye Pollock Assessment 
for 1999.  In Stock assessment and fishery 
evaluation report for the groundfish resources 
of the Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands regions.  
North Pac. Fish. Mgmt. Council, Anchorage, 
AK, section 1: 1-79. 
Livingston, P.A., and Methot, R.D.  1998.  
Incorporation of predation into a population 
assessment model of eastern Bering Sea 
walleye pollock. In Fishery Stock Assessment 
Models.  University of Alaska Sea Grant, AK-
SG-98-01, Fairbanks, pp. 663-678. 
Livingston, P.A. and Jurado-Molina, J-J.  2000.  A 
multispecies virtual population analysis of the 
eastern Bering Sea.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 57: 
294-299. 
Megrey, B.A., Hollowed, A.B., Hare, S.R., 
Macklin, S.A., and Stabeno, P.A.  1996.  
Contributions of FOCI research to forecasts of 
140
year-class strength of walleye pollock in 
Shelikof Strait.  Fish Ocean. 5: 189-203. 
Okey, T. A., and Pauly, D.  1999.  A mass-
balanced model of trophic flows in Prince 
William Sound: de-compartmentalizing 
ecosystem knowledge. In Ecosystem 
approaches for fisheries management.  Edited 
by S. Keller. University of Alaska Sea Grant, 
Fairbanks, pp. 621-635  . 
Trites, A.W., Livingston, P., Mackinson, S., 
Vasconcellos, M.C., Springer, A.M., and 
Pauly, D.  1999.  Ecosystem change and the 
decline of marine mammals in the eastern 
Bering Sea:  
Testing the ecosystem shift and commercial 
whaling hypotheses.  Univ. British Columbia, 
Fisheries Centre Research Reports 1999, Vol. 
7. 
Wespestad, V.G., Fritz, L.W., Ingraham, W.J., and 
Megrey, B.A.  1997.  On Relationships 
between Cannibalism, climate variability, 
physical transport and recruitment success of 
Bering Sea Walleye Pollock, Theragra 
chalcogramma. ICES International 
Symposium, Recruitment Dynamics of 
exploited marine populations: physical-
biological interactions.  Baltimore, MD, Sept 
22-24. 
 
Table 1 Model areas, time period, contact person, and model status. 
Model Name/ 
Model Region 
Time Period Contact Status 
Single-species stock 
assessment models that 
include predation 
EBS: 1964-95 
GoA: 1964-97 
(Annual) 
Patricia Livingston Working 
Bering Sea MSVPA 1979-98 
3 Months (quarterly) 
Patricia Livingston 
Jesus Jurado-Molina 
Working 
BORMICON for the Eastern 
Bering Sea 
1979-97 
1 Month 
Patricia Livingston Planning/Construction 
Evaluating Alternative 
Fishing Strategies 
Current Jim Ianelli Working 
Advection on larval pollock 
recruitment 
90 Days of Larval Drift 
1970s-present 
Jim Ianelli Working 
Shelikof Pollock IBM YD 60-270 
Daily 
Sarah Hinckley Working 
GLOBEC NPZ 1-D and 3-D 
Models 
YD 60-270 (eventually 
year-round).  Daily 
Sarah Hinckley In progress 
Steller Sea Lion IBM Summer or Winter, 
Minutes to Days 
Sarah Hinckley Planning/Construction 
Shelikof NPZ Model, 1-D 
and 3-D Versions 
YD 60-270 (eventually 
year-round).  Daily 
Sarah Hinckley In progress 
GoA Pollock Stochastic 
Switch Model 
32 years (replicates) 
Daily 
Bern Megrey Working 
NEMURO 1 Full Year, Daily Bern Megrey In progress 
Eastern Bering Sea Shelf 
Model 1 Ecopath 
1950s and early 1980s 
Annual 
Patricia Livingston Completed 
Eastern Bering Sea Shelf 
Model 2 Ecopath 
1979-1998 
Annual 
Kerim Aydin In progress 
Western Bering Sea Shelf 
Ecopath 
Early 1980s 
Annual 
Kerim Aydin 
Victor Lapko 
In progress 
 
141
Table 1 (continued) 
Model Name/ 
Model Region 
Time Period Contact Status 
Gulf of Alaska Shelf 
Ecopath 
1990-99 
Annual 
Sarah Gaiches In progress 
Aleutian Islands, Pribilof 
Islands Ecopath 
1990s-2000s 
Annual 
Patricia Livingston, 
Lorenzo Ciannelli 
Proposed 
Prince William Sound, 
Ecopath 
Pre- and Post 1989 oil spill  
Annual 
Tom Okey Completed 
 
Table 2 Model spatial domains, currencies, inputs and outputs. 
Model Name/ 
Model Region 
Model Spatial Domain 
 
Inputs 
 
Outputs/currency 
 
Single-species stock 
assessment models that 
include predation 
Across EBS and GOA 
Pollock distributions 
Fisheries data and 
predator biomass 
Pollock population and 
mortality trends—number at age 
(and biomass at age). 
Bering Sea MSVPA The modeled region is 
the eastern Bering Sea 
shelf and slope north to 
about 61°N 
Fisheries, predator 
biomass, and food habits 
data.  This model 
requires estimates of 
other food abundance 
supplied by species 
outside the model.   
Age-structured population 
dynamics for key species—
numbers at age 
BORMICON for the 
eastern Bering Sea 
The model is spatially 
explicit with 7 defined 
geographic regions that 
have pollock abundance 
and size distribution 
information. 
Temperature is included 
and influences growth 
and consumption. 
Spatial size distribution of 
pollock. 
Evaluating Alternative 
Fishing Strategies 
US EEZ Gear-specific fishing 
effort including bycatch 
Biomass of managed fish 
species. 
Advection on larval 
pollock recruitment 
Southeast Bering Sea 
Shelf 
OSCURS surface 
currents (wind-driven). 
Index of pollock recruitment. 
Shelikof Pollock IBM Western GOA from just 
southwest of Kodiak 
Island to the Shumagin 
Islands, shelf, water 
column to 100 m. 
From Physical model: 
Water velocities, wind 
field, mixed-layer depth, 
water temperature and 
salinity, 
Pseudocalanus field 
(from NPZ model). 
Individual larval characteristics 
such as age, size, weight, 
location, lifestage, hatchdate, 
consumption, respiration. 
 
GLOBEC NPZ 1-D and 
3-D Models 
Water column (0-100 m) 
Coastal GOA from 
Dixon Entrance to 
Unimak Pass, 100 m of 
water column over 
depths < 2000 m 
5 m depth bins x 20 km 
horizontal grid. 
Irradiance, MLD  
Temperature, 
diffusivity, bottom 
depths, water velocities 
(u, v, w) 
Diffusivity, ammonium, nitrate, 
detritus, small and large 
phytoplankton, dinoflagellates, 
tintinnids, small coastal 
copepods, neocalanus and 
euphausiids 
(nitrate and ammonium): 
mmol/m
3
 
(all else): mg Carbon/m
3
 
142
Table 2 (continued) 
Model Name/ 
Model Region 
Model Spatial Domain Inputs Outputs/currency 
Steller Sea Lion IBM Should be applicable to 
any domain surrounding a 
specific sea lion rookery or 
haul-out in the Bering Sea, 
Aleutian Islands or GOA 
The main input to the 
SSL-IBM will be a 3D 
field of prey (fish) 
distribution, derived 
either from hypothetical 
scenarios or (later) 
modeled based on 
acoustic data 
Individual sea lion 
characteristics such as age, 
location, lifestage, birthdate, 
etc are recorded.  Caloric 
balance is the main variable 
followed for each individual. 
Shelikof NPZ Model, 1-
D and 3-D Versions 
water column (0-100 m), 
GOA from southwest of 
Kodiak Island to 
Shumagin Islands.  1 m 
depth bins for 1-D version, 
1 m depth x 20 km for 3-D 
version 
Irradiance, MLD, 
Temperature, Bottom 
depths, water velocities 
(u, v, w). 
Nitrogen, phytoplankton, 
Neocalanus densities, 
Pseudocalanus numbers/m
-3
 
for each of the 13 stages 
(egg, 6 naupliar, 6 
copepodite)s 
GoA Pollock Stochastic 
Switch Model 
Shelikof Strait, Gulf of 
Alaska 
Number of eggs to seed 
the model.  Base 
mortality, additive and 
multiplicative mort. 
adjustment parameters 
for each mort. Factor. 
number of 90 day old pollock 
larvae through time 
NEMURO Ocean Station P (50°N 
145°W), Bering Sea 
(57.5°N 175°W), and  
station A7 off the east of 
Hokkaido island, Japan 
(41.3°N 145.3°W) 
Fifteen state variables 
and parameters 
including 2 
phytoplankton, 3 
zooplankton, and 
multiple nutrient 
groups.  
Ecosystem fluxes are tracked 
in units of nitrogen and 
silicon. 
Eastern Bering Sea 
Shelf Model 1 Ecopath 
500,000 km
2
 in eastern 
Bering Sea south of 61°N 
Biomass, Production, 
Consumption, and diet 
composition for all 
major species in each 
ecosystem 
Balance between produced 
and consumed per-area 
biomass (t/km
2
).  Future 
work will explore energy 
(kcal/km
2
) and nutrient 
dynamics. 
Eastern Bering Sea 
Shelf Model 2 Ecopath 
500,000 km
2
 in eastern 
Bering Sea south of 
61°N 
Western Bering Sea 
Shelf Ecopath 
300,000 km
2
 on western 
Bering Sea shelf 
Gulf of Alaska Shelf 
Ecopath 
NPFMC management 
areas 610, 620, 630, and 
part of 640 
Aleutian Islands, 
Pribilof Islands Ecopath 
Not determined 
Prince William Sound, 
Ecopath 
Whole Prince William 
Sound 
  
143
Life history of Pacific halibut (Hippoglossus stenolepis) 
 
Steven R. Hare 
International Pacific Halibut Commission, P.O. Box 95009, Seattle, WA  98145-2009, U.S.A.  E-mail: 
hare@iphc.washington.edu 
 
Distribution 
 
Pacific halibut (Hippoglossus stenolepis) are 
found throughout the coastal waters of Alaska, 
British Columbia, Washington, Oregon and into 
northern California.  The center of abundance is 
the central Gulf of Alaska, particularly near 
Kodiak Island.  The depth range for adult halibut 
is from 50 m in the summer, to 600 m during 
winter spawning.  Pacific halibut are generally 
found in temperatures from 3-9°C. 
 
Reproduction and migration 
 
Pacific halibut mature at approximately 8 years of 
age.  During the spawning season - generally 
November to March - adult fish move to deeper 
waters near the edge of the continental shelf.  
Halibut are broadcast spawners with fertilization 
occurring by random external contact.  Halibut 
eggs and larvae drift in the surface currents for 6-7 
months after spawning.  During this long pelagic 
phase, halibut are moved generally west in the 
Gulf of Alaska and north into the Bering Sea by 
the dominant surface currents, before settling to 
the bottom in shallow waters in late spring and 
summer.  The relative distribution of recruited 
halibut (i.e. fish age 8 and older) biomass by area 
remains relatively constant from year to year.  To 
achieve this continuity, juvenile halibut migrate 
back to the south and east towards their spawning 
grounds.  This counter migration usually takes 
place between ages 2 and 6.  Adult halibut show 
seasonal migration (to deeper water for spawning) 
but very little directed migration. 
 
Age and growth 
 
Pacific halibut is the largest flatfish in the world, 
reaching a length of 2.7 meters and weight of 300 
kg.  It has a flat, diamond shaped body;  the 
colored side is a mottled brown, and over 99% are 
dextral, i.e., the eyes are on the right side of the 
fish.  The oldest identified halibut was a 55-year 
old male, however, fish over 25 years of age are 
uncommon.  Females grow to much larger sizes 
than males. 
 
The fishery 
 
A commercial fishery for halibut has existed since 
1888.  During the 20
th
 century, annual landings 
ranged between 17,000 and 40,000 metric tons.  
The current health of the fishery is attested to by 
the fact that some of highest landings on record 
were taken in the last 5 years of the 1990s.  Since 
1995, the fishery has been managed under an 
Individual Transferable Quota system.  Currently, 
the ex-vessel value of the fishery is around $US 
175 million.  In addition to the commercial 
fishery, there is a growing sport fishery and 
halibut are also captured incidentally in other 
North Pacific groundfish fisheries.  
 
Climate influences 
 
During the 20
th
 century, there have been dramatic 
and persistent changes in the growth and 
recruitment of Pacific halibut that cannot be 
readily explained by changes in stock size.  Over 
the last 15 years, the growth of halibut has 
decreased substantially, especially in Alaska  
(Fig. 1).  An eleven-year-old female halibut landed  
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
7891 01 11 21 31 41 51 61 71 8
Age
Mean Weight
1970-79
1980-89
1960-69
1940-59
1990-99
1920-39
 
Fig. 1 Changes in mean weight at age for 
female Pacific halibut in Alaska, 1925-2000. 
144
 
in Kodiak, Alaska, averaged 40 pounds in weight 
in 1980.  In 1995, the average weight for the same 
age female halibut was less than 20 pounds.  
Fifteen years ago fish of a given age were 
substantially larger in Alaska than in British 
Columbia;  now there is no difference.  In both 
respects, halibut growth is similar to what was 
observed in the 1920s and 1930s.  An increase 
occurred sometime during the 1940s, and the 
present decrease began in the mid-1970s.  Fish are 
also maturing at a smaller size now than they used 
to, while the age at maturity is quite close to what 
it has always been. 
 
There have also been clear decadal variations in 
halibut recruitment all through the century, or at 
least since about 1935 ( Fig. 2).  Most recently 
there was a run of good year-classes spawned in 
the late 1970s through late 1980s, apparently 
followed by a run of poor year-classes.  This kind 
of alternation has sometimes been viewed as a 
cycle, but could just as well reflect distinct periods 
of different environmental conditions.  Recent 
work has strongly suggested that halibut  
 
Recruitment of 6 year olds
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
1935 1945 1955 1965 1975 1985 1995
Year
Million Recruits
Total 
Area 3A
Area 2C
Area 2AB
 
Reproductive biomass
0
100
200
300
400
1935 1945 1955 1965 1975 1985 1995
Year
Million Pounds
Area 3A
Area 2C
Area 2AB
 
Fig. 2 Long-term trends in recruitment 
(measured as six-year olds) and spawning biomass 
of Pacific halibut from 1935 to 2000, for IPHC 
areas 2AB (British Columbia), 2C (Southeast 
Alaska), and 3A (central Gulf of Alaska). 
PDO and age-six recruitment
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Year Class
Millions of age-six recruits
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Winter PDO value
Recruits
PDO
2 regime stock-recruitment model
0
4
8
12
0 100 200 300 400
Million pounds spawning biomass
Million of age-six recruits
1947-1976
1977-1988
1989-1994
 
Fig. 3 Relationship between halibut spawning 
biomass and recruitment (top) and winter values of 
the Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO) and halibut 
recruitment (bottom). 
 
recruitment is driven primarily by the Pacific 
Decadal Oscillation (Fig. 3).  Stock size explains 
very little of the variability in recruitment;  use of 
the PDO as a covariate explains much of the 
observed variation however.  The PDO has 
alternated between positive (productive for 
halibut) and negative (unproductive) phases every 
25-35 years (Fig. 4). 
 
Available time series 
 
1. Age-6 Recruitment, 1935-1994, GOA and BC:  
these estimates are generated from a catch-age 
stock assessment model; 
2. Spawning biomass, 1935-2001, GOA and BC:  
these estimates are generated from a catch-age 
stock assessment model; 
3. Weight at age, incomplete from 1925-2000, 
GOA and BC:  these estimates come from fish 
measured during annual surveys. 
145
 
-0.6
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.8
Pacific Decadal Oscillation
ºC
 
-3
0
3
1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000
standard deviations
 
Fig. 4 The Pacific Decadal Oscillation, 1900-
2000.  The positive phase is illustrated, 
corresponding to positive values of the temporal 
index.  The index most recently turned negative in 
October 1998, and has remained strongly negative 
through the end of 2000. 
 
 
Biological and physical environment databases of the International Pacific 
Halibut Commission 
 
Steven R. Hare 
International Pacific Halibut Commission, P. O. Box 95009, Seattle, WA  98145-2009, U.S.A.  E-mail: 
hare@iphc.washington.edu 
 
Introduction 
 
The International Pacific Halibut Commission 
(IPHC) collects a broad variety of data in support 
of its research and management mandates.  
Scientific data collection activities began in 1925 
and have continued unabated to the present.  
Bering Sea activities commenced in 1930 and a 
great deal of larval and juvenile work has been 
conducted there.  In 1997, as part of an expanded 
survey design, regular longline surveying of the 
Bering Sea continental shelf edge and slope was 
initiated.  This plan calls for the same areas to be 
surveyed each year until 2001, at which time the 
sampling plan will be re-evaluated.  This brief 
report summarizes the biological and physical 
environmental data collected by the IPHC. 
 
Biological data 
 
Three types of biological data are collected, or 
estimated, by the IPHC: 
 
Commercial catch (fishery-dependent) data since 
1935 
 
The IPHC employs port samplers at 18 ports from 
St. Paul Island (Pribilofs) to Newport (Oregon).  
The port samplers collect both fishing log and 
biological data.  From the fishing logs we gather 
fishing data, time and location as well as fishing 
effort.  From this data we are able to continue our 
60-year i ndustry catch-per-unit-effort-index.  
From the landed catches we obtain size data and 
take otoliths to determine age composition. 
 
Survey (since 1963) and research (since 1925, 
fishery-independent) data 
 
The IPHC has conducted research aboard 
chartered commercial fishing vessels since 1925.  
The primary purpose of most charters has been to 
collect information pertaining to stock assessment 
and migration of Pacific halibut.  Since 1925, the 
IPHC has completed approximately 271 separate 
charters:  99 using trawl gear and 172 using setline 
gear.  Charter duration has varied between 1 week 
to 4 months consisting of 1 to 9 separate trips per 
charter.  From the regular surveys we obtain data 
on the sex, size and age composition of the 
146
 
population.  We also collect data on other aspects 
of the biology such as spawning condition, prior 
hook injuries and bycatch data on other species.  
Special research charters have been used to 
investigate questions relating to migration, effects 
of hook spacing and hook type catchability, bait 
loss and oil spill impact, among many others.  In 
addition, the IPHC has placed observers aboard 
numerous commercial and government vessels 
gathering information on the size, age, and sex 
composition of halibut. 
 
Population dynamics model output since 1974 
 
The commercial and research data collected are 
input to a complex size, sex and age structured 
model we use for assessing the population 
dynamics of the Pacific halibut resource.  The 
model produces estimates (from 1974 to the 
present) of exploitable biomass, exploitation rates, 
fishing mortality, annual surplus production and 
recruitment.  Estimates of recruitment and 
exploitable biomass prior to 1974 are available 
from a VPA type analysis. 
 
Physical environment data 
 
While most of the IPHC sampling effort is 
directed toward the fishery, we also have a long 
history of interest in the oceanic environment.  
Bottom temperatures have been collected at all 
stations of the research survey since 1963.  During 
the extensive egg, juvenile, and larval halibut 
work of the 1960s, detailed temperature and 
salinity data were collected.  As part of a recently 
initiated halibut fisheries oceanography project, an 
ocean bottom properties database has been 
assembled.  A number of uses are envisioned for 
this database including attempts to determine 
migration pathways of juvenile halibut, understand 
and model low frequency variability in growth 
rates, and model oceanic flow at depth along the 
ocean bottom. 
 
Ocean bottom properties database 
 
Data for the IPHC ocean bottom properties 
database were assembled from several sources, 
including the National Oceanic Data Center, 
National Marine Fisheries Service, Japanese 
Meteorological Agency, U.S. Foreign Observer 
Program, University of Alaska, and IPHC longline 
surveys.  The data were quality controlled through 
comparison of means and variances in areas of 
overlap.  All data were plotted and depths were 
checked against an independent bathymetry 
database (TerrainBase).  At present, the database 
contains 107,000 records and has the following 
boundary conditions: 
- Areal coverage:  Alaska, British Columbia, and 
U.S. West Coast (to 30ºN) shelf & upper slope; 
- Depth:  observations must be within 15 m of the 
bottom and are restricted to areas with a bottom 
depth of 1,000 m or less; 
- Variables:  temperature, salinity, dissolved 
oxygen, nutrients (phosphate, nitrate, nitrite); 
- Time:  as complete a historical record as 
possible. 
 
To illustrate the temporal and spatial distribution 
of data, plots of temperature (Fig. 5) and salinity 
(Fig. 6) were made for each decade.  Most of the 
data were compiled in the months of May through 
September.  For the study of halibut, this is 
encouraging since these are the months during 
which most growth takes place and during which 
most of the fishery occurs.  The amount of usable 
data varies substantially by decade and variable.  
The temperature data are the most promising and it 
is anticipated that annual indices of ocean bottom 
temperatures by IPHC area from 1960-present can 
be constructed.  For salinity, we may not be able to 
do better than 5-year averages.  The long-term 
average fields for the months May to September 
and the years 1961-95 are shown in Figure 7.  
These average fields should be viewed as the 
conditions to which halibut have adapted over 
time.  Sustained departures from these average 
conditions are then prime candidates for 
exploration as agents of change in halibut biology.  
Analysis of the temporal variability of ocean 
bottom temperature has begun and initial results 
are highly encouraging. 
 
Availability of IPHC data 
 
The IPHC has long strived to make its data 
available to interested parties.  Much of the data 
are available in the three primary IPHC data 
series.  These reports contain both raw and 
interpreted data as well as analysis: 
147
1940s
1950s
1960s
1970s
1980s
1990s
 
Fig. 5 Location of ocean bottom temperature 
data by decade. 
1940s
1950s
1960s
1970s
1980s
1990s
 
Fig. 6  Location of ocean bottom salinity data 
by decade. 
 
Temperature
Salinity
 
Fig. 7 Long-term (1961-1995) average fields for ocean bottom temperature and salinity for the months 
May to September. 
 
- Scientific Reports, 1931-2000, most recent is 
Report No. 79; 
- Technical Reports, 1969-2000, most recent is 
Report No. 42;  and 
- Annual Reports, 1969-2000, most recent is 
2000. 
 
One of the main methods of data distribution has 
been through personal communication and IPHC 
generally responds in a timely manner to such 
requests.  Increasingly, IPHC is making data 
available over the World Wide Web.  For 
example, our annual survey catch data is of great 
interest to halibut fishermen.  We will shortly be 
making these data available interactively over the 
WWW.  Much of the pre-1963 IPHC data is 
available only in hard copy (i.e., the IPHC 
Reports).  We have initiated an effort to digitize 
these data and preserve them in electronic format. 
 
IPHC contacts 
 
WWW page:  http://www.iphc.washington.edu 
Dr. Bruce Leaman, Director 
International Pacific Halibut Commission 
P. O. Box 95009 
Seattle, WA  98125-2009 
Phone: (206) 634-1838 
148
 
Fishery data of the Republic of Korea 
 
Suam Kim 
Department of Marine Biology, Pukyong National University, 599-1 Daeyeon 3-dong, Nam-gu, Pusan, 
Republic of Korea.  608-737  E-mail:suamkim@pknu.ac.kr 
 
Catch statistics of major species 
 
Warm and cold water masses are found 
permanently around the Korean peninsula:  a 
branch of warm Kuroshio Current flows into the 
Yellow Sea and the southern part of the Japan/East 
Sea (JES), and cold water occupies the north part 
of the JES forming a Polar Front near the mid JES.  
Therefore, many warm and cold water species 
have been exploited traditionally in Korean 
waters.  Catch statistics of about 40 commercially 
important fishes have been recorded since the 
1920s, and some additional species were 
considered necessary and added later (Table 3).  
The Fishery Administration Authority of Korea 
has collected and published monthly and annual 
catch data for about 60 fish species.  
 
Recently, the National Statistical Office of Korean 
Government began to archive the fishery data in 
electronic form.  Monthly and annual catch 
statistics (fish, 58 species;  squids and octopus, 7 
species;  shellfish, 19 species;  shrimps and crabs, 
12 species;  and macro-algae, 12 species) since 
1988 were digitized, and the electronic data can be 
found at “www.nso.go.kr”. 
 
Biomass estimation 
 
In Korean waters, many fish are transboundary 
specie:  they span the national boundaries of 
Korea, North Korea, China, Japan, and Russia 
through their life cycles, which often results in the 
lack of fishery information.  Because of scanty 
research facilities and complexity in ecosystems, 
intensive scientific surveys such as hydroacoustic 
and trawl surveys were not started until recently.  
Trawl/acoustic surveys for biomass estimation 
were conducted in the southwestern part of the 
Yellow Sea from the late 1990s.  However, the 
spatial and seasonal coverage of the survey was 
not enough to reveal biomass and migration routes 
of the major stocks. 
 
Cohort analysis for biomass estimation was 
applied to some species since the early 1990s.  By 
using catch and ageing data since 1970s, 
biomasses of about 10 species were estimated 
(Table 3).  However, as is a common problem in 
scientific survey, it has been often criticised that 
there was no integration of fishery data between 
countries for the transboundary species.  
Furthermore, there was no consideration of 
climate change on the small pelagic fish 
population.  
 
Fish length measurement 
 
Length composition of fish can be found in some 
literature (Table 3).  However, not much published 
information is available though the National 
Fisheries Research and Development Institute 
(NFRDI) of Korea has collected annual mean 
length of some major species continuously.  
 
 
Table 3 Fish catch, biomass estimation, and length frequency in Korean waters. 
Common Name Scientific Name year (catch) year (biomass) year (length) 
Flounders  26-00   
Bastard (Paralichthys olivaceus) 26-00   
Tongue Fish  26-00   
Cod Gadus macrocephalus 26-00   
Pollock Theragra chalcogramma 26-00   
Common Sea Bream Pagrus major 26-00 75, 79, 80, 85, 86 (VPA) 70, 75, 80, 85, 86 
Black Sea Bream Acanthopagrus schlegeli 44-00   
Others Sea Bream  26-00   
149
 
Table 3 (continued) 
Common  Name Scientific Name year (catch) year (biomass) year (length) 
Pomfret Pampus argenteus 26-00   
Brown Croaker Miichthys miiuy 26-00   
Small yellow Croaker Larimichthys polyactis 26-00 74-76, 80, 85, 86 (VPA) 70, 74, 75, 78, 80, 82-99 
White Croaker Argyrosomus argentatus 75-00 75-95 (VPA) 70, 75, 80, 85, 86 
Large Yellow Croaker Larimichthys crocea   85, 86 
Other Croakers  52-00   
Corvenias  26-00   
Hairtail Trichiurus lepturus 26-00 70-97 (VPA)  
Sandfish Arctoscopus japonicus 26-00   
Common Sea Bass Lateolabrax japonicus 26-00   
Bea Bass Epinephelus septemfasciatus 31-00   
Redfish Doederleinia berycoides 28-00   
Sharp Toothed Eel Muraenesox cinereus 26-00 76-95 (VPA)  
Sea Eel Conger myriaster 26-00   
Gobies  76-00   
Lizard Fishes (Saurida undosquamis)  59-00   
Flat Head Platycephalus indicus 26-00   
Rockfish Sebastes inermis 26-00   
Puffers  26-00   
Anchovies (Engraulis japonicus) 26-00   
Sardine Sardinops melanostictus 27-00 71-94 (VPA) 75-94 
Hickory Shad Konosirus punctatus 26-00   
Herring Clupea pallasii 26-00   
Round Herring Sardinella zunasi 27-00   
Mackerel (Scomber japonicus) 26-00 76-94 (VPA)  
Jack Mackerels (Trachurus japonicus) 26-00 65-95 (VPA) 75, 80, 85, 86 
Spanish Mackerels (Scomberomorus niphonius) 26-00  84, 85, 86 
Saury Cololabis saira 26-00  75, 80, 85, 86 
Half Baek Hyporhamphus sajori 26-00   
Tuna Thunnus thynnus 26-00   
Yellow Tail Seriola quinqueradiata 26-00   
Salmon Oncorhynchus keta 26-40, 91-00   
Trout  26-00   
Sea Smelt Sillago sihama 74-00   
Monk Fish Lophiomus setigerus 26-00   
Yellow goosefish Lophius litulon 85-00  94-97 
Filefish Stepanolepis cirrhifer 75-00   
Filefish Navodon modestus 75-00 80-86 (VPA) 80-86 
Gurnards (Chelidonichthys spinosus) 26-00   
Sand Lance Hypoptychus dybowskii 26-00   
Mullets (Mugil cephalus cephalus) 26-00   
Whitings  26-00   
Bigeyed Herring Ilisha elongata 26-00   
Atka Fish Pleurogrammus azonus 26-00   
Sharks  26-00   
Skates  26-00   
Skateray Raja kenojei 91-00   
Squid Todarodes pacificus 26-00   
Cuttle Fish Sepia esculenta 31-00   
Shrimp Medium Panaeus orientalis 44-00   
Tanner Crab Chionoecetos opilio 65-00   
Blue Crab Portunus trituberculatus 66-00   
Pink Shrimp Pandalus borealis 80-00   
 
150
 
TINRO’s time-series data on Russian fish and ecosystems 
 
Victor V. Lapko 
Pacific Scientific Research Fisheries Centre (TINRO-Centre), 4 Schevchenko Alley, Vladivostok, 
690950, Russia.  E-mail: interdept@tinro.wavenet.ru 
 
Most data that are considered suitable for a 
contribution to a North Pacific Ecosystem Status 
Report from Russia were collected in the Russian 
EEZ on commercially valuable species.  Only 
fisheries research institutes are capable of 
providing regular monitoring of the commercial 
stocks over large areas and during prolonged 
periods.  The main goal of the monitoring is to 
evaluate the biological condition of the stocks, to 
observe their abundance dynamics and to 
determine allowable catches.  
 
The fisheries resources of Russia are now 
composed of about 200 species, however only 30 
species could be defined as basic.  The most 
common are Pacific salmon, walleye pollock, 
Pacific herring, cod, flatfishes, saury, atka 
mackerel, squids, crabs, and till 1993 – Japanese 
sardine.  During 1981–2000, these taxa constituted 
90–94% of the total predictable catch, and these 
were the only taxa receiving the most regular and 
thorough monitoring and statistics reporting.  
 
Observations were started beginning in the late 
1970s – early 1980s, after the Exclusive Economic 
Zones (EEZ) were established.  The reasons were 
self-evident – first of all, the Russian fisheries 
industry had to pay attention to the bioresources of 
its own EEZ, and began regular investigations on 
commercial species.  Such work – to carry out 
monitoring of the major fisheries stocks, was 
entrusted to the institutes of TINRO’s system. 
Also in the beginning of 1980s, the Laboratory of 
Applied Biocenology was established at TINRO-
Centre.  The Laboratory initiated and, up to now, 
has conducted an ecosystem study of fishery 
resources in the far-eastern waters of Russian 
EEZ.  So it could be concluded that regular 
monitoring of the fisheries resources in the far-
eastern waters of Russia was started in the early 
1980s. 
 
To date, TINRO-Centre has accomplished several 
hundred expeditions according to the program of 
stock observation on single commercially valuable 
species and populations.  However those data 
appear slightly inappropriate for an Ecosystem 
Status Report because they have been collected 
mainly on single species or even population of 
species, for example, walleye pollock, cod, herring 
etc.  Bycatch species were usually not recorded 
entirely or recorded very roughly (both species 
composition and abundance of the bycatch) in 
those surveys.  Nevertheless, information collected 
in single-species surveys as well as fishery 
statistics have been used for summarizing and 
analysing the abundance of those species, status 
and time trends.  In this respect the major target 
species and groups (pollock, herring, salmons, 
cod, crabs etc.) are well provided with prolonged 
time-series data that can be used for commenting 
on long-term species condition.  
 
Otherwise, TINRO’s ecosystem investigations 
were aimed at studying marine communities and 
foremost – fish communities, which involve a 
major commercial species.  All species have been 
systematically recorded in such observations, 
providing the necessary information for 
monitoring on pelagic and demersal communities.  
The main method for collecting data was the trawl 
survey.  Stations were arranged in transects and 
covered the area of interest.  Integrating, averaging 
and extrapolating the point data throughout the 
observed area provided the necessary assessments 
of species composition and abundance.  
Accordingly, about 70 expeditions totaling about 
15,000 stations and pelagic trawl tows have been 
carried out in the Pacific waters of Russian EEZ.  
These data could be used for preparing a North 
Pacific Ecosystem Status Report (Table 4).  In 
addition, the western Kamchatka shelf is a region 
with a valuable commercial bottom fishery and 
hence is well-provided with regular data collected 
in trawl surveys.  About 10 expeditions 
(approximately 2,000 trawl tows) have been 
accomplished in that area in 1981–2000 and these 
data can also be used for preparing the Report.   
151
 
To collect nektonic and nektobenthic species, we 
applied both midwater and demersal rope trawls, 
trying to keep using the same types while carrying 
out the same surveys.  The method and techniques 
of trawl towing differed slightly depending on the 
investigation, but the resulting calculations are 
very comparable with respect to swept area or 
volume.  
 
The major gear for plankton sampling was Jedy’s 
net with mouth diameter 0.1 m
2
.  Vertical hauls 
(total and in separate layers) were usually 
accomplished over a wide range of depths.  The 
total number of plankton hauls slightly exceeds 
that of trawl tows because of round-the-clock 
plankton stations, which were regularly conducted 
almost in each expedition. 
 
In TINRO’s system, all the above-mentioned 
information is used for preparing the “Annual  
Prediction of the Commercial Stocks’ Status and 
Establishing of Total Allowable Catches” for each 
exploited species.   
 
Table 4 Time-series surveys conducted in 
pelagic layer in Pacific waters according to 
ecosystem studying program. 
Region Time range 
(month, year) 
No. of 
surveys 
Bering Sea  
(western part) 
April – December  
(1986 – 2000) 
21 
Waters off Eastern 
Kamchatka 
June – December  
(1986 – 1995) 
6 
Pacific waters off 
Kuril Islands 
June – December  
(1986 – 2000) 
21 
Sea of Okhotsk January – December 
(1984 – 2000) 
24 
Total January – December 
(1984 – 2000) 
72 
 
 
Groundfish, crab, shrimp and other time-series of the Alaska Fisheries 
Science Center  
 
Patricia Livingston and Anne B. Hollowed 
Alaska Fisheries Science Center, 7600 Sand Point Way NE, Seattle, WA 98115, U.S.A.  E-mail: 
Pat.Livingston@noaa.gov;  Anne.Hollowed@noaa.gov 
 
The Alaska Fisheries Science Center in Seattle, 
Washington, maintains several time-series of fish, 
crab, and shrimp abundance (Table 5).  The Center 
also collects physical and biological data (e.g., 
temperature, stomach contents, weight and length 
at age, etc.) and produces stock assessments for 
groundfish populations (Table 5).  Echointe-
gration/ trawl surveys are used to assess species 
with a large off-bottom component such as 
walleye pollock and Pacific hake.  Summer bottom 
trawl surveys in the eastern Bering Sea, Gulf of 
Alaska, Aleutian Islands and off the Washington-
Oregon-California coasts have a primary purpose 
of quantifying groundfish biomass and size-at-age 
composition for setting allowable biological catch 
limits for fishery management.  Limited winter 
survey efforts have recently begun to look at 
winter distribution of walleye pollock and Pacific 
cod in Steller sea lion foraging areas.  The summer 
eastern Bering Sea time-series is also used for crab 
assessment purposes.  Many non-commercial 
species and benthic invertebrates are captured in 
these surveys, so they can also be used to assess 
the abundance of some of these species.  Time 
trends in abundance of non-commercial species 
can be compared with exploited species to 
understand possible links to climate variability 
(Figs. 8 and 9).  Changes in spatial distribution or 
abundance of small pelagics such as capelin and 
eulachon or perhaps sharks, might be indexed by 
these surveys (see “www.afsc.noaa.gov/kodiak/ 
osmeridebs.htm” for summer distribution of 
capelin and eulachon in the eastern Bering Sea 
1982-1999, and p. 35-36 of “www.refm.noaa.gov/ 
docs/Ecocon2000.pdf” for capelin abundance 
changes in inshore areas of the Gulf of Alaska 
1972-1999, and p.62-67 for shark distribution 
changes in the Gulf of Alaska).  Changes in 
abundance of species and diversity of trophic 
guilds might provide information to help separate 
152
 
fishing versus climate (Fig. 10).  Life history 
characteristics and responses to climate variability 
are a focus.   
 
Surveys also provide information used in fish 
stock assessment models.  The statistical age-
structured models developed at the Alaska 
Fisheries Science Center use the Baranov catch 
equation as the underlying population model, and 
incorporate diverse sources of information on 
species catch, abundance, age composition, and 
life history parameters to assess historical 
population abundance at age.  These estimates can 
provide historical estimates of population biomass 
(Fig. 11) and recruitment.  Relationships between 
these estimates and climate regime shifts have 
been examined in recent years (e.g., Hollowed et 
al. 1999; Hare and Mantua 2000).  See 
“www.refm.noaa.gov/stocks/Default.htm” for 
more information on the Center’s fish stock 
assessments.  Historical groundfish estimates from 
stock assessments (total biomass, spawning 
biomass, recruitment, catch and weight-at-age 
data) can be accessed at “www.refm.noaa.gov/ 
stocks/stocksum.htm”.  Groundfish stomach 
content data have been collected by the Alaska 
Fisheries Science Center from summer research 
surveys and during other times of the year from 
commercial fishing vessels utilizing fishery 
observers (see “www.refm.noaa.gov/reem/data/ 
Default.htm” for more details).  These data are 
incorporated into multispecies and ecosystem 
models. 
 
A time-series of ocean surface current speed and 
direction have been compiled for the North Pacific 
from an ocean surface current model of the Alaska  
 
YEAR
Lycodes brevipes
Sarritor frenatus
Podothecus acipenserinus
Icelus spp.
Gymnocanthus pistilliger
Triglops spp.
Cyclopteridae
Bathymaster signatus
Dasycottus setiger
Hexagrammos stelleri
1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
 
Fig. 8 Changes in population estimates for a 
variety of non-commercial species showing a 
similarity in trends.  Species include sculpins, 
eelpouts, poachers, snailfish, ronquils, and 
greenlings (source:  Gerry Hoff, AFSC). 
Year
1980 1985 1990 1995
Biomass (thousand mt)
0
50
100
150
200
Entire survey area
SE Middle Shelf
NW Middle Shelf
Biomass of Large Medusae in Bering Sea Surveys
Fig. 9 Biomass of jellyfish medusae in the 
eastern Bering Sea from bottom trawl surveys, 
1979-1998 (source:  Ric Brodeur, NWFSC). 
 
 
Inshore Benthic Infauna 
C
0 
1,000,000 
2,000,000 
3,000,000 
4,000,000 
5,000,000 
6,000,000 
7,000,000 
8,000,000 
9,000,000 
79 81 83 85 87 89 91 93 95 97 
Starfish 
Blue king 
Red king 
C. bairdi 
C. opilio 
Flathead sole 
Longhead dab 
Alaska plaice 
Rock sole  
Yellowfin sole  
Offshore Pelagic Fish 
C
0 
2,000,000 
4,000,000 
6,000,000 
8,000,000 
10,000,000 
12,000,000 
14,000,000 
79 81 83 85 87 89 91 93 95 97 
Piscivorous birds 
N. sea lion 
N. fur seal 
Adult pollock  
Arrowtooth flounder   
Greenland turbot   
Crab/fish Consumers 
0 
500,000 
1,000,000 
1,500,000 
2,000,000 
2,500,000 
3,000,000 
3,500,000 
79 81 83 85 87 89 91 93 95 97 
Year 
Myoxocephalus sp. 
Hemilepidotus sp. 
Pacific cod 
Skates 
Pacific halibut 
Biomass (t) Biomass (t) Biomass (t) 
 
Fig. 10 Changes in biomass within trophic 
guilds in the eastern Bering Sea (source:  Pat 
Livingston, AFSC). 
 
 
153
 
Table 5 Time-series maintained by the Alaska Fisheries Science Center, Seattle, WA, U.S.A. 
Time series Area
1
 Years Sampling 
period 
Main species  Gear Physical data Bottom depth 
range (m) 
Groundfish bottom 
trawl survey 
GOA 84,87,90,93,96,99 June-August Groundfish Bottom trawl (roller gear) Bottom and 
surface temp., 
XBT or MBT 
10-500 
(some 500-1000) 
" AI 80,83,86,91,94,97,00 " Groundfish " " 10-900 
" EBS shelf 
Slope 
75, 79-00 
79,81,82,85,88,91, 00 
" Groundfish, crab Bottom trawl " 10-200 
200-800 
" WOC 77,80,83,86,89,92,95,98 " Groundfish Bottom trawl " 55-366 
Hydroacoustic/trawl 
survey 
EBS – shelf 
SE shelf 
Bogoslof I. 
79,82,85,88,91,94,96,97,99,00 
91,92,93,95,00,01 
88-89, 91-00 
June-Aug. 
Feb-Apr 
Feb.-Mar. 
Walleye pollock 38kHz 
echosounder/midwater 
trawl 
" 10-200 
10-200 
>200 
" GOA 
(Shelikof Strait) 
81,83-85, 88-98,00 March Walleye pollock " " 10-200 
" WOC 77,80,83,86,89,92,95,98 July-Sept Pacific hake " " Mostly 55-366 
Longline survey GOA 
AI 
EBS 
1978-00 
80-94,96,98,99 
82-94,97,99 
May-August Sablefish longline " 200-1000 
Inshore small mesh 
survey 
GOA-  1953-54, 57-59,62-64,68, 1970-
2000 
Mostly June-
Nov. 
Shrimp and 
epibenthic fish 
Small-mesh shrimp trawl 
(same gear since 1972) 
" 20-250 
Groundfish stomach 
content collection 
EBS 
GOA 
AI 
WOC 
Mostly 1984-2000 
1990,93,96, 99, 2001 
91,94,97,2000 
87,88,89,91,92,95,98 
Mostly June-
Aug. 
Groundfish Multiple  Mostly 10-500 
Groundfish stock 
assessments 
EBS 
GOA 
AI 
1979-present Annual 
assessment 
cycle 
    
Fishery Observer data EBS 
GOA 
AI 
1977-present All months Groundfish Multiple Surface temp Mostly 10-500 
Chum salmon age and 
size at maturity 
GOA 1972-present Late Aug. Chum salmon    
Ocean surface current 
model outputs 
North Pacific 1901-present All months   Surface current 
direction and 
velocity 
 
Pinniped and cetacean 
data 
EBS 
GOA 
AI 
WOC 
  Pinnipeds and 
cetaceans 
   
Recruitment processes EBS 
GOA 
(see contribution by B. Megrey for 
more details) 
 Larval fish and 
walleye pollock 
   
1 
GOA = Gulf of Alaska;  AI = Aleutian Islands;  EBS = Eastern Bering Sea;  WOC = Washington-Oregon-California 
154
 
GOA  
0.00E+00 
1.00E+06 
2.00E+06 
3.00E+06 
4.00E+06 
5.00E+06 
6.00E+06 
7.00E+06 
78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 
Year 
Sablefish GOAPollock GOA cod GOA ATF Thornyhead POP Northern rockfish 
Biomass (t) 
EBS 
0.00E+00 
5.00E+06 
1.00E+07 
1.50E+07 
2.00E+07 
2.50E+07 
78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99                      
Year
 
Pollock P. Cod Ak Plaice Flathead sole Yellowfin sole Rock sole Arrowtooth flounder EBS POP 
Biomass (t) 
 
Fig. 11 Groundfish stock biomass estimates in 
the Gulf of Alaska (GOA) and eastern Bering Sea 
(EBS) derived from stock assessment models of 
the Alaska Fisheries Science Center. 
 
Fisheries Science Center.  A model description 
and the outputs can be viewed at “www.refm.noaa. 
gov/docs/oscurs/Default.htm”.   
 
The Alaska Fisheries Science Center’s Ocean 
Carrying Capacity Program carries out work on  
 
North Pacific salmon ecology.  It has begun a 
series of coastal cruises in the Bering Sea and Gulf 
of Alaska to look at salmon ecology, and has a 
historical time-series of chum salmon age and size 
of return (“www.afsc.noaa.gov/abl/OCC/ 
occ.htm”). 
 
The North Pacific Groundfish Observer Program 
maintains a fishery observer database containing 
the catch and other biological and physical 
information recorded by fishery observers on 
commercial fishing vessels or at fish processing 
plants (“www.refm.noaa.gov/observers/ 
Default.htm”). 
 
Marine mammal population data are maintained 
for Alaska pinniped information (“nmml.afsc.noaa 
ov/AlaskaEcosystems/akprog.htm”), for Alaska 
cetacean assessments “nmml.afsc.noaa.gov/ 
CetaceanAssessment/cetacean.htm”, and for 
California Current pinniped and cetacean 
assessments (“nmml.afsc.noaa.gov/California 
Current/calcurr.htm”).  Marine mammal stock 
assessment reports can be viewed at “www.nmfs. 
noaa.gov/prot_res/PR2/Stock_Assessment 
_Program/ ars.html”. 
 
The Recruitment Processes program (“www.afsc. 
noaa.gov/race/recruit-fociprog.htm”) has time-
series relating to early life history stages of fish 
and physical and biological data to assist in 
understanding population processes (see Megrey 
in this volume for details).  
 
Groundfish and pelagic time-series maintained by the Stock Assessment 
Division of Fisheries and Oceans, Canada 
 
Gordon A. McFarlane 
Fisheries and Ocean Canada, Pacific Biological Station, 3190 Hammond Bay Road, Nanaimo, B.C. 
Canada.  V9R 5K6  E-mail: McfarlaneS@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
The Groundfish Section at the Pacific Biological 
Station maintains several time-series of data 
related to groundfish fishery monitoring and 
fishery surveys (Table 6).  The Section also 
collects physical and biological data (e.g., 
temperature, weight and length-at-age, etc.) and 
produces stock assessments for groundfish 
populations (Table 6).   
Echo-integration/midwater trawl surveys are used 
to estimate Pacific hake abundance for the 
offshore and the Strait of Georgia stocks.  The 
bottom trawl surveys in Hecate Strait and Queen 
Charlotte Sound are conducted to index the 
abundance of exploited species and to study 
multispecies groundfish assemblages.  Ecosystem 
dynamics are studied using an annual midwater 
 
155
 
Table 6 The physical and biological data used for stock assessment of groundfish and small pelagics. 
Time series Area
1
 Years Sampling 
period 
Main species  Gear Physical 
data 
Bottom 
depth 
range (m) 
Email Contact 
Groundfish 
bottom trawl 
survey 
Hecate Strait, BC 84, 87, 89, 91, 
93, 95, 96, 98, 
2000 
May-June Groundfish Bottom trawl (soft-
bottom gear) 
CTD (87-
present) 
20-150 fargoj@pac.dfo-
mpo.gc.ca 
Pacific ocean 
perch bottom 
trawl survey 
Queen Charlotte 
Sound, BC 
65-67, 69-71, 
73, 76-77, 84, 
94, 95 
June-
September 
Pacific ocean 
perch 
Bottom trawl (roller 
gear) 
None 100-400 krishkab@pac.dfo-
mpo.gc.ca 
Hydroacoustic
/ trawl survey 
Coastwide, BC 90-2000 August Pacific Hake 38kHz 
echosounder/ 
midwater trawl 
CTD 50-1000 saundersm@pac.dfo
-mpo.gc.ca 
La Perouse 
Ecosystem 
Project 
Southwest Coast 
Vancouver Island, 
BC 
85-2000 August Herring/ 
Pacific  Hake 
38kHz 
echosounder/ 
midwater trawl 
CTD 50-1000 mcfarlanes@pac.dfo
-mpo.gc.ca 
Hydroacoustic
/ trawl survey 
Strait of Georgia, 
BC 
80, 88,  93,  
96,  97, 98, 
2000 
February-
April 
Pacific Hake 38kHz 
echosounder/ 
midwater trawl 
CTD/ADCP 
(2000 only) 
50-350 saundersm@pac.dfo
-mpo.gc.ca 
Sardine/ 
Midwater 
Trawl Survey 
West Coast 
Vancouver Island, 
BC 
1996-present July Sardine 38kHz 
echosounder/ 
midwater trawl 
CTD 50-1000 mcfarlanes@pac.dfo
-mpo.gc.ca 
Groundfish 
stock 
assessments 
BC 1979-present Annual 
assessment 
cycle 
Commecially 
important 
species 
   www.pac.dfo-
mpo.gc.ca/sci/psarc/ 
Groundfish 
Fishery 
Observer data 
Foreign Pacific 
Whiting Fishery, 
BC 
1987-present June-
October 
Pacific Hake Midwater trawl   50-500  saundersm@pac.dfo
-mpo.gc.ca 
Groundfish 
Fishery 
Observer data 
Domestic trawl 
(100% coverage), 
BC 
1996-present All year All groundfish 
species 
Trawl   20-1100  rutherfordka@pac.d
fo-mpo.gc.ca 
Groundfish 
Fishery 
Observer data 
Domestic hook-
and-line (5-10% 
coverage), BC 
2000-present All year All groundfish 
species 
Hook-and-line  20-1100  rutherfordka@pac.d
fo-mpo.gc.ca 
156
 
Table 6 (continued) 
Time series Area
1
 Years Sampling 
period 
Main species  Gear Physical 
data 
Bottom depth 
range (m) 
Email Contact 
Groundfish 
Fishery Sales 
slips 
Domestic fishery 
(all gears), BC 
1950-1996 All year Commercially 
important 
species 
All Gears  20-1100  bijsterveldl@pac.dfo-
mpo.gc.ca 
Groundfish 
Dockside 
monitoring 
Trawl and Hook-
and-line, BC 
1996-present All year All landed 
catch 
Trawl and hook-
and-line 
 20-1100 rutherfordka@pac.dfo-
mpo.gc.ca 
Groundfish 
Fisher logs 
Domestic trawl 
fishery, BC 
1950-present All year Commercially 
important 
species 
Trawl  20-1100  rutherfordka@pac.dfo-
mpo.gc.ca 
Groundfish 
Fisher logs 
Domestic hook-
and-line fishery, 
BC 
1995-present All year Commercially 
important 
species 
Hook-and-line  20-1100 rutherfordka@pac.dfo-
mpo.gc.ca 
Groundfish 
Fisher logs 
Domestic 
sablefish trap 
fishery, BC 
1980-present All year Sablefish Trawl and hook-
and-line 
 200-1100  saundersm@pac.dfo-
mpo.gc.ca 
Groundfish 
Specimen 
Sampling 
From commercial 
and research 
catches, BC 
1950-present All year Most 
commercially 
important  
groundfish 
species 
All gear  20-1100  rutherfordka@pac.dfo-
mpo.gc.ca 
Herring 
Spawn survey 
Coastwide, BC 1950-present March-April Herring Dive and Aerial 
surveys 
 0-30 schweigertj@pac.dfo-
mpo.gc.ca 
Herring 
Assessments 
BC 1950-present Annual 
assessment 
cycle 
Herring    www.pac.dfo-
mpo.gc.ca/sci/psarc/ 
Herring 
Specimen 
Sampling 
Coastwide, BC 1950-present September-
April 
Herring Seine and gillnet   schweigertj@pac.dfo-
mpo.gc.ca 
Herring Catch 
data 
Coastwide, BC 1950-present September-
April 
Herring Seine and gillnet   schweigertj@pac.dfo-
mpo.gc.ca 
1 
BC = British Columbia Coast 
  
157
 
trawl survey off the southwest coast of Vancouver 
Island.  
 
The Section maintains the principal fishery 
monitoring databases of the commercial fishery.  
These include fisher and observer logs and 
dockside monitoring results of the trawl, trap and 
hook-and-line fisheries.  The section also 
maintains a centralised biological database system 
with results of approximately 4,000,000 specimens 
that have been examined since 1950 from on-
board and dockside sampling of research and 
commercial catches. 
 
Stock assessments are conducted using a variety of 
analytical methods depending on the amount and 
types of information available.  These include 
catch-at-age analyses tuned with abundance 
indices for Pacific hake, Pacific Ocean perch and 
some of the sole species or simple catch curve 
analyses for “data poor” stocks which include 
many rockfish species.  
 
The Pelagics Section at the Pacific Biological 
Station maintains several data series related to 
stock assessment.  These include a long time-
series of information on the extent and intensity of 
herring egg deposition, estimates of the total catch 
removed by gear, area and year, and estimates of 
biological characteristics of each stock including 
length, weight, sex, maturity and age (Table 6).  
These data series are updated and analysed 
annually to produce estimates of current stock 
abundance and forecasts of abundance for the next 
fishing season. 
 
Stock assessments are conducted using primarily 
two methods.  The first is based on a synthesis of 
the annual surveys of egg deposition into an 
estimate of spawning biomass which is combined 
with catch-at-age data to estimate total mature 
biomass in each area for each season.  The second 
method of stock assessment is based on a catch-at-
age analysis tuned with the spawn deposition 
information. 
 
The Section also maintains a database of tagging 
and tag recovery data from all areas of the coast 
dating back to the late 1930s.  These data indicate 
the degree of fidelity of herring to particular areas 
as well as highlighting the tendency of herring to 
stray extensively from year to year. 
 
Time series of 5 ocean/climate indices have been 
compiled (Aleutian Low Pressure Index-ALPI; 
Pacific Circulation Index-PCI; Atmospheric 
Forcing Index-AFI; Length of Day-LOD; and 
Fraser River Flows) to examine the relationship 
between ocean/ climate conditions and trends in 
abundance, recruitment and distribution of marine 
fishes.  These indices are available at “www.pac. 
dfo-mpo.gc.ca./sci/sa-mfpd/”.
 
 
FOCI biological time-series available for use as ecosystem indicators from the 
Fisheries Oceanography Coordinated Investigation 
 
Bernard A. Megrey 
National Marine Fisheries Service, Alaska Fisheries Science Center, 7600 Sand Point Way NE, Seattle, 
WA 98115, U.S.A.  E-mail: Bern.Megrey@noaa.gov 
 
Note:  The time-series described below are 
variable with respect to the number of years they 
describe.  FOCI is in the process of updating these 
time-series to make them as current as possible. 
 
Ichthyoplankton database 
 
Data from ichthyoplankton research surveys from 
the west coast of the United States as well as the 
Gulf of Alaska and Bering Sea are available from 
1972.  These data, which concentrate on eggs and 
larvae of ecologically important marine fish 
species, were collected by the U.S. and other 
international participants, and are assembled into a 
scientific database maintained at the Alaska 
Fisheries Science Center.  Included are species, 
stage, length (age), abundance and haul specifics 
(i.e., sample time, location, sampling method, 
etc.). 
158
 
Biological oceanography database 
 
Zooplankton and water nutrient information from 
research cruises are archived into a scientific 
database similar to the one described above.  Data 
records date from the early 1980s.  The recorded 
information includes species, stage, length, 
abundance, nutrient concentrations and haul 
specifics (i.e., sample time, location, sampling 
method, etc.). 
 
Egg and larval pollock abundance indices 
 
Egg and larval index values are calculated from 
data collected on Alaska Fisheries Science Center 
(AFSC) research cruises.  Since cruises were 
conducted for a variety of purposes, station 
patterns and the number of stations sampled are 
not consistent between cruises (Dunn and Rugen 
1989).  To deal with these inconsistencies, index 
values were calculated for regions and times that 
are of historic importance to eggs and larvae and 
were sampled during most years.  This was done 
to avoid extrapolating data to areas where no 
information was available.  The egg time-series 
begins in 1978 and the larval series begins in 
1979. 
 
Because mortality can have a large effect during 
an index interval (one month in this case), 
abundance values were standardized to the mid-
point of the index period.  The egg mortality rate 
(z=0.186/day) was taken from Picquelle and 
Megrey (1993, 1991) and larval mortality rate 
(z=0.110/day) was taken from Yoklavich and 
Bailey (1990).  The abundances for eggs and 
larvae in the index region were calculated by year 
using the Sette and Ahlstrom method (Richardson 
1981).  Mean catch per m
2
 was calculated by 
weighting catch per 10 m
2
 for each station by the 
polygonal area of the station. The grand mean of 
all stations within the index region was then 
multiplied by the total area of the index region to 
give the abundance index.  Because early sampling 
for eggs was done to an insufficient depth to cover 
the whole vertical range of distribution, egg 
abundances were corrected for tows sampled to 
less than 250 m depth using the method described 
in Kendall and Kim (1989). 
 
Age-0 and age-1 juvenile pollock abundance 
 
Indices of juvenile pollock were derived from data 
generated from shrimp and juvenile pollock 
surveys conducted in the Shelikof Strait region.  
Data for age-0 pollock begin in 1975.  Data for 
age-1 pollock begin in 1979.  Spring and Bailey 
(1991) provided detailed descriptions of gear used 
to collect samples, geographic and temporal 
coverage of the surveys, gear-dependent mortality 
corrections, and all assumptions and data 
processing steps.  Juvenile abundance values used 
in this study were corrected for gear and mortality 
affects. 
 
Egg production estimates of pollock spawning 
biomass 
 
Estimates of spawning biomass in Shelikof Strait 
derived from the application of egg production 
methods to results of egg surveys are available in 
1981 and from 1985-1992.  A complete 
description is given in Picquelle and Megrey 
(1991).  These fishery-independent estimates of 
spawner biomass have been used to calibrate stock 
assessment models but can be useful in an 
ecosystem analysis context.  The time-series will 
be updated as new egg surveys are conducted. 
 
FOCI recruitment prediction 
 
FOCI supplies annual recruitment forecasts for 
Gulf of Alaska estimates for Shelikof Strait 
walleye pollock based on a conceptual model 
which incorporates biological and physical factors 
that influence survival of early life history forms.  
The sections above explained the biological data 
that are incorporated into the recruitment forecast.  
The sections below describe the historical data 
used in this activity. 
 
COADS SST, air temperature and sea level 
pressure 
 
To account for the variability in fluid temperature 
affecting the ocean's mixed layer in Shelikof 
Strait, FOCI also considers air temperature, sea-
surface temperature, and sea-level pressure from 
the Monthly Summaries Trimmed Group of the 
Comprehensive Ocean-Atmosphere Data Set 
(COADS) (Woodruff et al. 1987).  These data, 
159
 
which begin in 1962, are monthly averages of 
marine observations subjected to quality control to 
remove outliers and binned into 2º latitude by 2º 
longitude boxes.  Our subset comprised monthly 
averaged data from three locations:  55ºN, 159ºW; 
57ºN, 155ºW;  and 59ºN, 153ºW.  
 
Advection 
 
Advection through Sheilkof Strait, expressed as an 
index of continuous transport, is inferred from 
satellite-tracked drifters and is available beginning 
in 1980. 
 
Freshwater runoff 
 
The Alaska Coastal Current has a strong 
buoyancy-driven component created by freshwater 
runoff originating from ice melt, precipitation and 
coastal river discharge.  Buoyancy-driven coastal 
flows are typical of subarctic regions where 
changes in salinity rather than temperature 
generate density gradients.  Royer (1982) modeled 
the monthly freshwater runoff as a line source 
around the Gulf of Alaska by estimating the 
effects of insolation, local precipitation minus 
evaporation, and air temperature around the 
northern Gulf of Alaska.  This series was modified 
(Parker 1989a, 1989b) to include freshwater 
additions from Cook Inlet and sources along 
Shelikof Strait.  Values used in this study are 
indices that represent deviations from the mean 
winter (November-April) estimates of integrated 
coastal freshwater discharge into the Gulf of 
Alaska as provided by Parker (1989a, 1989b). 
 
Wind mixing 
 
Winds transfer mechanical energy between the 
atmosphere and the ocean.  The main effects of 
wind on early life stages of larvae are transport by 
wind-driven currents and deepening of the mixed 
layer.  Wind stress, proportional to the square of 
the wind speed, causes the former, and wind 
mixing, proportional to the cube of the wind 
speed, causes the latter.  The relative importance 
of these energy-transfer mechanisms depends on 
wind and current directions and the structure of the 
oceanic mixed layer (Klein 1980).  To account for 
the maximum effect of wind on early life stages of 
pollock larvae, we picked mixing, the highest 
mode.  A study of survival of first-feeding larvae 
with respect to wind mixing in Shelikof Strait 
(Bailey and Macklin 1993) supports this choice.  
Twice daily, winds were computed from the 
gridded NMC sea level pressures by applying a 
geotriptic wind model tuned to the Shelikof Strait 
region (Macklin et al. 1993).  The wind speeds 
were cubed and monthly averages determined for 
the study period.  We retained monthly averages to 
avoid the possibility of missing the influence of 
small-scale wind events, which are episodic in 
nature.  One NMC time-series was produced for 
wind mixing near the exit of Shelikof Strait (57ºN, 
156ºW) and one for the Shumagin Islands (55ºN, 
160ºW).  An independent estimate of wind mixing 
was determined from COADS wind data.  The 
COADS wind data comprised monthly averaged 
wind speed observations from three locations:  
55ºN, 159ºW;  57ºN, 155ºW;  and 59ºN, 153ºW.  
The time-series begins in 1962. 
 
OSCURS model output 
 
OSCURS (Ocean Surface Current Simulations) is 
an empirical ocean-wide model covering the 
subarctic Pacific region with a 1/4 mesh FNOC 
(U.S. Navy Fleet Numerical Oceanography 
Center) grid (about 90 km).  Expanding the studies 
of Hubert and Laevastu (1965) and Larson and 
Laevastu (1972), the model combines long-term 
mean surface geostrophic currents (Ingraham and 
Miyahara 1989) with wind-generated surface-
mixed-layer currents to form a resultant current 
vector at each grid point.  Wind speed and 
direction are derived from daily FNOC sea-level 
pressure data to provide daily continuity from 
1946 to 1990 following the methods of Larson 
(1975).  Wind-induced ocean currents are then 
calculated from the empirical functions of the 
wind (Witting 1909; Huang 1979; Weber 1983).  
The Gulf of Alaska portion of the model was first 
tuned so that the model trajectories calculated for 
the period September 21 to December 31, 1978 
(about 3 months), matched the trajectory of a 
satellite-tracked drifter (drogued at 20-m) from 
Reed (1980) for the same dates and starting 
locations (Ingraham and Miyahara 1989).  
 
OSCURS data consist of an annual index (1946-
1991) of the tendency for surface currents to flow 
160
 
southwestward out of the Gulf of Alaska, as 
derived from model trajectory patterns.  The 
numerical value of the index used in this study is 
defined as the number of trajectories out of six, 
starting on February 1, that are along 55ºN 
between 137ºW and 152ºW, and move west of 
154ºW by the end of April.  This is the same index 
used by Ingraham et al. (1991) to show that large-
scale interannual changes in surface currents in the 
Gulf of Alaska during February-April (1976-
1989), were connected to changes in water 
properties below sill-depth in Shelikof Strait.  The 
data are extended annually back to 1946. 
 
NEPPI 
 
Much of the variability in the physical 
environment of the Gulf of Alaska is due to large-
scale atmospheric phenomena (Schumacher and 
Kendall 1991).  The Aleutian Low dominates the 
variability of the atmospheric circulation over the 
Gulf of Alaska and plays a crucial role in the 
hydrological cycle (Neibauer 1988).  NEPPI 
(Northeast Pacific Pressure Index (Emery and 
Hamilton 1985)), is a scalar index of the 
large-scale, sea-level pressure gradient across the 
northeast Pacific Ocean from (40ºN, 120ºW) near 
Reno, Nevada, to (50ºN, 170ºW) south of Amukta 
Pass in the Aleutian Islands.  NEPPI, which varies 
with the intensity of the atmospheric circulation 
and the track of storms over the northeast Pacific 
Ocean, provides a measure of the strength, 
frequency, and location of the Aleutian Low.  
NEPPI correlates strongly with northeastern 
Pacific sea-surface temperatures and adjusted 
coastal sea levels (Emery and Hamilton 1985), 
with coastal volume transport in the Shelikof Strait 
region (Roach and Schumacher 1991), and with 
Gulf of Alaska circulation (Ingraham et al. 1991).  
We computed a monthly mean NEPPI from twice 
daily, gridded (381 km at 60ºN) sea-level 
pressures produced by the U.S. National 
Meteorological Center (NMC), and archived and 
averaged by the Department of Atmospheric 
Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.  
Linear interpolation of gridded pressures yielded 
sea level pressures at (40ºN, 120ºW) and (50ºN, 
170ºW).  The time-series begins in 1962. 
 
Fig. 12 Displacement zooplankton volume data 
from line 8. 
 
Zooplankton, chlorophyll and nutrients in t he 
Gulf of Alaska and Bering Sea 
 
Gulf of Alaska 
 
NOAA’s Fisheries Oceanography Coordinated 
Investigations monitoring program of the Gulf of 
Alaska has dramatically declined in the recent 
past.  Our cardinal sampling line (Line 8, 7 
stations across Shelikof Strait between Cape 
Kekurnoi and Kodiak Island) was routinely 
sampled for nutrients, chlorophyll, icthyo- and 
zooplankton several times each year from March – 
June.  Monitoring began in 1985, but not all 
sample types were collected in all years.  
Currently Line 8 is sampled for nutrients, 
chlorophyll, and zooplankton only once or twice a 
year (May), and broad-scale surveys for 
ichthyoplankton are conducted approximately 
twice a year.  Every other year a process-oriented 
springtime cruise is conducted in Shelikof Strait to 
investigate a physical or biological process that 
contributes to recruitment variability of walleye 
pollock. 
 
Figure 12 is an example of how zooplankton 
displacement volume data from Line 8 have been 
used to examine inter-annual variability despite 
seasonal trends in the data.  For this exercise we 
examined the departures from a logistic population 
growth curve fit to the data.  Note that we have not 
yet added data from recent years to the graph, 
although we do have these data. 
 
161
 
Bering Sea 
 
A consistent monitoring program from FOCI did 
not emerge until very recently.  Fall surveys for 
age-0 pollock around the Pribilof Islands (Lines  
A – D) were begun in 1994.  These surveys 
included hydrography, nutrients, chlorophyll, 
zooplankton, and juvenile fish along the 4 
sampling transects.  The project that initiated these 
collections is not funded to continue sample 
collection past fall 1999.   The Southeast Bering 
Sea Carrying Capacity (SEBSCC) Monitoring and 
Indices program began in 1997, and field 
collections will end in FY00.  In this program, 
nutrients, chlorophyll and zooplankton are 
collected winter, spring and fall at the shelf break, 
and around moorings in the Outer and Middle 
Shelf Domains (Fig. 13).  Sample collection 
around Unimak Pass is less frequent.  Biological 
and chemical data from this project are currently 
being synthesized with physical environmental 
data to produce indices of ecosystem “health” for 
use in predicting survival potential of juvenile 
walleye pollock.  We are also looking for extra-
mural support to continue our monitoring. 
 
 
Fig. 13 Survey area in Bering Sea. 
 
References 
 
Bailey, K.M., and Macklin, S.A.  1993.  Coherent 
patterns of larval walleye pollock (Theragra 
chalcogramma) survival and wind mixing 
events in Shelikof Strait, Gulf of Alaska.  Mar. 
Ecol. Prog. Ser. 
Cayan, D.R., McLain, D.R., and Nichols, W.D.  
1991. Monthly climate time series data for the 
Pacific Ocean and western America's. United 
States Geological Survey Report OFR 91-92. 
Dunn, J.R., and Rugen, W.C.  1989.  A catalog of 
Northwest and Alaska Fisheries Science 
Center ichthyoplankton cruises 1965-1988.  
NWAFC Proc. Rep. 89-04, Northwest and 
Alaska Fish.  Ctr., Natl. Mar. Fish. Serv., 
NOAA, Seattle, WA 98115-0070, 66p. 
Emery, W.J., and Hamilton.  1985.  Atmospheric 
forcing of interannual variability in the 
northeast Pacific Ocean: connections with El 
Niño.  J. Geophys. Res. 90: 857-868. 
Huang, N.E.  1979.  On the surface drift currents 
in the ocean.  J. Fluid Mech. 91: 191-208. 
Hubert, W.E., and Laevastu, T.  1965.  Synoptic 
analysis and forecasting of surface currents.  
U.S. Navy Fleet Numerical Weather Facility, 
Monterey, CA. Tech. Note 9, 47p. 
Ingraham, W.J., Jr., Reed, R.K., Schumacher, J.D., 
and Macklin, S.A.  1991.  Interannual 
variability of circulation in the Gulf of Alaska 
in relation to water properties and fisheries 
resources.  EOS, Trans. Am. Geophys. Union 
72: 257-264. 
Ingraham, W.J., Jr., and Miyahara, R.K.  1989.  
Tuning of OSCURS numerical model to ocean 
surface current measurements in the Gulf of 
Alaska.  NOAA Tech. Memo. NMFS F/NWC-
168, 67p. 
Kendall, A.W., Jr., and Kim, S.  1989.  Buoyancy 
of walleye pollock (Theragra chalcogramma) 
eggs in relation to water properties and 
movement in Shelikof Strait, Gulf of Alaska.  
In  Effects of ocean variability on recruitment 
and an evaluation of parameters used in stock 
assessment models.  Edited by R.J. Beamish 
and G.A. McFarlane. Can. Spec. Publ. Fish. 
Aquat. Sci. 108: 169-180. 
Klein, P.  1980.  A simulation of the effects of 
air-sea transfer variability on the structure of 
the marine upper layers.  J. Phys. Oceanog. 
10: 1824-1841.  
Larson, S., and Laevastu, T.  1972.  Numerical 
analysis of ocean surface currents In Studi  
in onore di Giuseppina  Aliverti, Instituto 
Universitario Navale di Napoli, Napoli  
pp. 55-74. 
Larson, S.E.  1975.  A 26-year time series of 
monthly mean winds over the oceans, Part 1, a 
statistical verification of computed surface 
winds over the North Pacific and North 
162
 
Atlantic.  U.S. Navy Environmental Prediction 
Research Facility, Monterey, CA.  Envpredr-
scwfac Tech. Paper No. 8-75. 
Macklin, S.A., Stabeno, P.J., and Schumacher, 
J.D.  1993.  A comparison of gradient and 
observed over-the-water winds along a 
mountainous coast.  J. Geophys. Res. 98: 
16555-16569. 
Niebauer, H.J.  1988.  Effects of El Niño-Southern 
Oscillation and North Pacific weather patterns 
on interannual variability in the subarctic 
Bering Sea.  J. Geophys. Res. 93: 5051-5068. 
Parker, K.S.  1989a.  Influence of oceanographic 
and meteorological processes on the 
recruitment of Pacific halibut, Hippoglossus 
stenolepis, in the Gulf of Alaska.  Ph.D. 
dissertation, Univ. Washington, Seattle, WA 
154p.  
Parker, K.S.  1989b.  Influence of oceanographic 
and meteorological processes on the 
recruitment of Pacific halibut, Hippoglossus 
stenolepis, in the Gulf of Alaska. In Effects of 
ocean variability on recruitment and an 
evaluation of parameters used in stock 
assessment models.  Edited by R.J. Beamish 
and G.A. McFarlane.  Can. Spec. Pub. Fish. 
Aquat. Sci. 108: 221-237. 
Picquelle, S.J., and Megrey, B.A.  1993.  A 
preliminary spawning biomass estimate of 
walleye pollock, Theragra chalcogramma, in 
the Shelikof Strait, Alaska, based on the 
annual egg production method.  In 
Proceedings from the symposium on the 
advances in estimating the biomass of marine 
fish stocks using ichthyoplankton, during the 
15th annual Early Life History Section of the 
American Fisheries Society.  Edited by J.R. 
Hunter and N.C.H. Lo.  Bull. Mar. Sci. 53: 
230-252. 
Picquelle, S.J., and Megrey, B.A.  1991.  A 
method of estimating spawning biomass from 
egg surveys with an application to walleye 
pollock, Theragra chalcogramma, in the 
Shelikof Strait, Alaska.  AFSC Processed 
Report 91-21.  
Reed, R.K.  1980.  Direct measurements of 
recirculation in the Alaskan Stream.  J. Phys. 
Oceanogr. 10: 976-978. 
Richardson, S.L.  1981.  Spawning biomass and 
early life of northern anchovy, Engraulis 
mordax, in the northern subpopulation off 
Oregon and Washington.  Fish. Bull. 78: 855-
876. 
Roach, A.T., and Schumacher, J.D.  1991.  
Observations of seasonal and  interseasonal 
variability in Shelikof Strait, Alaska.  Proc. 
Seventh Symposium on Coastal and Ocean 
Management, Coastal Zone 91: 3304-3317. 
Royer, T.C.  1982.  Coastal fresh water discharge 
in the Northeast Pacific.  J. Geophys. Res. 87: 
2017-2021. 
Schumacher, J.D., and Kendall, A.W., Jr. 1991.  
Some interactions between young walleye 
pollock and their environment in the western 
Gulf of Alaska.  CalCOFI Rep. 32: 22-40. 
Spring, S., and Bailey, K.  1991.  Distribution and 
abundance of juvenile pollock from historical 
shrimp trawl surveys in the western Gulf of 
Alaska.  Alaska Fisheries Science Center 
Processed Report 91-18.  NOAA/NMFS, 
Seattle, WA 98115, 66p. 
Weber, J.E.  1983.  Steady wind- and 
wave-induced currents in the  open ocean.  J. 
Phys. Oceanogr. 13: 524-530.  
Witting, R.  1909.  Zur Kenntnie den vom Winde 
Erzeigtem Oberflächenstromes.  Ann. 
Hydrogr. Marit. Met. 73, 193p. 
Woodruff, S.D., Slutz, R.J., Jenne, R.L., and 
Steurer, P.M.  1987.  A comprehensive ocean-
atmosphere data set.  Bull. Amer. Met. Soc. 
68: 1239-1250. 
Yoklavich, M.M., and Bailey, K.M.  1990.  
Hatching period, growth, and survival of 
young walleye pollock Theragra 
chalcogramma as determined from otolith 
analysis.  Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 64: 13-22. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
163
 
The California Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries Investigations ichthyoplankton 
time-series 
 
H. Geoffrey Moser 
National Marine Fisheries Service, Southwest Fisheries Science Center, P.O. Box 271, La Jolla, CA 
92038, U.S.A.  E-mail: Geoff.Moser@noaa.gov 
 
The California Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries 
Investigations (CalCOFI) is a partnership of the 
Southwest Fisheries Science Center (SWFSC) of 
the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), 
the Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO), 
and the California Department of Fish and Game 
(CDFG).  This program was initiated in 1949, 
under the sponsorship of the Marine Research 
Committee of the State of California, to study the 
population changes of the Pacific sardine 
(Sardinops sagax) and the environmental factors 
that may play a role in these fluctuations.  The 
three organizations conduct cooperative sea 
surveys, hold quarterly meetings, and sponsor an 
annual conference, with symposia.  CalCOFI 
publishes CalCOFI Reports, a peer reviewed 
journal, and an atlas series.  The CalCOFI Atlas 
series summarizes a wide variety of data from the 
CalCOFI surveys in the oceanographic (10 
atlases), zooplankton (13 atlases), and 
ichthyoplankton (11 atlases) fields (see workshop 
report by David Checkley for additional 
information on the history and conceptual basis of 
CalCOFI). 
 
Sea surveys 
 
The boundaries, station placement, and sampling 
frequency for the CalCOFI surveys were based on 
the results of joint biological-oceanographic 
cruises conducted by Elton Sette (NMFS) and 
Harald Sverdrup (SIO) during 1939–1941.  
Originally, CalCOFI cruises were designed to 
collect sardine eggs and larvae and associated 
hydrographic data over the entire areal and 
seasonal spawning range of the species.  From 
1951 to 1960 the surveys were annual with cruises 
conducted monthly over the greater CalCOFI 
sampling area (Fig. 14) extending from northern 
California to Cabo San Lucas, Mexico.  The 
survey area was occupied quarterly during 1961–
1965, and in 1966 the surveys became triennial 
with monthly cruises.  In 1985, the survey pattern  
 
Fig. 14 The basic CalCOFI station pattern 
occupied, in part, by cruises during 1951-1984. 
 
 
Fig. 15 Station plan for CaCOFI survey cruises 
from 1984 to the present. 
164
 
was limited to 66 standard stations in the Southern 
California Bight region (Fig. 15), with surveys 
conducted each year on a quarterly basis (see 
Hewitt 1988; Moser et al. 1993, 1994; Ohman and 
Smith 1995; and Checkley in this workshop for 
summaries of CalCOFI sampling history). 
 
The basic plankton tow methodology has been 
consistent throughout the time-series, double-
oblique tows with a cable pay-out rate of 50 m per 
minute and retrieval rate of 20 m per minute at a 
constant wire angle.  Tows from 1951 through 
1968 employed a 1-m ring net towed to a depth of 
140 m.  Beginning in 1969, the nominal tow depth 
was increased to 210 m and the 71-cm bongo net 
(McGowan and Brown 1966) replaced the ring net 
from the last cruise in 1977 to the present.  Silk 
mesh (0.55 mm opening), used from 1951 to 1968, 
was replaced by nylon mesh (0.505 mm opening) 
in 1969.  Beginning in 1978, surface tows were 
taken at each station with a Manta net (Brown and 
Cheng 1981), consisting of a rectangular mouth 
15.5 cm deep and 86 cm wide attached to a frame 
that supports square lateral extensions covered 
with plywood and urethane foam.  These 
extensions stabilize the net when it is towed and 
keep the top of the net at the sea surface.  The net 
material is 0.505 mm nylon mesh. 
 
Sample processing 
 
Prior to sorting fish eggs and larvae, we determine 
zooplankton displacement volume for each sample 
(methods described in Kramer et al. 1972).  Then, 
eggs and larvae of Pacific sardine, northern 
anchovy and Pacific saury, and larvae of Pacific 
hake are removed and body lengths of sardine, 
anchovy, and hake larvae are measured to the 
nearest 0.5 mm.  Identification of ichthyoplankton 
species beyond those separated during the sorting 
process is done by a separate group of specialists.  
Since 1951, fish larvae in CalCOFI samples have 
been identified to species or to the lowest taxon 
that knowledge permitted.  The number of 
identifiable taxa increased with the improvement 
of taxonomic knowledge and competency.  
Historical identifications were evaluated 
thoroughly during the development of the 
CalCOFI ichthyoplankton computer data base in 
1984–1988, and historical advances in the 
identification process were standardized at 
approximately decadal intervals.  Our ability to 
identify larvae in the California Current region 
improved greatly during 1988–1995, as a result of 
taxonomic research that culminated in a taxonomic 
monograph on the ontogenetic stages of fishes of 
this region (Moser 1996).  This resulted in a ~60% 
increase in the number of identifiable taxa 
beginning with samples collected in 1985.  
 
After samples are processed from a cruise, the 
specimens are stored and archived, by station, in a 
permanent ichthyoplankton collection which is 
curated on a regular basis.  These collections are 
available for re-examination when taxonomic 
advances permit identification of previously 
unknown eggs and larvae.  The collection has 
become an important asset in establishing time-
series of the larvae of important species that were 
not identifiable during the early years of the 
CalCOFI surveys. 
 
Ichthyoplankton time-series 
 
The major features of the CalCOFI 
ichthyoplankton time-series are listed in Table 7.  
Ichthyoplankton, plankton displacement volumes 
and station data for all cruises from 1951 to 1998 
 
Table 7 Summary of major features of the 
CalCOFI ichthyoplankton time-series. 
Years   1951– 2001 
Area surveyed  California 
Current Region 
Number of 
cruises 
 306 
Number of 
tows 
  
 1-m ring net 28.8 K 
 Bongo net 13.9 K 
 Manta net 8.5 K 
 CalVET 
net* 
13.9 K 
 Total 65.1 K 
Total fish 
larvae 
 4.8 M 
Total fish eggs  12.7 M 
Data base  Oracle 
Operating 
system 
 In house UNIX 
Web page  In development 
A 0.25 m diameter net used in fish egg production surveys; 
the tow is vertical (70 m/min retrieval rate). 
165
 
Table 8 List of ichthyoplankton data reports for 
CalCOFI surveys from 1951 to 1998.  Citations 
for each report are included in the References 
section of this report. 
Survey Year Senior Author Publication Year 
1951 Ambrose et al.  1987a 
1952 Sandknop et al.  1987a 
1953 Stevens et al.  1987a 
1954 Sumida et al.  1987a 
1955 Ambrose et al.   1987b 
1956 Stevens et al.  1987b 
1957 Sumida et al.   1987b 
1958 Sandknop et al.  1987b 
1959 Stevens et al.  1987c 
1960 Ambrose et al.   1987c 
1961 Sandknop et al.  1988a 
1962 Sumida et al.  1988a 
1963 Ambrose et al.  1988a 
1964 Sandknop et al.  1988b 
1965 Stevens et al.   1988a 
1966 Sumida et al.  1988b 
1967 Ambrose et al.  1988b 
1968 Sandknop et al.   1988c 
1969 Stevens et al.  1988b 
1972 Sumida et al.  1988c 
1975 Ambrose et al.  1988c 
1978 Sandknop et al.  1988d 
1981 Ambrose et al.  1988d 
1984 Stevens et al.  1990 
1985 Ambrose et al.  1999a 
1986 Charter et al.  1999a 
1987 Sandknop et al.  1999a 
1988 Watson et al.  1999a 
1989 Ambrose et al.  1999b 
1990 Charter et al.  1999b 
1991 Sandknop et al.  1999b 
1992 Watson et al.  1999b 
1993 Ambrose et al.   1999c 
1994 Charter et al.   1999c 
1995 Sandknop et al.  1999c 
1996 Watson et al.  1999c 
1997 Ambrose et al.  1999d 
1998 Charter et al.   1999d 
 
are listed in a series of 38 data reports (Table 8).  
CalCOFI Atlases 31 and 32 presented distribu-
tional summaries for all taxa taken on surveys that 
covered the greater CalCOFI sampling area 
extending from northern California to Cabo San 
Lucas, Mexico, during 1951–1984 (Moser et al. 
1993, 1994).  CalCOFI Atlas 34 (in press) 
summarizes the distribution and abundance of 160 
ichthyoplankton taxa or categories collected in 
plankton net tows on CalCOFI survey cruises from 
1951 to 1998 in the Southern California Bight 
(SCB) region, the area encompassed by CalCOFI 
surveys since 1985.  This atlas presents areal and 
temporal (seasonal, annual and decadal) changes 
in occurrence and abundance of larval fish taxa in 
a format that permits the reader to interpret, in 
general terms, the effects that fisheries and ocean 
climate may have had on larval fish populations in 
the SCB during 1951–1998.  CalCOFI surveys are 
the basis for research on the population biology of 
the major coastal pelagic (Pacific sardine, northern 
anchovy, Pacific mackerel, Pacific hake and jack 
mackerel) and demersal (e.g., rockfishes) fishes of 
the California Current System.  The CalCOFI 
database provides a fishery-independent measure 
of abundance trends that is essential in the 
monitoring of biomass changes of these important 
commercial stocks, and is important in the 
development of management plans for their 
fisheries.  
 
IMECOCAL (Investigaciones Mexicanas de la 
Corriente California) 
 
Beginning in 1997, Mexican research partners of 
CalCOFI at CICESE in Ensenada and CICIMAR 
in La Paz began conducting biological-oceanogra-
phic survey cruises off Baja California, occupying 
stations that had not been sampled by CalCOFI 
surveys since 1984.  Generally, four cruises have 
been conducted each year since September-
October, 1997, using CalCOFI sampling gear and 
techniques.  The resurgence of surveys off Baja 
California is an important step in improving our 
knowledge and monitoring capability of 
oceanographic and ecological processes in the 
southern region of the California Current.  The 
ability to monitor important trans-boundary fish 
populations has been improved greatly, and has 
increased our potential to manage and conserve 
such valuable species as Pacific sardine, northern 
anchovy and Pacific mackerel.  IMECOCAL and 
CalCOFI scientists have cooperated in all phases 
of the two programs, to maximize the benefits 
from our surveys.  The web site for IMECOCAL 
is http://imecocal.cicese.mx. 
166
 
References 
 
Ambrose, D.A., Charter, R.L., Moser, H.G., and 
Santos Methot, C.R.  1987a.  Ichthyoplankton 
and station data for California Cooperative 
Oceanic Fisheries Investigations survey 
cruises in 1951.  U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA 
Tech. Memo., NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFC-79. 
196p. 
Ambrose, D.A., Charter, R.L., Moser, H.G., and 
Santos Methot, C.R.  1987b.  Ichthyoplankton 
and station data for California Cooperative 
Oceanic Fisheries Investigations survey 
cruises in 1955.  U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA 
Tech. Memo., NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFC-83. 
185p. 
Ambrose, D.A., Charter, R.L., Moser, H.G., and 
Santos Methot, C.R.  1987c.  Ichthyoplankton 
and station data for California Cooperative 
Oceanic Fisheries Investigations survey 
cruises in 1960.  U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA 
Tech. Memo., NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFC-88. 
253p. 
Ambrose, D.A., Charter, R.L., Moser, H.G., and 
Earhart, B.S.  1988a.  Ichthyoplankton and 
station data  for California Cooperative 
Oceanic Fisheries Investigations survey 
cruises in 1963.  U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA 
Tech. Memo., NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFC-94. 
209p. 
Ambrose, D.A., Charter, R.L., Moser, H.G., and 
Earhart, B.S.  1988b.  Ichthyoplankton and 
station data  for California Cooperative 
Oceanic Fisheries Investigations survey 
cruises in 1967.  U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA 
Tech. Memo., NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFC-98. 
103p. 
Ambrose, D.A., Charter, R.L., Moser, H.G., and 
Earhart, B.S.  1988c.  Ichthyoplankton and 
station data  for California Cooperative 
Oceanic Fisheries Investigations survey 
cruises in 1975.  U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA 
Tech. Memo., NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFC-110. 
221p. 
Ambrose, D.A., Charter, R.L., Moser, H.G., and 
Earhart, B.S.  1988d.  Ichthyoplankton and 
station data  for California Cooperative 
Oceanic Fisheries Investigations survey 
cruises in 1981.  U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA 
Tech. Memo., NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFC-112. 
170p. 
Ambrose, D.A., Charter, R.L., and Moser, H.G.  
1999a.  Ichthyoplankton and station data for 
California Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries 
Investigations survey cruises in 1985.  U.S. 
Dep. Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo., NOAA-
TM-NMFS-SWFC-266. 79p. 
Ambrose, D.A., Charter, R.L., and Moser, H.G.  
1999b.  Ichthyoplankton and station data for 
California  Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries 
Investigations survey cruises in 1989.  U.S. 
Dep. Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo., NOAA-
TM-NMFS-SWFC-270. 87p. 
Ambrose, D.A., Charter, R.L., and Moser, H.G.  
1999c.  Ichthyoplankton and station data for 
California Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries 
Investigations survey cruises in 1993.  U.S. 
Dep. Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo., NOAA-
TM-NMFS-SWFC-274. 88p. 
Ambrose, D.A., Charter, R.L., and Moser, H.G.  
1999d.  Ichthyoplankton and station data for 
California Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries 
Investigations survey cruises in 1997.  U.S. 
Dep. Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo., NOAA-
TM-NMFS-SWFC-278. 86p. 
Brown, D.M., and Cheng, L.  1981.  New net for 
sampling the ocean surface.  Mar. Ecol. Prog. 
Ser.5: 224–227. 
Charter, S.R., Charter, R.L., and Moser, H.G. 
1999a. Ichthyoplankton and station data for 
California Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries 
Investigations survey cruises in 1986.  U.S. 
Dep. Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo., NOAA-
TM-NMFS-SWFC-267. 79p. 
Charter, S.R., Charter, R.L., and Moser, H.G.  
1999b.  Ichthyoplankton and station data for 
Calfornia Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries 
Investigations survey cruises in 1990.  U.S. 
Dep. Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo., NOAA-
TM-NMFS-SWFC-271. 86p. 
Charter, S.R., Charter, R.L., and Moser, H.G.  
1999c.  Ichthyoplankton and station data for 
California Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries 
Investigations survey cruises in 1994.  U. S. 
Dep. Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo., NOAA-
TM-NMFS-SWFC-275. 89p. 
Charter, S.R., Charter, R.L., and Moser, H.G.  
1999d.  Ichthyoplankton and station data for 
California Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries 
Investigations survey cruises in 1998.  U. S. 
Dep. Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo., NOAA-
TM-NMFS-SWFC-279. 104p. 
167
 
Hewitt, R.P.  1988.  Historical review of the 
oceanographic approach to fishery research.  
Calif. Coop. Oceanic Fish. Invest. Rep. 29:27-
41. 
Kramer, D., Kalin, M., Stevens, E.G., Thrailkill, 
J.R., and Zweifel, J.R.  1972.  Collecting and 
processing data on fish eggs and larvae in the 
California Current Region.  NOAA  Tech.  
Rep.  NMFS  Circ. 370. 38p. 
McGowan, J.S. and Brown, D.M.  1966.  A new 
opening-closing paired zooplankton net.  
Scripps Inst. Oceanogr. Ref. 66-23. 23 pp. 
Moser, H.G. (ed.).  1996.  The early stages of 
fishes in the California Current region.  
CalCOFI Atlas 33. 1505p. 
Moser, H.G., Charter, R.L., Smith, P.E., Ambrose, 
D.A., Charter, S.R., Meyer, C.R., Sandknop, 
E.M., and Watson, W.  1993.  Distributional 
atlas of fish larvae and eggs in the California 
Current region: taxa with 1000 or more total 
larvae, 1951 through 1984.  CalCOFI Atlas 
31. 233p. 
Moser, H.G., Charter, R.L., Smith, P.L., Ambrose, 
D.A., Charter, S.R., Meyer, C.A., Sandknop, 
E.M., and Watson, W.  1994.  Distributional 
atlas of fish larvae in the California Current 
region: taxa with less than 1000 total larvae, 
1951 through 1984.  CalCOFI Atlas 32. 181p. 
Ohman, M.D. and Smith, P.E.  1995.  A 
comparison of zooplankton sampling methods 
in the CalCOFI time series.  Calif. Coop. 
Oceanic Fish. Invest. Rep. 36: 153-158. 
Sandknop, E.M., Charter, R.L., Moser, H.G., and 
Ryan, J.D.  1987a.  Ichthyoplankton and 
station data for California Cooperative 
Oceanic Fisheries Investigations survey 
cruises in 1952.  U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA 
Tech. Memo., NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFC-80. 
207p. 
Sandknop, E.M., Charter, R.L., Moser, H.G., and 
Ryan, J.D.  1987b.  Ichthyoplankton and 
station data for California Cooperative 
Oceanic Fisheries Investigations survey 
cruises in 1958. U.S. Dep. Commer.  NOAA 
Tech. Memo., NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFC-86. 
248p. 
Sandknop, E.M., Charter, R.L., Moser, H.G., 
Meyer, C.A., and Hays, A.E.  1988a.  
Ichthyoplankton and station data for California 
Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries Investigations 
survey cruises in 1961.  U.S. Dep. Commer., 
NOAA Tech. Memo., NOAA-TM-NMFS-
SWFC-92. 167p. 
Sandknop, E.M., Charter, R.L., Moser, H.G., 
Meyer, C.A., and Hays, A.E.  1988b.  
Ichthyoplankton and station data for California 
Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries Investigations 
survey cruises in 1964.  U.S. Dep. Commer., 
NOAA Tech. Memo., NOAA-TM-NMFS-
SWFC-95. 222p. 
Sandknop, E.M., Charter, R.L., Moser, H.G., 
Meyer, C.A., and Hays, A.E.  1988c.  
Ichthyoplankton and station data for California 
Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries Investigations 
survey cruises in 1968.  U.S. Dep. Commer., 
NOAA Tech. Memo., NOAA-TM-NMFS-
SWFC-99. 112p. 
Sandknop, E.M., Charter, R.L., Moser, H.G., 
Meyer, C.A., and Hays, A.E.  1988d.  
Ichthyoplankton and station data for California 
Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries Investigations 
survey cruises in 1978.  U.S. Dep. Commer., 
NOAA Tech. Memo., NOAA-TM-NMFS-
SWFC-111. 216p. 
Sandknop, E.M., Charter, R.L., and Moser, H.G.  
1999a.  Ichthyoplankton and station data for 
California Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries 
Investigations survey cruises in 1987.  U.S. 
Dep. Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo., NOAA-
TM-NMFS-SWFC-268. 91p. 
Sandknop, E.M., Charter, R.L., and Moser, H.G.  
1999b.  Ichthyoplankton and station data for 
California Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries 
Investigations survey cruises in 1991.  U.S. 
Dep. Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo., NOAA-
TM-NMFS-SWFC-272. 90p. 
Sandknop, E.M., Charter, R.L., and Moser, H.G.  
1999c.  Ichthyoplankton and station data for 
California Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries 
Investigations survey cruises in 1995.  U.S. 
Dep. Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo., NOAA-
TM-NMFS-276. 84p. 
Smith, P.E. and Richardson, S.L.  1977.  Standard 
techniques for pelagic fish egg and larva 
surveys.  FAO Fish. Tech. Pap. 175. 100p. 
Stevens, E.G., Charter, R.L., Moser, H.G., and 
Busby, M.S.  1987a.  Ichthyoplankton and 
station data for California Cooperative 
Oceanic Fisheries Investigations survey 
cruises in 1953.  U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA 
168
 
Tech. Memo., NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFC-81. 
186p. 
Stevens, E.G., Charter, R.L., Moser, H.G., and 
Busby, M.S.  1987b.  Ichthyoplankton and 
station data for California Cooperative 
Oceanic Fisheries Investigations survey 
cruises in 1956.  U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA 
Tech. Memo., NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFC-84. 
189p. 
Stevens, E.G., Charter, R.L., Moser, H.G., and 
Busby, M.S.  1987c.  Ichthyoplankton and 
station data for California Cooperative 
Oceanic Fisheries Investigations survey 
cruises in 1959.  U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA 
Tech. Memo., NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFC-87. 
273p. 
Stevens, E.G., Charter, R.L., Moser, H.G., and 
Zins, L.R.  1988a.  Ichthyoplankton and 
station data for California Cooperative 
Oceanic Fisheries Investigations survey 
cruises in 1965.  U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA 
Tech. Memo., NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFC-96. 
220p. 
Stevens, E.G., Charter, R.L., Moser, H.G., and 
Zins, L.R.  1988b.  Ichthyoplankton and 
station data for California Cooperative 
Oceanic Fisheries Investigations survey 
cruises in 1969.  U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA 
Tech. Memo., NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFC-100. 
265p. 
Stevens, E.G., Charter, R.L., Moser, H.G., and 
Meyer, C.A.  1990.  Ichthyoplankton and 
station data for California Cooperative 
Oceanic Fisheries Investigations survey 
cruises in 1984.  U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA 
Tech. Memo., NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFC-141. 
157p. 
Sumida, B.Y., Charter, R.L., Moser, H.G., and 
Snow, D.L.  1987a.  Ichthyoplankton and 
station data for California Cooperative 
Oceanic Fisheries Investigations survey 
cruises in 1954.  U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA 
Tech. Memo., NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFC-82. 
207p. 
Sumida, B.Y., Charter, R.L., Moser, H.G., and 
Snow, D.L.  1987b.  Ichthyoplankton and 
station data for California Cooperative 
Oceanic Fisheries Investigations survey 
cruises  in 1957.  U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA 
Tech. Memo., NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFC-85. 
225p. 
Sumida, B.Y., Charter, R.L., Moser, H.G., and 
Snow, D.L.  1988a.  Ichthyoplankton and 
station data for California Cooperative 
Oceanic Fisheries Investigations survey 
cruises in 1962.  U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA 
Tech. Memo, NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFC-93. 
179p. 
Sumida, B.Y., Charter, R.L., Moser, H.G., and 
Snow, D.L.  1988b.  Ichthyoplankton and 
station data for California Cooperative 
Oceanic Fisheries Investigations survey 
cruises in 1966.  U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA 
Tech. Memo., NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFC-97. 
287p. 
Sumida, B.Y., Charter, R.L., Moser, H.G., and 
Snow, D.L.  1988c.  Ichthyoplankton and 
station data for California Cooperative 
Oceanic Fisheries Investigations survey 
cruises in 1972.  U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA 
Tech. Memo., NOAA-TM-NMFS-SWFC-109. 
219p. 
Watson, W., Charter, R.L., and Moser, H.G.  
1999a.  Ichthyoplankton and station data for 
California Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries 
Investigations survey cruises in 1988.  U. S. 
Dep. Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo., NOAA-
TM-NMFS-SWFC-269. 88p. 
Watson, W., Charter, R.L., and Moser, H.G.  
1999b.  Ichthyoplankton and station data for 
California Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries 
Investigations survey cruises in 1992.  U.S. 
Dep. Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo., NOAA-
TM-NMFS-SWFC-273. 90p. 
Watson, W., Charter, R.L., and Moser, H.G.  
1999c.  Ichthyoplankton and station data for 
California Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries 
Investigations survey cruises in 1996.  U.S. 
Dep. Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo., NOAA-
TM-NMFS-SWFC-277. 91p. 
 
 
 
 
169
 
Long-term monitoring of subarctic North Pacific ecosystems by the  
T/S Oshoro Maru and Hokusei Maru (Hokkaido University):  The present and 
the future 
 
Yasunori Sakurai  
Division of Marine Environment and Resources, Graduate School of Fisheries Science, Hokkaido 
University, Minato-cho, Hakodate, Hokkaido, Japan.  041-8611  E-mail: sakurai@fish.hokudai.ac.jp 
 
Since the late-1970s, the T/S Oshoro Maru and 
Hokusei Maru of Hokkaido University have been 
conducting summer monitoring surveys of the 
oceanography and ecology of the northern North 
Pacific by sampling micronekton and zooplankton, 
deploying research driftnets and taking 
hydrographic observations.  This monitoring has 
been repeated yearly from June to early August in 
the North Pacific along 155°E, 170°E, 175°30'E, 
180°, 165°W, 145°W, and in the southeastern 
Bering Sea.  The data from each cruise are 
published annually in the Faculty of Fisheries’ 
“Data Record of Oceanographic Observations and 
Exploratory Fishing”.  
 
The long-term monitoring of the subarctic North 
Pacific ecosystems was conducted as part of the 
cadet training program of the Faculty of Fisheries, 
Hokkaido University.  Unfortunately, this program 
will end in March 2002, and the T/S Hokusei 
Maru will be decommissioned at this time.  After 
April 2002, the T/S Oshoro Maru (1,383 tons) and 
R/V Ushio Maru (175 tons) will be used to 
continue some sampling in the North Pacific while 
training undergraduate and graduate students in 
the area of Oceanography and Fisheries Science.  
Hokkaido University scientists remain hopeful that 
the monitoring in the North Pacific and the 
cooperative research programs in the PICES 
region will be able to continue (Bower 2001), 
because our main scientific concern is to 
determine how physical forces are linked with the 
marine ecosystem dynamics in the North Pacific at 
regional and basin scales.  Also, our long-range 
goal is to forecast how changes in ocean climate 
will alter the productivity of keystone species in 
the boreal ocean, including walleye pollock, 
salmon and pelagic migratory fishes and squids 
from the subtropics, and to develop acoustic, 
sampling and observation systems to assess and 
forecast stock fluctuations. 
 
Research on community structure and dynamics 
over large areas of the northern North Pacific is 
needed to understand the present and future 
ecological responses to changes in climate.  To 
address these goals, Hokkaido University 
scientists will establish and maintain partnerships 
between physical, biological and modeling 
scientists, and continue international cooperative 
research programs related to the International-
GLOBEC and PICES programs, such as 
“Response of keystone species in marine 
ecosystems to multi-decadal changes in the 
subarctic circulation” and “Comparison of 
Ecosystem dynamics in the northeast and 
northwest Pacific”, aboard the T/S Oshoro Maru 
and R/V Ushio Maru.  
 
Scientific findings by the drift gillnet survey 
 
Hokkaido University has a large data set collected 
over long time period from a large area of 
subarctic North Pacific.  This review shows some 
results on the interannual variability in distribution 
and abundance of pelagic species obtained from 
summer cruises of the T/S Oshoro Maru and 
Hokusei Maru during the past two decades.  The 
transition domain area shifts seasonally from 35ºN 
in winter to 45ºN in summer.  The Subarctic 
Boundary denoted by the vertical ascent of the 
33.8 or 34.0 psu of salinity to the surface (Favorite 
et al. 1976).  In spring, this boundary forms an 
environmental barrier creating a subarctic 
ecosystem.  In summer, warming of the shallow 
water mass extends to the northern subarctic 
region.  
 
Figures 16 and 17 show interannual variation of 
CPUE and species composition by gillnet survey 
at transects along 170°E, 175°E and 180° during 
summer cruises of the T/S Oshoro Maru and 
Hokusei Maru, from late-1970s to late-1990s.  
These surveys used research gillnets which were 
170
 
composed of tans (50-m lengths) of different mesh 
size, often from 19 or 25 mm (knot to knot in 
stretched length) to 204 mm.  Marine animals 
were collected in drift gillnets set overnight from 
the surface down to about 7 m. 
 
 
Fig. 16 Interannual variation of CPUE 
(kg/tan/day) and composition of species by gillnet 
surveys along 180° during summer cruises of T/S 
Oshoro Maru, 1979-1998.  Blue line:  Subarctic 
Front, red line:  Subarctic Boundary (modified 
from Takagi and Onhisi 1996). 
 
 
 
Fig. 17 Interannual variation of CPUE (kg/tan) 
and relative abundance of pelagic migrant species 
by gillnet surveys along 170°E and 175°E during 
summer cruises of T/S Hokusei maru, 1978-1997. 
Along 180° (37-48°N), the position of the 
southern boundary (Subarctic Boundary) of the 
transition domain fluctuated between 39°N and 
42°N within a period of ten years, but the position 
of the northern boundary (Subarctic Front) 
remained constant (Fig. 16).  Sockeye, pink and 
chinook salmon were distributed mainly in cold 
water (<8°C) such as the Subarctic Current.  
Steelhead, chum and coho salmon were distributed 
in water of subarctic domain (<12°C), where they 
slightly overlapped in distribution of Pacific 
pomfret and flying squid.  Neon flying squid and 
Pacific pomfret migrated north across the 
Subarctic Boundary during the summer.  By the 
late-1980s, the abundance of both species 
decreased (Fig. 17).  Since the late-1990s, neon 
flying squid abundance has increased, while 
Pacific pomfret abundance remains low, which 
might be a reflection of difference in their life-
span.  These stock fluctuations may be due to 
changing ocean conditions, such as those caused 
by El Niño, and impacts of fishing, such as the 
intensive driftnet fishing that occurred before 1992 
(Yatsu et al. 2000).  Also, Figure 17 shows the 
expansion of the distribution of Pacific sardine and 
anchovy from coastal water around Japan to the 
subarctic ocean, which is strongly related to their 
stock fluctuation after 1970s. 
 
References 
 
Bower, J.R.  2001.  The Oshoro Maru: a short 
history of Hokkaido University’s workhorse in 
the North Pacific.  PICES Press 9: 25-28. 
Favorite, F., Dodimead, A.J., and Nasu, K.  1976.  
Oceanography of the subarctic Pacific region, 
1960-71.  Bull. Int. North Pacific Fish. Comm. 
33: 1-187. 
Takagi, S., and Onishi, H.  1996.  Interannual 
variability in distribution and abundance of 
pelagic nekton and oceanographic condition in 
the Central North Pacific in early summer, 
1979-1995.  Proc. 1996 Salmon Workshop, 
10-26. 
Yatsu, A., Watanabe, T., Mori, J., Nagasawa, et al.  
2000.  Interannual variability in stock 
abundance of the neon flying squid, 
Ommastrephes bartramii, in the North Pacific 
Ocean during 1979-1998: impact of driftnet 
fishing and oceanographic conditions.  
Fisheries Oceanography, 9: 163-170. 
171
 
Time-series information in the Yellow Sea and Bohai Sea 
 
Qisheng Tang and Xianshi Jin 
Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, 106 Nanjing Road, 
Qingdao, Shandong, People’s Republic of China.  266071  E-mail: ysfri@public.qd.sd.cn 
 
The time-series data collected by the Yellow Sea 
Fisheries Research Institute (YSFRI) mainly 
focused on the Yellow Sea and Bohai Sea  
(Table 9).  The surveys were conducted only by 
bottom trawl at different years since the mid-
1980s, with the purpose of assessing relative 
abundance and shift of dominant species.  The 
stations of these bottom trawl surveys were all 
predetermined (Fig. 18).  The data include 
temperature, salinity, nutrients, plankton, 
invertebrate, species composition of trawl, length, 
weight, stomach contents of fish, etc.   
 
 
Fig. 18 Survey stations (source: YSFRI). 
 
Table 9 List of bottom trawl surveys in the Bohai Sea and Yellow Sea (source:  YSFRI). 
Year Bohai Sea Yellow Sea Method 
1959-60 
1982-83 
1985-86 
1992-93 
1985-1996,1999-2001 
1998-99 
1998-2000 
Monthly 
Monthly 
 
Seasonally 
 
Seasonally 
 
Monthly 
 
Seasonally 
 
Winter 
 
Seasonally 
Bottom trawl 
””” 
Acoustic/bottom trawl 
Bottom trawl 
Acoustic/trawl 
Bottom trawl 
Acoustic/trawl 
 
 
The variations of species composition in the two 
seas are given in Figures 19-21.  The distribution 
of species and environmental factors in the Bohai 
Sea in 1982 and 1992 can be found in the Atlas of 
the Ecological Environmenta and Living 
Resources in the Bohai Sea edited by Qisheng 
Tang et al. (1997).  A new atlas on the Yellow Sea 
will be published. 
 
The hydroacoustic/trawl surveys have been used to 
assess the stock biomass in the Yellow Sea and 
sometimes in the East China Sea, for such species 
as Japanese anchovy (Engraulis japonicus), 
largehead hairtail (Trichiurus haumela) and 
sardine (Sardinops melanosticta).  Particularly the 
results from the time-series of winter acoustic 
surveys carried out in the Yellow Sea since 1985 
up to now have been used for fishery management 
(Fig. 21).  Based on these surveys, the recruitment 
information on economically important species 
(e.g., Japanese anchovy, Pacific herring (Clupea 
pallasi) and Spanish mackerel (Scomberomorus 
niphonius) may be obtained (Figs. 22 and 23).  
Information from landings is also crucial for the 
explanation of changes of species composition in 
the ecosystem (Fig. 24). 
 
During the stock assessment surveys, environ-
mental parameters were also collected at the same 
time (Figs. 25 and 26).  Those parameters are 
useful for studying ecosystem changes and may 
influence the ecosystem and biodiversity in the sea 
(e.g., see Figure 27 for Pacific herring). 
 
172
1959
Chelidonichthys
kumu
2.5%
Raja porosa
4.6%
Trichiurus
haumela
13.2%
Pseudosciaena
polyactis
13.4%
Penaeus
orientalis
38.9%
Others
18.7%
Setipinna taty
8.7%
1982
Portunus
trituberculatus
20.0%
loligo
7.2%
Setipinna taty
13.8%
Others
47.4%
Pseudosciaena
polyactis
4.8%
Oratosquilla
oratoria
3.6%
Trachypenaeus
curvirostris
3.3%
1992
Collichthys
lucidus
5.5%
Clupanodon
punctatus
10.6%
Oratosquilla
oratoria
7.9%
Setipinna taty
9.7%
loligo
11.1%
Engraulis
japonicus
20.4%
Others
34.9%
1998
Thrissa
kammalansis
1.6%
Portunus
trituberculatus
6.6%
Setipinna taty
19.5%
Clupanodon
punctatus
31.6%
Others
25.9%
Pampus argenteus
12.0%
loligo
2.8%
 
Fig. 19 Variations of dominant species composition in the Bohai Sea in autumn (source:  YSFRI). 
1959
Pseudosciaena
polyactis
36.6%
Flatfishes
12.8%
Skates
10.3%
Gadus
macrocephalus
10.6%
Chelidonichthys
kumu
9.1%
Others
20.6%
1981
Setipinna taty
11.3%
Pseudosciaena
polyactis
9.2%
Engraulis
japonicus
4.8%
Others
47.1%
Pampus
argenteus
8.1%
Clupea pallasi
7.2%
Portunus
trituberculatus
12.3%
1986
Engraulis
japonicus
57.1%
Others
21.3%
Raja pulchra
3.7%
Pampus argenteus
3.1%
Loligo
2.9%
Zoarces elongatus
6.2%
Cleisthenes
herzensteini
5.6%
1998
Pseudosciaena
polyactis
3.3%
Ammodytes
personatus
11.9%
Engraulis
japonicus
51.3%
Others
20.0%
Cleisthenes
herzensteini
3.2%
Zoarces
elongatus
4.3%
Crangen affinis
6.0%
 
Fig. 20  
Fig. 21 
Variations
 
 
Changes of species ecotype composition in Bohai Sea (left) and Yellow Sea (right) in May,
Pelagic fish Bottom fish
Crustaceans Cephalopods
1959 1998 1992 1982
1959 1998 1986 1981
Pelagic fish Bottom fish Invertebrates
 
from 1959 to 1998 (source:  Jin 2000). 
173
 of dominant species composition in the Yellow Sea in spring (source:  YSFRI).
 
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
 1984-85
 1985-86
 1986-87
 1987-88
 1988-89
 1989-90
 1990-91
 1991-92
 1992-93
 1993-94
 1994-95
1995-96
1997
1998
1998-99
1999-00
Year
Biomass (million tons)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Landing (million tons)
 
Fig. 22 The yearly variations of Japanese anchovy biomass (bars) and landings (line) (source:  YSFRI). 
 
 
 
Fig. 23 Recruitment of Pacific herring (A) and 
Spanish mackerel (B) in the Yellow Sea (source: 
Tang 1993). 
 
Fig. 24 Annual catch of dominant species:  
small yellow croaker and hairtail (A), Pacific 
herring and Japanese mackerel (B), and anchovy 
and half-fin anchovy (C) (source:  Tang 1993, 
1998). 
0
5
10
15
20
25
1959 1982 1992
Year
10
5
 cells/m
3
Phytoplankton
 
 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
1959 1982 1992 
Year 
mmol/L 
Inorganic nitrogen Phosphate Silicate 
 
Fig. 25 Changes of phytoplankton and nutrients in the Bohai Sea (source:  YSFRI). 
 
174
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
1959 1982 1992 1998
Year
Biomass (mg/m
3
)
May
Aug.
 
Fig. 26 Changes of zooplankton biomass in the 
Bohai Sea (source:  YSFRI). 
 
 
 
Fig. 27  Relationship between the fluctuations in 
herring abundance in the Yellow Sea and the 36-yr 
cycle of wetness oscillation in eastern China 
(source:  Tang 1981, 1995). 
 
 
Trajectories of catch and stock abundance of dominant small pelagic fishes 
and common squid with some related environmental indices around Japan 
 
Akihiko Yatsu
1
, Hiroshi Nishida
1
, Minoru Ishida
1
, Akira Tomosada
1
, Takahiro Kinoshita
2
 
and Tokio Wada
3 
1 
National Research Institute of Fisheries Science, 2 -12 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, Japan.  
256-8648  E-mail: yatsua@nrifs.affrc.go.jp 
2 
Hokkaido National Fisheries Research Institute  
3 
Fisheries Agency of Japan 
 
Small pelagics are ideal subjects for studying 
ocean-climate variability (Hunter and Alheit 
1995).  In the northwestern Pacific, 2 - 6 million 
tons of small pelagic fishes have been harvested 
annually since the 1950s by the Japanese 
commercial fisheries, with quasi-decadal 
alternations in dominant species known as species 
replacement:  chub mackerel, Scomber japonicus, 
in the 1970s, Japanese sardine, Sardinopus 
melanostictus, in the 1980s, Pacific saury, 
Cololabis saira, anchovy, Engraulis japonicus, 
and Japanese common squid, Todarodes pacificus, 
in the early 1990s (Fig. 28).  These small pelagics 
have a short life span (<10 yr) and migrate 
between spawning grounds in southern Japan 
including the East China Sea, and feeding grounds 
in the northwestern Pacific and the Japan Sea and 
Okhotsk Sea.  Herring is confined to subarctic 
waters of Japan, mainly around Hokkaido.  Time-
series of catch, recruitment and biomass of these 
small pelagics in the Japanese waters together with 
related environmental factors are presented below 
(Table 10;  Figs. 29-34).  
 
 
0
1,000,000
2,000,000
3,000,000
4,000,000
5,000,000
1905 1915 1925 1935 1945 1955 1965 1975 1985 1995
Catch in ton (Sardine)
0
100,000
200,000
300,000
400,000
500,000
Catch in ton (Anchovy)
Sardine
Anchovy
0
200,000
400,000
600,000
800,000
1,000,000
1,200,000
1,400,000
1,600,000
1,800,000
1905 1915 1925 1935 1945 1955 1965 1975 1985 1995
Catch in ton (Chub
Mackerel)
0
100,000
200,000
300,000
400,000
500,000
600,000
700,000
800,000
900,000
Catch in ton (Others)
Mackerels
Herring
Saury
Common squid
 
Fig. 28 Catch histories of small pelagic fishes 
by Japan. 
 
175
 
Table 10 Summary of time-series for dominant small pelagic fishes and common squid and related 
environmental indices around Japan. 
Time series Fig. Start year Sampling 
interval 
Time of year Sampling 
location 
Sampling gear, data 
source 
 
 
Fig. 29 Midwater-trawl survey towed locations from 1996-2000. 
 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995
O yash i o I ndex
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
RPS
Oyash i o- i ndex
RPS( i nd/Egg)
RPS ( i nd/kg)
 
Fig. 30 Spawning stock abundance (SSB), egg 
production, recruitment and reproductive success 
of the Japanese sardine along the Pacific coast of 
Japan and Oyashio index. 
0
50 , 000
100 , 000
150 , 000
200 , 000
250 , 000
1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995
St ock N o . ( x 10^5)
To t al
To t al ( age 1-7)
SSN
SSN ( age 3-7)
Recr u i ts
Recr u i t ( age-1)
 
Fig. 31 Total stock numbers, spawning stock 
numbers (SSN), and recruitment of the chub 
mackerel along the Pacific coast of Japan (1960-
1984: Honma et al. (1987)). 
Sampling Stations (1996 1997 1998 1999 2000) 
176
Commercial 
catch statistics 
28 1905 Annual All seasons 
combined 
Japanese fishing 
grounds 
Purse seine, jigging, etc. 
Sardine biomass 
& 
egg production 
30 1951 Annual All seasons 
combined 
Japanese EEZ 
Pacific side  
VPA, plankton net, Wada 
and Jacobson (1998) 
Chub mackerel 
abundance 
31 1961 Annual All seasons 
combined 
Japanese EEZ 
Pacific side 
VPA, Honma et al. (1987) 
Common squid 
biomass 
32 1964 Annual All seasons 
combined 
Japanese EEZ 
Pacific side 
Production model with 
regime shift 
Juvenile fish 
abundance 
33 1996 Annual May-June 35-39N, 140-
170E 
Midwater trawl, Nishida et 
al. (2000) 
Sardine, 
anchovy, 
mackerels 
annual egg 
production 
34 1978 Monthly All seasons Japanese EEZ 
Pacific side 
Ishida (unpubl.) 
Kuroshio path 
type 
35, 36 1965 Monthly All seasons Central Japan Japan Coast Guard 
Hydrographic Dept. 
Kuroshio path 
length 
32 1965 Monthly All seasons Central Japan Ditto, Tomosada (unpubl.) 
Oyashio index 30 1975 Annual Feb-Mar. Northern Japan Ebisawa and Kinoshita 
(1998) 
 
-4.0 
-2.0 
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
64 69 74 79 84 89 94 99
Kuroshio & Zoopl
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
CPUE , Biomass
Kuroshio Dist.
Zooplankton
Bio mass (10^6t)
CPU E ton/day
 
Fig. 32 Kuroshio path distance (March) 
anomaly, zooplankton abundance anomaly in the 
central North Pacific, and biomass and CPUE of 
the Japanese common squid along the Pacific 
coast of Japan. 
 
0
100
200
300
400
500
1996 1997 1998 1999 2000
Abundance
Sardi ne
C hub
macke r el
Spotted
macke rel
 
Fig. 33 Abundance indices of the Japanese 
sardine, chub mackerel and spotted mackerel from 
midwater trawl survey in the Kuroshio-Oyahiso 
Transition Zone. 
 
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
14,000
16,000
18,000
78 83 88 93 98
Annual Egg Production
(10^12) Sardine and Anchovy
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
Annual Egg Production
(10^12) Mackerels
Sardine
Anchovy
 
Fig. 35 Kuroshio path types. 
 
177
Mackerels
 
Fig. 34 Annual egg production of small pelagic 
fishes along the Pacific coast of Japan. 
 
The commercial catch statistics have been 
published annually by the Ministry of Agriculture, 
Forestry and Fisheries.  Biomass, recruitment and 
other stock information are based on the routine 
stock assessments of small pelagic fishes 
harvested by Japan.  Midwater trawl survey has 
been carried out by NRIFS since 1996 in the 
Kuroshio-Oyashio Transition Zone in order to 
examine recruitment.  Recruitment abundance 
indices for sardine and mackerels are calculated 
from catch in numbers standardized by the sea  
 
surface water temperature and tow numbers.  The 
abundance indices are in reasonable agreement 
with age-0 fish stock numbers estimated from 
VPA.  The decline of sardine populations in the 
late 1980s was caused by recruitment failures 
corresponding to Oyashio index and SST 
anomalies in the Kuroshio Extention (Ebisawa and 
Kinoshita 1988; Noto and Yasuda 1999).  Annual 
egg production has been estimated from the 
extensive plankton net surveys throughout the 
season in the Pacific coast of Japan for sardine, 
anchovy and mackerels (Scomber japonicus and S. 
australacicus combined). 
 
Oyashio index is the area of 10  C SST south of 
37  N.  The decline of chub mackerel stock can be 
partly explained by the low reproductive success 
in the late 1970s and 1980s, when Kuroshio path 
type was dominated by “A-type” (Figs. 35 and 36) 
and the famous regime shifts occurred (Hare and 
Mantua 2000).   
 
The common squid biomass (derived from 
production model) and catch also showed both low 
and high frequency variability, of which the 
former one seemed inversely correlated to the 
Kuroshio path distance between the longitudes 
131 E and 142  E, and also to the zooplankton 
abundance in the Central North Pacific taken from 
Hare and Mantua (2000). 
 
 
 
Year Month1 E1 L2 E2 L3 E3 L4 E4 L5 E5 L6 E6 L7 E7 L8 E8 L9 E9 L1 0 E1 0 L1 1 E1 1 L1 2 E1 2 L
1 9 6 5 DCNNNNNNNNBBBCDCDDNNNDNN
1 9 6 6 NNCCCCCCCBBBDDBNDNNNNNBB
1 9 6 7 DDCNNNNNNNNNBBBNBBNNNNNN
1 9 6 8 NCCCCCCCCCNNNNNNNNNNNNNN
1 9 6 9 DNNNNNDDBBBBCCBBCCBBCCDC
1 9 7 0 CCCCCCCCDDNNNNNNNNNNBCDD
1 9 7 1 CCCCCCCCCCDDNNNNBBDCNNNN
1 9 7 2 NNNNNNDNNNNNNNNNNNNNNBCC
1 9 7 3 NBNNNNCNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNN
1 9 7 4 NNNNNNNNNNBBBDNNNNNNNNNN
1 9 7 5 NNDDDNNNNNNNNNNABBBBBBAA
1 9 7 6 AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
1 9 7 7 AAAAAAAAAAANNNAAAAAAAAAA
1 9 7 8 AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
1 9 7 9 AAAAAAAAAAAAAABBBBBBBBBB
1 9 8 0 BBBBBCCCCCDCCCNNNNNNNNNB
1 9 8 1 BDDDBNNNNNBDDNNNNDDBBCBC
1 9 8 2 CCCCCBBBBCCCCBBBBBBBCCCC
1 9 8 3 CBBCCCCBBBBBBCCCCBCCCBBB
1 9 8 4 CCCCCCCCCCCCCCCDDNNCCCCC
1 9 8 5 CCBBCCCCCBBCCCCCDNNNCCCD
1 9 8 6 NNNNC DW CCCCCNNNCCNNNCNNNAA
1 9 8 7 AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
1 9 8 8 CBBBCBBCBCCCCCCCCNNCCCCC D
1 9 8 9 BCCCCD WCNNNNNNNNNNNND NBAAA
1 9 9 0 AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA CCCCC
1 9 9 1 CCCCCCCCCC DCCCCCCD NNNNNNNN
1 9 9 2 C DCNNNNNB DC DNNNNNDNNNNN CNNNN
1 9 9 3 NNNNNN BBB CCCCCCC NN CC NNN CDN CNNNN
1 9 9 4 NB CC DDNNCCNNNNN BBB NNNNNNNNNN
1 9 9 5 NNNNNNNBBB CCCCDB NNNNNNBCCC
1 9 9 6 CC DDDDDNNNNNNNNDNNNDDBCDD
1 9 9 7 NDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDDNNNNC
1 9 9 8 C DNNNNNNNNNBBBCCCNNNBCCCC
1999 D DCWW BCCCCDDNNNDNNNNNNBBBCC
2 0 0 0 CCC WWWW BBB CC WW BB CCCCCCCCCCC WW BBB
 
Fig. 36 Half-month statistics of the Kuroshio path type. 
References 
 
Ebisawa, Y., and Kinoshita, T.  1998.  
Relationship of surface water temperature in 
Boso-Sanriku area sea and recruitment per 
spawning biomass of the Japanese sardine.  
Bull. Ibaragi Fish. Exp. Sta., 36: 49-55 (In 
Japanese). 
Hare, S.R., and Mantua, N.J.  2000.  Empirical 
evidence for North Pacific regime shifts in 
1977 and 1989.  Prog. Oceanogr., 47: 103-
145. 
Honma, M., Sato, Y., and Usami, S.  1987.  
Estimation of the population size of Pacific 
mackerel by the cohort analysis.  Bull. Tokai 
Reg. Fish. Res. Lab., 121: 1-11. (In Japanese). 
Hunter, J., and Aleit, J. 1995.  International 
GLOBEC small pelagic fishes and climate 
change program.  Report of the first planning 
meeting, La Paz, Mexico, June 20-24, 1994.  
GLOBEC Rept., 8: 1-72. 
Noto, M., and Yasuda, I.  1999.  Population 
decline of the Japanese sardine, Sardinops 
melanostictus, in relation to sea surface 
temperature in the Kuroshio Extension.  Can. 
J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 56: 973-983. 
Wada, T., and Jacobson, L.D.  1998.  Regimes and 
stock-recruitment relationships in Japanese 
sardine (Sardinops melanostictus), 1951-1995.  
Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci., 55:2455-2463. 
 
178
GROUP 4:  HIGHLY MIGRATORY FISHES, SEABIRDS AND MARINE 
MAMMALS 
 
 
Seabirds reflect changes in ocean climate 
 
Douglas F. Bertram 
Canadian Wildlife Service & Simon Fraser University, Institute of Ocean Sciences, P.O. Box 6000, 
Sidney, B.C., Canada.  V8L 4B2  E-mail: bertramd@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
Seabirds spend most of their lives on the ocean but 
come to shore to raise their young.  Most seabirds 
breed on island colonies.  When birds are on the 
colony it is relatively easy for scientists to obtain 
rigorous quantitative information on their diet, 
reproduction and survival.  The response of 
seabirds to variation in ocean climate will likely 
reflect species-specific traits that include body 
size, cost of foraging, potential foraging range, 
ability to dive, amount of ‘spare’ time in the daily 
budget, and ability to switch diet (Furness and 
Tasker 2000).  The following example outlines 
some research on Triangle Island, British 
Columbia, Canada, examining time-series data on 
breeding seabirds during a period of extreme 
variation in ocean temperatures. 
 
Background and natural history  
 
British Columbia has major proportions of the 
world’s populations of Cassin’s Auklet and 
Rhinoceros Auklet, which breed on a few large 
colonies.  Triangle Island (50°52'N, 129°05'W), an 
Ecological Reserve and internationally Important 
Bird Area (IBA), is the outermost of the Scott 
Island Group off the northern tip of Vancouver 
Island (Fig. 1).  The island supports the world’s 
largest population of Cassin’s Auklet 
(Ptychoramphus aleuticus; 1.1 million breeders) 
and a large population of Rhinoceros Auklet 
(Cerorhinca monocerata; 82,000 breeders) in 
addition to significant populations of Tufted Puffin 
(Fratercula cirrhata; 52,000 breeders) and 
Common Murre (Uria aalge; 8,200 breeders) 
(Rodway 1991).  The Cassin’s Auklet is a small 
(190 g) planktivorous, burrow-nesting seabird 
which visits the colony only at night.  Nestlings 
leave the burrow (fledge) between 40-60 d old.  
The Rhinoceros Auklet (Cerorhinca monocerata) 
is a 550 g piscivorous, burrow-nesting species that 
only visits the colony at night.  Nestlings are cared 
for from 45-60 d until fledging.  The Tufted Puffin 
is a 750 g, piscivorous, burrow nester which visits 
the colony at multiple times throughout the day.  
Nestlings fledge at 40-50 d.  The breeding 
population for Triangle Island is estimated to be 
26,000 pairs (Rodway 1991).  The Common 
Murre is a large (950 g), piscivorous, cliff nesting, 
diurnal species.  Nestling development is semi-
precocial and the chicks leave the colony with 
their fathers at age 20-25 d to complete the 
majority of development at sea. 
 
 
Fig. 1 Location of the seabird colony, Triangle 
Island, and Pine Island light station in British 
Columbia, Canada. 
 
From 1989 – 1999, the Cassin’s Auklet population 
size on Triangle Island has declined and breeding 
success was very poor in several years.  To the 
south on the Farallon Islands in California, a 65% 
population decline of Cassin's Auklet from 1972-
1997 has been linked to a long-term decline in 
zooplankton in the California Current marine 
179
ecosystem (which stretches from California to 
Northern Vancouver Island).  A decline in the 
world’s largest population of Cassin’s Auklet on 
Triangle Island may also be related to the long-
term zooplankton changes in the California 
Current.  However, in northern British Columbia, 
the Cassin’s Auklets on Frederick Island 
(53°56'N, 133°11'W) show no sign of population 
decline and the birds have had consistently good 
breeding success in the 1990s, in marked contrast 
to the Triangle Island population.  Populations of 
the fish eating Rhinoceros Aukelts and Tufted 
Puffin are stable (1984-1999) and there is no 
indication of changes in the murre population on 
Triangle Island. 
 
Time-series information  
 
Seabirds are long-lived species so the research and 
monitoring must be conducted over appropriate 
durations to understand how populations change 
over time.  The Pacific Seabird Group (led by Dr. 
Scott Hatch) in collaboration with the US 
Geological Survey is working to assemble an 
interactive database of time-series information for 
seabirds that is slated to be made available on the 
web.  The database includes contributions from the 
PICES member nations (Canada, Japan, Russia 
and U.S.A.) as well as Mexico.  An online data 
entry system is currently being developed so that 
researchers can easily update their time-series.  
The database contains information on population 
size, productivity, components of productivity, 
survival, reproductive chronology and food habits.  
Some of the time-series available from Triangle 
Island are described below, to illustrate the value 
of seabird time-series information for 
understanding changes in marine ecosystems (see 
Bertram et al. 2001 for details).   
 
Triangle Island, the largest seabird colony in 
British Columbia, has the most extensive time-
series data sets for the region, spanning three 
decades.  Since 1994, researchers from Canadian 
Wildlife Service (CWS) and Simon Fraser 
University have been visiting the colony annually 
to collect information on breeding propensity, 
timing of breeding, hatch success, nestling growth 
and development, nestling diet, fledging success, 
adult survival and population trends.  (Valuable 
data can be obtained at this site from surveys 
shorter than 24 hr.  The research focuses on the 
planktivorous Cassin’s Auklet and the piscivorous 
Rhinoceros Auklet, Tufted Puffin and Common 
Murre. 
 
1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
Year 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Sea Surface Temperature (Celcius) 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
58 
59 
60 
61 
62 
63 
64 
65 
66 
67 
00 99 
98 
97 
96 
95 
94 
93 
92 
91 
90 
89 
88 
87 
86 
85 
84 
83 
82 
81 
80 
79 
78 
77 
76 
75 
74 
73 
72 
71 
70 
69 
68 
Fig. 2 Average sea surface temperature in 
April at Pine Is. light station, B.C., Canada. 
 
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000
Year
120
142
164
186
208
230
Hatch date (Julian)
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000
120
142
164
186
208
230
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000
120
142
164
186
208
230
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000
120
142
164
186
208
230
Common
Murre
Tufted
Puffin
Rhinoceros
Auklet
Cassin's
Auklet
 
Fig. 3 Timing of breeding for seabirds on 
Triangle Island, B.C., Canada.  Values are mean 
hatch dates (with 95% confidence intervals) for 
Cassin’s Auklet Rhinoceros Auklet and Tufted 
Puffin.  Values for Common Murre are dates when 
nestlings were first observed. 
 
On the B.C. coast, the 1990s was the warmest 
decade of the century with some of the highest 
SSTs on record ( Fig. 2).  For the piscivores 
(Rhinoceros Auklet, Tufted Puffin and Common 
Murre), the timing of breeding in the 1990s and  
 
180
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 
-10 
-5 
0 
5 
10 
Growth rate anomaly 
(g/d) 
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 
-3 
-2 
-1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Growth rate anomaly 
(g/d) 
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 
-2 
-1 
0 
1 
Growth rate anomaly 
(g/d) 
YEAR 
Tufted  
Puffin 
Rhinoceros 
Auklet 
Cassin's 
Auklet 
* 
 
Fig. 4 Nestling growth rate anomalies (g/d) for 
Tufted Puffin, Rhinoceros Auklet and Cassin’s 
Auklet on Triangle Island, B.C., Canada.  Note 
that in 1976 breeding failure was observed for the 
Tufted Puffins because most eggs failed to hatch 
(marked by star). 
 
2000 was significantly earlier than during the 
1970s and 1980s ( Fig. 3).  For the planktivorous 
Cassin’s Auklet, timing of breeding in the 1990s 
encompassed the entire range of values previously 
observed ( Fig. 3).  Nestling growth rates for 
Cassin’s Auklet, Rhinoceros Auklet and Tufted 
Puffin  tended to show  poorer performance  in the 
7.0 7.5 8.0 8.5 9.0 9.5
3
4
5
6
Mean Chick Growth Rate (g/d)
99
98
96
95
94
81
78
97
00
7.0 7.5 8.0 8.5 9.0 9.5
April Sea Surface Temperature, Pine I.
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Mean Chick Growth Rate (g/d)
76
99
77
98
96
95
94
84
78
97
86
85
00
7.0 7.5 8.0 8.5 9.0 9.5
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Cassin's
Auklet
Rhinoceros
Auklet
 
Fig. 5 Consequences of interannual variation 
in spring SST for Cassin’s Auklet and Rhinoceros 
Auklet reproductive performance on Triangle 
Island, B.C., Canada.  Growth rates of nestling 
Cassin’s Auklet and Rhinoceros Auklets are 
generally lower when spring is early and sea 
surface temperatures are warm.  Mortality from 
starvation is much more frequent when chick 
growth rates are low.  The slopes of the lines are 
statistically significant for both the Cassin’s 
Auklet (y = 13.97 – 1.07x; F
1,7
 = 12.5; P =0.009) 
and the Rhinoceros Auklet (excluding 1976, y = 
21.53 – 1.91x; F
1,10 
= 11.2; P = 0.007).  Shown are 
mean annual population estimates of nestling 
growth rate in relation to the average SST in April 
at Pine Island light station. 
 
1990s than in previous decades (Fig. 4).  Between 
1989 and 1999, the world’s largest population of 
Cassin’s Auklet on Triangle Island declined 
significantly (Bertram et al. 2000, CWS unpubl.).  
Note, too, that in the California Current ecosystem 
a 65% population decline of the planktivous 
Cassin's Auklet on the Farallon Islands from 1972-
181
1997 (Nur et al. 1998) has been linked (Ainley et 
al. 1996) to a significant long-term decline in 
zooplankton production in the California Current 
system (Roemmich and McGowan 1995).   
 
For Cassin’s Auklet and Rhinoceros Auklet, warm 
waters in spring are associated with poor nestling 
growth (Fig. 5).  The poor performance of the 
Cassin’s Auklet during warm spring years likely 
reflects a temporal mismatch between the timing 
of availability of their main prey (Neocalanus 
cristatus) and the timing of breeding (Bertram et 
al. 2001).  In warm spring years (e.g., 1996 and 
1998) the zooplankton peak is early and poor 
nestling growth and large scale nestling mortality 
are observed for Cassin’s Auklet.  The mechanism 
linking poor nestling growth and warm SST is less 
clear for the piscivorous Rhinoceros Auklet, but 
may be related to temperature dependent 
recruitment to fish prey populations such as 
Pacific sand lance (Ammodytes hexapterus).   
 
The focus here has been on a colony-based 
example data but time-series data on birds at sea 
can also reveal significant patterns related to 
climate variability.  For example, declines in 
populations of seabirds wintering in the California 
Current ecosystem have been associated with the 
large-scale decline of zooplankton in that 
ecosystem (Veit et al. 1996). 
 
References 
 
Ainley, D.G., Spear, L.B., and Allen, S.B.  1996.  
Variation in the diet of Cassin’s Auklet reveals  
spatial, seasonal, and decadal occurrence 
patterns of euphausiids off California, USA. 
Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 137: 1-10. 
Bertram, D.F., Jones, I.L., Cooch, E., Knechtel, 
H., and Cooke, F.  2000.  Survival rates of 
Cassin's and Rhinoceros Auklets at Triangle 
Island, British Columbia.  Condor 102: 155-
162. 
Bertram, D.F., Mackas, D.L., and McKinnell, 
S.M.  2001.  The seasonal cycle revisited: 
interannual variation and ecosystem 
consequences.  Prog. Oceanogr. 49(1-4): 283-
308.  
Furness, R.W., and Tasker, M.L.  2000.  Seabird-
fishery interactions: quantifying the sensitivity 
of seabirds to reductions in sandeel 
abundance, an identification of key areas for 
sensitive species in the North Sea.  Mar. Ecol. 
Prog. Ser. 202: 253-264. 
Nur, N., Sydeman, W.J., Hester, M., and Pyle, P.  
1998.  Survival in Cassin’s Auklets on 
Southeast Farallon Island: Temporal patterns, 
population viability, and the cost of double 
brooding.  Pacific Seabirds 25: 38. 
Rodway, M.S.  1991.  Status and conservation of 
breeding seabirds in British Columbia.  
International Council for Bird Preservation 
Technical Publication No. 11, pp. 43-102. 
Roemmich, D., and McGowan, J.  1995.  Climate 
warming and the decline of zooplankton in the 
California Current.  Science 267: 1324-1326.  
Veit, R.R., Pyle, P., and McGowan, J.A.  1996.  
Ocean warming and long-term change in 
pelagic bird abundance within the California 
Current system.  Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 139: 
11-18. 
 
 
Assessment of feeding impact by higher trophic predators 
 
Hidehiro Kato 
Cetacean Population Biology Section, National Research Institute of Far Seas Fisheries, 5-7-1 Orido, 
Shimizu, Shizuoka, Japan.  424-8633  E-mail: katohide@enyo.affrc.go.jp 
 
Okamura (2000) tried to develop an 
ECOPATH/ECOSIM model of the western North 
Pacific to elucidate the role of marine mammals 
and marine birds in the ecosystem.  His attention 
was focused on two sub-regions: the Western 
Tropical Zone (WTZ) and the Kuroshio/Oyashio 
Region (KR/OY) in the PICES area in which food 
consumption by sea birds and marine mammals 
was assessed by PICES Working Group 11.  These 
two sub-regions were selected based on data 
availability and academic interests of many 
Japanese fisheries scientists.  In the case where 
182
toothed whales were removed from components in 
the western North Pacific model to give a high 
fishing rate, the biomasses of large squids and 
miscellaneous fishes in the ecosystem have 
increased two-fold at the end of the simulation but 
those of mesopelagics decreased by half.  On the 
other hand, in the case where baleen whales, 
pinnipeds and sea birds were removed 
simultaneously from the ecosystem to give a high 
fishing rate, the remarkable change of biomass for 
various species was not observed.  Furthermore, 
the author had made sensitivity test on the 
difference of the diet composition for respective 
whale groups.  The change of the diet composition 
of the baleen whales had no big effect on the 
biomass trajectory, seemingly due to the small 
biomass of the baleen whales in this area.  The 
change of the diet composition of the toothed 
whales had big visible effect on biomass change 
for every group in the ecosystem.  These results 
suggest the importance of the toothed whales in 
the ecosystem.  Okamura and his colleagues are 
now trying to construct the revised western North 
Pacific ECOPATH/ECOSIM model that 
incorporates more detailed information about 
biomass and diet composition for fishes.  
 
Reference 
 
Okamura, H.  2000.  Consideration for modeling 
to incorporate prey consumption by marine 
birds and mammals (W6-183).  Extended 
abstract for the PICES Ninth Annual Meeting. 
 
 
Data summary:  Impact of climate variability on observation and prediction 
of ecosystem and biodiversity changes in the North Pacific 
 
Phillip R. Mundy
1
, Cherri Womac
1
 and Carrie Holba
2
  
1
 Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Restoration Office, #401-645 G Street, Anchorage, AK 99501-3451, U.S.A.  
E-mail: phil_mundy@oilspill.state.ak.us; cherri_womac@oilspill.state.ak.us 
2
 Alaska Resources Library and Information Service, Anchorage, AK 99501-3451, U.S.A.  E-mail: 
carrie@arlis.org 
 
The Exxon Valdez Trustee Council (EVOS) funds 
data collection, analysis and modeling by 
scientists at government, university and private 
institutions.  The data for each project are 
submitted in the form of final reports, however, 
publication in peer-reviewed journals is strongly 
encouraged.  Original data are held by the authors, 
and may be replicated in the final report.  Formats 
are paper, MS-Word, Adobe Acrobat (pdf), and 
original software provided by authors. 
 
Types of data  
 
Observations and analyses from marine areas of 
the northern Gulf of Alaska include those of birds, 
fishes, shellfishes and mammals, physical, 
chemical, biological, geological and atmospheric 
data.  The following parameters are considered:  
abundances, age structure, distributions, physio-
logy, growth, survival, energetics, trophic level, 
contaminant burdens, multiple life cycle stages, 
macro- and micro-invertebrates and vertebrates 
and marine plants, air and water temperature, 
salinity, currents, wind, and bathymetry. 
 
Prominent higher trophic level species are:  pink 
salmon (embryos, adults), mussels, clams, sea 
otters, harbor seals, kittiwakes, murres, pigeon 
guillemot, and harlequin duck. 
 
Time-series 
 
Data collected by EVOS do not presently exceed 
11 years (1989–present), however, for some 
oceanographic and biological variables, analyses 
include comparisons of EVOS data to historical 
data sets.  Since observations are available on 
hundreds of species and several types of physical 
phenomena for varying lengths of time, locating 
time-series of interest requires the following: 
 
1. Searching the file “EVOS Final Report List & 
Abstracts.doc” by keywords for the project 
title and number of interest; 
183
2. Locating the “Project data field” following the 
abstract for projects of interest;  
3. Locating data by consulting the Adobe 
Acrobat version of the Final Report at 
“http://dtlcrepository.downtownlegal.com/AR
LIS/PDF/” or from the peer-reviewed 
publication to be found by searching the 
bibliography “EVOS TC Supported 
publications 020901.pdx”; 
4. Data not available from the Final Report or 
journal may be obtained from the author and 
agency, or often from the U.S. National 
Technical Information Service (NTIS), as 
indicated in the file “EVOS Final Report List 
& Abstracts.doc”. 
 
Models 
 
1. Numerical simulation of the seasonal ocean 
circulation patterns and thermohaline structure 
of Prince William Sound based on the 
Princeton 3-D ocean circulation model (Wang 
and Mooers 1996; Wang et al. 1999). 
2. A mass-balanced ECOPATH model of trophic 
flows in Prince William Sound: decompart-
mentalizing ecosystem knowledge (Okey and 
Pauly 1999). 
3. Plankton dynamics:  observed and modeled 
responses to physical factors in Prince 
William Sound, Alaska (Eslinger et al. in 
press). 
4. Herring over-wintering survival model in 
Prince William Sound (Brown et al. unpubl.). 
 
Metadata 
 
1. EVOS GEM GOA database:  descriptions and 
geographic coordinates of 280 active and 
historic data gathering projects in the Gulf of 
Alaska and adjacent waters by all U.S. and 
some Canadian entities.  Satellite observing 
programs are included.  Format:  Summaries 
Excel and FileMaker Pro. 
2. GIS:  geographic locations with abstract of 
project’s metadata for those with multiple 
sampling sites.  Format:  ArcView shape files. 
 
Electronic bibliographies 
 
1. TC Bibliography (file name: EVOS TC 
Supported publications 020901.pdx):  work 
supported by EVOS includes 404 peer-
reviewed journal citations, theses and 
dissertations, some with abstracts for marine 
biology, geophysics and numerical and 
statistical models.  Search engine is provided.  
Format:  ProCite (*.pdx). 
2. GEM Cites Bibliography (file name: EVOS 
Gemcites 030101.pdx):  1,011 peer reviewed 
works and authoritative agency data reports 
cited in the GEM synthesis document or 
current synthesis articles on marine biology, 
geophysics, astrophysics, and numerical and 
statistical models.  Search engine is provided. 
Format:  ProCite (*.pdx).  
3. EVOS Final Report List & Abstracts.doc – 
starts with a list of all Final Reports by 
number, author, title, agency and NTIS 
number if applicable.  Searchable by key 
words or phrases.  Format:  MS-Word 2000 
(*.doc).  
4. EVOS Final Reports reviewed and accepted as 
of September 30, 2000, are available 
electronically in Adobe Acrobat (*.pdf) on 
two CD’s and on web at “http://dtlcrepository. 
downtownlegal.com/ARLIS/PDF/”.
 
 
 
Yellowfin, bigeye, skipjack, bluefin, and albacore tunas in the Eastern Pacific 
Ocean 
 
Robert Olson 
Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission, 8604 La Jolla Shores Drive, La Jolla, CA 92037, U.S.A.   
E-mail: rolson@iattc.ucsd.edu 
 
The time-series described are for the eastern 
Pacific Ocean (EPO), currently defined as the area 
bounded by the coastline of North, Central, and 
South America, 40ºN, 150ºW, and 40ºS.  The 
184
IATTC (Inter-American Tropical Tuna 
Commission) staff maintains records for most of 
the vessels which fish at the surface for yellowfin 
tuna (Thunnus albacares), skipjack tuna 
(Katsuwonus pelamis), bigeye tuna (Thunnus 
obesus), or Pacific bluefin tuna (T. orientalis) in 
the EPO.  Records are not maintained for sport-
fishing vessels and small craft, such as canoes and 
launches.   
 
The IATTC maintains field offices in Manta and 
Playas, Ecuador;  Ensenada and Mazatlán, 
Mexico;  Panama, Republic of Panama;  
Mayaguez, Puerto Rico;  U.S.A.;  and Cumaná, 
Venezuela.  The scientists and technicians 
stationed at these offices collect landings data, 
abstract the logbooks of tuna vessels to obtain 
catch and effort data, measure fish and collect 
other biological data.  Most of the data analyses 
are conducted by the permanent, internationally-
recruited research and support staff at the 
IATTC’s headquarters in La Jolla, California, 
U.S.A.  The time-series presented in this report are 
summarized in Table 1. 
 
Table 1 Data time-series summarized in this report.  PS = purse seine, LL = longline, BB = baitboat. 
Time Series 
Figure 
number 
Beginning 
year 
Gear 
EPO 
Sampling 
Locations 
Estimate 
interval 
Type of 
analysis 
Yellowfin 
recruitment 
Figure 7 1975
1
 
PS-3 set types 
LL, BB 
Figure 6 
(1984-1998) 
Quarterly 
Length-based 
Age-structured Pop.  
yn. Model 
(A-SCALA) 
Yellowfin 
biomass 
Figure 8 1975
1
 
PS-3 set types 
LL, BB 
Figure 6 
(1984-1998) 
Quarterly 
Length-based 
Age-structured Pop. Dyn. 
Model 
(A-SCALA) 
Yellowfin 
average weight 
Figures 9 
& 10 
1975
1
 
PS-3 set types 
LL, BB 
Figure 6 
(1984-1998) 
Quarterly 
Length-based 
Age-structured Pop. Dyn. 
Model 
(A-SCALA) 
Bigeye 
recruitment 
Figure 12 1975
1
 
PS-3 set types 
LL, BB 
Figure 11 
(1994-1998) 
Quarterly 
Length-based 
Age-structured Pop. Dyn. 
Model 
(A-SCALA) 
Bigeye biomass Figure 13 1975
1
 
PS-3 set types 
LL, BB 
Figure 11 
(1994-1998) 
Quarterly 
Length-based 
Age-structured Pop. Dyn. 
Model 
(A-SCALA) 
Bigeye average 
weight 
Figure 14 1975
1
 
PS-3 set types 
LL, BB 
Figure 11 
(1994-1998) 
Quarterly 
Length-based 
Age-structured Pop. Dyn. 
Model 
(A-SCALA) 
Skipjack
2
 – – 
PS-2 set types 
BB 
Figure 15 
(1984-1998) 
– – 
Bluefin CPUEs 
Figures 18 
& 19 
1960 
EPO: PS 
WPO: trolling, 
PS, traps, gillnets, 
LL 
Figure 16 
(1970-1989) 
Figure 17 
(1972-1976) 
Yearly 
Habitat index, 
Regression Trees 
Albacore
3
 – – LL, trolling, BB 
Figures 19, 20 
(1999; 1952-1976) 
– – 
1
 Prior to 1975 the purse-seine fishery had not yet expanded its operations offshore. 
2
 The IATTC is working during 2001 on improved analyses of skipjack tuna using the same length-based age-
structured model approach used for yellowfin and bigeye tunas in the EPO.  Therefore, time-series estimates of 
recruitment, biomass, and average weights are not presented in this report. 
3
 Time-series of recruitment, biomass, and average weights are not available for albacore in the North Pacific Ocean. 
185
Yellowfin tuna  
 
The average annual distributions of the logged 
catches of yellowfin tuna by purse seiners in the 
EPO during 1984-1998 are shown in Figure 6.  
Most of these catches are from tropical and 
subtropical regions of the EPO.  The annual 
distributions of catches have changed over the 
historical evolution of the fishery and are 
described by Bayliff (2001a).  Prior to the mid-
1950s, the eastern Pacific fishery for yellowfin 
took place mostly within 250 miles of the 
mainland, principally by baitboats.  In the early 
1960s, purse-seining became the predominant 
fishing method.  During the mid-1960s the purse-
seine fishery began to expand its operations 
further offshore, and by the mid-1970s vessels 
were fishing as far west as 150ºW.  During 1975 
through 1998, the majority of yellowfin catch was 
taken by purse-seine sets on yellowfin associated 
with dolphins and by purse-seine sets on yellowfin 
in unassociated schools (Maunder and Watters 
2001). 
 
The most recent stock assessment of yellowfin 
tuna in the EPO is presented by Maunder and 
Watters (2001).  An age-structured population 
dynamics model and information contained in 
catch, effort, and size-composition data are used to 
assess the status of the yellowfin tuna stock in the 
EPO.  The stock assessment model, termed an age-
structured statistical catch-at-length analysis (A-
SCALA), is based on the method described by 
Fournier et al. (1998).  The assessment model uses 
quarterly time steps to describe the population 
dynamics.  The A-SCALA method recognizes that 
there is temporal variation in recruitment, that the 
environment may influence both recruitment and 
the efficiencies of different fishing gears, and that 
different fishing methods usually catch fish of 
different ages.  The model is described in detail by 
Maunder and Watters (2000). 
 
It is assumed that yellowfin tuna can be recruited 
to the fishable population during every quarter of 
the year.  The most-recent stock assessment of 
yellowfin makes no strong assumptions about the 
relationship between adult biomass (or abundance) 
and recruitment.  The estimated time series of 
yellowfin recruitment is shown in Figure 7 
(Maunder and Watters 2001).  The estimates are 
scaled so that the average recruitment is equal to 
1.0, which is 39,257,074 fish per quarter.  The 
recruitment of yellowfin tuna to the fisheries in the 
EPO is variable, and appears to be related to sea-
surface temperatures (SSTs).  The levels of 
recruitment to the fishery, at the age of 6 months,  
 
 
Fig. 6 Average annual catches of yellowfin 
tuna in the EPO during 1984-1998 for all purse-
seine trips for which usable logbook data were 
obtained (from Bayliff 2001a). 
 
Fig. 7 Estimated recruitment of yellowfin tuna 
to the fisheries of the EPO.  The estimates are 
scaled so that the average recruitment is equal to 
1.0.  The bold line illustrates the maximum 
likelihood estimates of recruitment, and the thin 
lines indicate the approximate 95-percent 
confidence intervals around those estimates.  The 
labels on the time axis are drawn at the start of 
each year, but, since the assessment model 
represents time on a quarterly basis, there are four 
estimates of recruitment for each year (from 
Maunder and Watters 2001). 
186
are positively correlated with the SST anomalies at 
the time of spawning 6 months earlier.  However, 
SST does not explain all the variation in 
recruitment, and it is possible that other 
oceanographic variables influence the recruitment.  
The IATTC staff intends to consider other 
environmental indices as candidates for explaining 
the variation in recruitment.   
 
One hypothesis is that the yellowfin population 
has experienced two different recruitment regimes 
(1975-1984 and 1985-1999), the second being 
higher than the first.  These two regimes in 
recruitment are also correlated with regimes in the 
SSTs.  This change in recruitment levels produces 
a similar change in biomass (Fig. 8).  The analysis 
indicates that a very strong cohort entered the 
fishery in 1998 and that this cohort increased the 
spawning biomass ratio (the ratio of spawning 
biomass during a period of harvest to the spawning 
biomass which might accumulate in the absence of 
fishing, SBR) and catches during 1999.  There is 
also an indication that most recent recruitments are 
low, which may lead to lower SBRs and catches.  
The lower SSTs may also indicate that the most 
recent recruitments will prove to be lower.  
However, these estimates of low recruitment are 
based on limited information, and are therefore 
very uncertain. 
 
The trends in the biomass of yellowfin (fish that 
are at least one and a half years old) in the EPO 
are shown in Figure 8 (Maunder and Watters 
2001).  During 1975-1983 the biomass of 
yellowfin decreased from about 315,500 to 
151,000 mt, caused by high levels of catch and 
less-than-average recruitment (assuming an overall 
average and not two regimes).  It then increased  
 
rapidly during 1983-1985, and reached about 
351,000 mt in 1985.  This increase in biomass was 
caused by an increase in average recruitment  
(Fig. 7) and an increase in the average size of the 
fish caught.  Since 1985 the biomass has been 
relatively constant.  Increased fishing pressure 
prevented the biomass from increasing further 
during the 1986-1990 period. 
 
The spawning biomass is defined as the total 
weight of mature female yellowfin.  The estimated 
trend in spawning biomass is shown in Figure 8.  
The spawning biomass has generally followed a 
trend similar to that for biomass, described in the 
previous paragraph.   
 
Fig. 8 Estimated biomass and spawning 
biomass of yellowfin tuna in the EPO.  The bold 
lines illustrate the maximum likelihood estimates 
of the biomass, and the thin lines the approximate 
95-percent confidence intervals around those 
estimates.  Since the assessment model represents 
time on a quarterly basis, there are four estimates 
of biomass for each year (from Maunder and 
Watters 2001). 
 
Fig. 9 Estimates of overall average weights of yellowfin tuna in the EPO.  The critical weight is 
drawn as the horizontal dashed line (from Maunder and Watters 2001). 
187
0
10
20
30
40
50
FISHERY – PESQUERIA  1
75 78 81 84 87 90 93 96 99
FISHERY – PESQUERIA  2 FISHERY – PESQUERIA  3
75 78 81 84 87 90 93 96 99
FISHERY – PESQUERIA  4 FISHERY – PESQUERIA  5
75 78 81 84 87 90 93 96 99
FISHERY – PESQUERIA  6 FISHERY – PESQUERIA  7 FISHERY – PESQUERIA  8 FISHERY – PESQUERIA  9
0
10
20
30
40
50
FISHERY – PESQUERIA  10
0
10
20
30
40
50
FISHERY – PESQUERIA  11 FISHERY – PESQUERIA  12 FISHERY – PESQUERIA  13 FISHERY – PESQUERIA  14 FISHERY – PESQUERIA  15
FISHERY – PESQUERIA  16 FISHERIES – PESQUERIAS 1-10
75 78 81 84 87 90 93 96 99
0
10
20
30
40
50
FISHERIES – PESQUERIAS 11-12
YEAR – AÑO
 
Fig. 10 Estimated average weights of yellowfin tuna caught by the fisheries of the EPO.  The time- 
series for “Fisheries 1-10” is an average of Fisheries 1 through 10, and the time-series for “Fisheries 8-9” 
is an average of Fisheries 8 and 9.  The dashed line identifies the critical weight (from Maunder and 
Watters 2001). 
 
The overall average weights of the yellowfin tuna 
caught in the EPO predicted by Maunder and 
Watters (2001) have been consistently around  
10 kg for most of the period from 1975 to 1999 
(Fig. 9), but have differed considerably among 
fisheries (Fig. 10).  Sixteen fisheries were defined 
for the stock assessment of yellowfin tuna.  These 
fisheries were d efined on the basis of gear type 
(purse seine, baitboat, and longline), purse-seine 
set type (sets on floating objects, unassociated 
schools, and dolphins), and IATTC length-
frequency sampling area or latitude.  The average 
weight of yellowfin caught by the different gears 
varies widely, but r emains fairly consistent over 
time within each fishery ( Fig. 10).  The lowest 
average weights (about 1 kg) are produced by the 
discard fisheries (Fisheries 13-16), followed by the 
baitboat fishery (Fishery 10; about 4 -5 kg), the 
floating-object fisheries (about 4-5 kg for Fisheries 
2-4 and 10 kg for Fishery 1), the u nassociated 
fisheries (Fisheries 5 and 6; about 8 -10 kg), the 
northern and coastal dolphin-associated fisheries 
(Fisheries 7 and 8; about 20-30 kg), and the 
southern dolphin-associated fishery and the 
longline fisheries (Fisheries 9, 11, and 12; each 
about 40-50 kg).   
 
Bigeye tuna 
 
The average annual distributions of the logged 
catches of bigeye tuna by purse seiners in the EPO 
during 1994-1998 are shown in Figure 11.  Most 
of these catches are from tropical and subtropical 
regions of the EPO, and there are substantial 
catches from south of the equator.   
188
 
Fig. 11 Average annual catches of bigeye tuna 
in the EPO during 1994-1998 for all purse-seine 
trips for which usable logbook data were obtained 
(from Bayliff 2001a). 
 
The most recent stock assessment of bigeye tuna 
in the EPO is presented by Maunder and Watters 
(2001).  There have been important changes in the 
amount of fishing mortality exerted by the 
fisheries that catch bigeye tuna in the EPO.  On 
average, the fishing mortality on bigeye less than 
about 14 quarters old was negligible until about 
1994.  Since 1993, the expansion of fisheries that 
catch bigeye in association with floating objects 
and the widespread use of fish-aggregating devices 
(FADs) has, on average, caused the fishing 
mortality on these young fish to increase.  Purse-
seine sets on floating objects select mostly young 
bigeye that are about 5 to 16 quarters old.  It is 
assumed that bigeye from about 2 to 5 quarters old 
are discarded while the catch taken around floating 
objects is sorted on board the vessels.  Purse-seine 
sets on unassociated schools of tuna select bigeye 
that span a wide range of ages, and since 1990, 
fish that were about 7 to 20 quarters old were most 
selected by this mode of fishing.  In the area north 
of 15°N, the longline fleet selects bigeye that are 
about 10 to 26 quarters old;  south of this parallel, 
bigeye become relatively vulnerable to longline 
fishing after they are about 17 quarters old.  The 
southern longline fishery typically selects bigeye 
that are older than those selected by any of the 
other fisheries operating in the EPO.  The 
catchability of bigeye by purse-seine vessels has 
changed over time, and these changes have been 
caused mostly by random events that affect the 
relationship between fishing effort and fishing 
mortality.   
 
An age-structured population dynamics model and 
information contained in catch, effort, and size-
composition data are used to assess the status of the 
bigeye tuna stock in the EPO (Watters and Maunder 
2001).  The stock assessment model, termed A-
SCALA, is described briefly in the section on 
yellowfin tuna (above) and in detail by Maunder 
and Watters (2000).   
 
It is assumed that bigeye tuna can be recruited to 
the fishable population during every quarter of the 
year.  The most-recent stock assessment of bigeye 
makes no assumptions about the relationship 
between adult biomass (or abundance) and 
recruitment.  The estimated time-series of bigeye 
recruitment is shown in Figure 12 (Watters and 
Maunder 2001).  The estimates are scaled so that 
the average recruitment is equal to 1.0, which is 
6,605,204 fish.  Recruitment of bigeye tuna to the 
fisheries in the EPO is variable, and the 
mechanisms that explain variation in recruitment 
cannot currently be identified.  The abundance of 
bigeye recruited to the fisheries in the EPO appears 
to be unrelated to SST anomalies at the time when 
these fish were assumed to have hatched.  It is, 
however, possible that other oceanographic 
variables influence the recruitment, and the IATTC 
staff intends to consider other environmental 
indices as candidates for explaining the variation in 
recruitment.  This will include offsetting the 
environmental index by one quarter (rather than 
two), to see whether recruitment is related to the 
environmental conditions during the early-juvenile 
phase (rather than the larval phase).  Over the range 
of spawning biomasses estimated by the A-SCALA 
method, the abundance of bigeye recruited to the 
fishery also appears to be unrelated to the biomass 
of adult females present at the time of hatching. 
 
Extremely large numbers of bigeye tuna are 
estimated to have been recruited to the fisheries in 
the EPO during 1997 and the first quarter of 1998.  
These recruitments were about 1.7 to 3.5 times the 
estimated level of average recruitment.  
Recruitment was estimated to be above average 
during most of 1995-1997, but below average 
during most of 1983-1991 and since the second 
quarter of 1998. 
189
 
Fig. 12 Estimated recruitment of bigeye tuna to 
the fisheries of the EPO.  The estimates are scaled 
so that the average recruitment is equal to 1.0.  
The bold line illustrates the maximum likelihood 
estimates of recruitment, and the thin lines indicate 
the approximate 95-percent confidence intervals 
around those estimates.  The labels on the time 
axis are drawn at the start of each year, but, since 
the assessment model represents time on a 
quarterly basis, there are four estimates of 
recruitment for each year (from Watters and 
Maunder 2001). 
 
 
Fig. 13 Estimated biomass and spawning 
biomass (females that are at least 3 years old) of 
bigeye tuna in the EPO.  The bold lines illustrate 
the maximum likelihood estimates of the biomass, 
and the thin lines the approximate 95 percent-
confidence intervals around those estimates.  Since 
the assessment model represents time on a 
quarterly basis, there are four estimates of biomass 
for each year (from Watters and Maunder 2001). 
 
Trends in the biomass of bigeye tuna in the EPO 
are shown in Figure 13 (Watters and Maunder 
2001).  During 1975-1980, the biomass of bigeye 
that were 1+ year-old is estimated to have been 
relatively stable, at a level of about 468,000 mt.  
The biomass of this age group increased steadily 
during 1981-1984, and reached a historic high of 
about 581,000 mt during the second quarter of 
1985.  It then decreased, and reached a historic 
low of about 326,000 mt during the fourth quarter 
of 1995.  Following this, the assessment model 
indicates a steady increase in the biomass of 1+ 
year-olds, to a level of about 538,000 mt by the 
beginning of 2000. 
 
The estimated trend in spawning biomass is shown 
in Figure 13.  The spawners are assumed to be 
females that are at least 3 years old.  The spawning 
biomass has generally followed a trend similar to 
that for the biomass of 1+ year-olds, but there are 
slight differences in the timing of the highest and 
lowest estimates of spawning biomass because the 
spawners are relatively old.  
 
Given the amount of uncertainty in both the 
estimates of biomass and the estimates of 
recruitment, it is difficult to determine whether, in 
the EPO, trends in the biomass of bigeye have 
been influenced more by variation in fishing 
mortality or by variation in recruitment.  
Nevertheless, the simulation exercises by Watters 
and Maunder (2001) make it apparent that fishing 
has reduced the total biomass of bigeye present in 
the EPO.   
 
 
Fig. 14 Estimated average weights of bigeye 
tuna caught by the fisheries of the EPO.  The time-
series for “Fisheries 1-7” is an average of Fisheries 
1 through 7, and the time-series for “Fisheries 8-9” 
is an average of Fisheries 8 and 9 (from Watters 
and Maunder 2001). 
190
There have been important changes in the overall 
average weights of bigeye tuna caught by the 
surface fleet in the EPO predicted by Watters and 
Maunder (2001), due to changes in fishing 
mortality by different gears and purse-seine set 
types.  These changes are illustrated in Figure 14.  
Thirteen fisheries were defined for the stock 
assessment of bigeye tuna.  These fisheries were 
defined on the basis of gear type (purse seine, 
baitboat, and longline), purse-seine set type (sets 
on floating objects, unassociated schools, and 
dolphins), time period, and IATTC length-
frequency sampling area or latitude.  Prior to 1993, 
the average weight of bigeye caught in association 
with floating objects was about 18 kg (Fig. 14, 
Fishery 1).  During 1993-1998, the average weight 
of bigeye caught in purse-seine sets on floating 
objects declined, but larger fish were caught by 
these fisheries during 1999 (Fig. 14, Fisheries 2-
5).  Prior to 1990, the average weight of bigeye 
caught in unassociated schools was stable at about 
21 kg (Fig. 14, Fishery 6), but, since 1990, the 
average weight of bigeye in the catch taken in 
unassociated schools has varied between about 20 
and 35 kg, with an average of about 31 kg  
(Fig. 14, Fishery 7).  The average weight of bigeye 
caught in unassociated schools increased during 
1999.  The average weight of bigeye caught by the 
combined surface fleet, not including the discard 
fisheries, during 1975-1999 was about 18 kg  
(Fig. 14, Fisheries 1-7).  The assessment model 
currently treats the increase in average weight of 
bigeye caught by the surface fleet during 1999 as 
evidence of low recruitment from the latter half of 
1998 through 1999 (Fig. 12), but it is also possible 
that the surface fleet has become capable of 
catching greater proportions of larger bigeye.  The 
average weights of bigeye tuna taken by longliners 
operating in the EPO have remained relatively 
stable at around 50 kg (Fig. 14, Fisheries 8 and 9). 
 
Skipjack tuna 
 
The status of skipjack tuna in the EPO is 
summarized by Anonymous (2001b).  Skipjack are 
fished in the EPO by purse seiners (in schools 
associated with floating objects and in 
unassociated schools) and by baitboats.  The 
average annual distributions of the logged catches 
of skipjack tuna by purse seiners in the EPO 
during 1984-1998 are shown in Figure 15.  Most 
of the catches are made between northern Baja 
California and southern Peru, but the catches are 
relatively low off southern Mexico.  The fishery 
extends westward to about 140°W in equatorial 
waters.  Skipjack tagged in the EPO have been 
recaptured in the central and western Pacific 
Ocean, but no skipjack tagged in the central or 
western Pacific Ocean have been recaptured in the 
EPO.   
 
 
Fig. 15 Average annual catches of skipjack tuna 
in the EPO during 1984-1998 for all purse-seine 
trips for which usable logbook data were obtained 
(from Bayliff 2001a). 
 
The catches per unit of effort of skipjack by 
commercial fishing gear in the EPO are positively 
correlated with the sea-surface temperatures in the 
central Pacific 18 months previously (Anonymous 
2001b).  The catches of skipjack by surface gear 
tend to be reduced during El Niño episodes, 
however, and it is hypothesized that during such 
times the depth of the thermocline increases, so 
that the fish spend less time at the surface than 
during anti-El Niño years.   
 
There are two principal hypotheses for the stock 
structure of skipjack in the Pacific Ocean 
(Anonymous 2001b).  The separate-subpopulation 
hypothesis states that there are two or more 
genetically-distinct subpopulations of skipjack in 
the Pacific Ocean, and the clinal hypothesis states 
that separate subpopulations of skipjack do not 
exist in the Pacific Ocean, but that there is 
isolation by distance, i.e. the probability of any 
two fish interbreeding is an inverse function of 
191
their distance from one another.  The available 
data do not favor either the separate-subpopulation 
or the clinal hypothesis.  It is reasonably certain 
that skipjack are underfished in the EPO 
(Anonymous 2001b).  This situation could change, 
however, so it is important to learn more about this 
species and its relationships with the environment. 
 
Time series of skipjack recruitment, biomass, and 
average weights are not presented here because the 
IATTC is working during 2001 on improved 
analyses of skipjack tuna data using the same 
length-based, age-structured model approach used 
for yellowfin and bigeye tunas in the EPO.  
Indices of abundance, however, are presented in 
Anonymous (2000a: Figure 51). 
 
Pacific bluefin tuna 
 
The status of Pacific bluefin tuna in the Pacific 
Ocean is summarized by Bayliff (2001b).  Most of 
the catches of bluefin in the EPO are taken by 
purse seiners.  The annual distributions of purse-
seine catches of bluefin in the EPO during 1970-
1989 are shown in Figure 16 (from Bayliff 1994).  
Nearly all of the purse-seine catch is made west of 
Baja California and California, within about 100 
nautical miles of the coast, between about 23°N 
and 33°N.  Lesser amounts of bluefin are caught 
by recreational, gillnet, and longline gear.  Bluefin 
have been caught during every month of the year, 
but most of the fish are taken from May to 
October. 
 
 
Fig. 16 Annual distributions of Pacific bluefin tuna catches in the eastern Pacific Ocean, 1970-1989 
(from Bayliff 1994). 
192
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
2
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
1
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
1
 0
 0
 0
1
 0
 0
1
1
 0
 0
1
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
1
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
1
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
1
2
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
2
 0
 0
 0
 0
2
2
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
3
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
7
9
1
 0
 0
 0
 0
25
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
4
8
1
 0
 0
 0
16
 0
2
 0
 0
 0
1
8
5
1
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
15
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
2
6
10
 0
 0
 0
 0
1
 0
8
 0
1
 0
 0
 0
1
1
5
26
1
1
1
 0
 0
2
50
1
23
3
1
1
 0
1
 0
3
36
73
8
1
1
1
 0
 0
11
3
 0
1
4
1
 0
 0
 0
 0
4
154
171
47
 0
1
2
 0
 0
1
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
1
1
 0
2
11
18
21
 0
1
 0
1
1
2
 0
 0
 0
1
 0
 0
2
 0
3
16
20
26
 0
 0
 0
 0
1
2
3
1
4
1
 0
 0
2
2
4
13
23
46
 0
1
2
1
1
8
6
1
4
 0
1
1
 0
2
1
7
14
49
42
 0
2
 0
 0
 0
 0
1
 0
 0
 0
2
2
18
39
86
21
1
 0
 0
 0
2
5
123
174
485
337
9
2
1
 0
1
3
253
619
 0
 0
3
4
2
1
154
267
20
1
1
16
 0
501
176
 0
1
 0
11
 0
78
1
 0
3
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
 0
1
 0
 0
 0
 0
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
120 130 140 150 160 170 180 170 160 150 140 130 120 110 100 90 80
 
Fig. 17 5° latitude by 5° longitude quadrangles 
in which PBT were captured by the Japanese 
longline fleet during January 1952 – December 
1997 (from Watters 1999).  The numbers indicate 
the total number of PBT (100s) removed from 
each quadrangle during this period (zeros indicate 
catches of less than 51 fish).  The quadrangles 
inside the polygon extending from Japan to 150°W 
constitute the core area defined by Tomlinson 
(1996). 
 
Bluefin are exploited by various gears in the 
western Pacific Ocean (WPO) from Taiwan to 
Hokkaido (Bayliff 2001b).  Age-0 fish about 15 to 
30 cm in length are caught by trolling during July-
October south of Shikoku Island and south of 
Shizuoka Prefecture.  During November-April 
age-0 fish about 35 to 60 cm in length are taken by 
trolling south and west of Kyushu Island.  Age-1 
and older fish are caught by purse seining, mostly 
during May-September between about 30-42°N 
and 140-152°E.  Bluefin of various sizes are also 
caught by traps, gillnets, and other gear, especially 
in the Sea of Japan.  Bluefin are also caught near 
the southeastern coast of Japan by longlining.   
 
The high-seas longline fisheries are directed 
mainly at tropical tunas, albacore, and billfishes, 
but some Pacific bluefin are caught by these 
fisheries.  Catch distributions of bluefin by 
Japanese longliners during 1952-1997 in the 
Pacific Ocean are shown in Figure 17 (from 
Watters 1999).  Small amounts of Pacific bluefin 
are also caught by Japanese pole-and-line vessels 
on the high seas. 
 
Bluefin are most often found in the EPO in waters 
where the sea-surface temperatures (SSTs) are 
between 17 and 23°C (Bayliff 2001b).  Fish 15 to 
31 cm in length are found in the WPO in waters 
where the SSTs are between 24 and 29°C.  
Conditions in the WPO probably influence the 
portions of the juvenile fish there that move to the 
EPO, and also the timing of these movements.  
Likewise, conditions in the EPO probably 
influence the timing of the return of the juvenile 
fish to the WPO. 
 
Various indices of abundance of Pacific bluefin in 
the EPO have been calculated, but none of these is 
entirely satisfactory.  The IATTC has calculated 
“habitat” indices for the EPO routinely for several 
years.  Since Bell (1963) had demonstrated that 
bluefin are most often found in waters where the 
SSTs are between 17 and 23°C, Bayliff (1996) 
considered the 1-degree areas north of 23°N and 
west of California and Baja California in which 
the SSTs were in that range during May through 
October to be “bluefin habitat.”  He then divided 
the catches of bluefin in those 1-degree areas 
during each year by the corresponding numbers of 
unstandardized days of fishing effort to obtain 
CPUEs of bluefin (Fig. 18).  Indices of abundance 
of bluefin for the WPO were prepared by Watters 
(1999) of the IATTC and by scientists from other 
nations.  Watters’ time-series of abundance indices 
for the “core area” (Fig. 17) in the WPO for the 
Japanese longline fishery are shown in Figure 19. 
 
The National Research Institute of Far Seas 
Fisheries, Japan, has been tagging Pacific bluefin 
tuna with archival tags to study the relationships 
between their movements and the physical 
environment (Anonymous 1999, Anonymous 
2000b).  Tsuji et al. (1999) reported the first 
recapture of a Pacific bluefin tuna that made a 
trans-Pacific migration while carrying an archival 
tag.   
 
There was general agreement at a working group 
meeting on bluefin in December 2000, to start the 
process of developing a Pacific-wide assessment 
of bluefin tuna using the same length-based age-
structured model approach used for yellowfin and 
bigeye tunas in the EPO (Anonymous 2000b). 
 
193
 
Fig. 18 Catch, effort, and catch-per-unit of 
effort data for the surface fishery for bluefin in the 
EPO, as determined by the habitat index method.  
The data for 1998 are preliminary (from Bayliff 
2001b). 
Year
CPUE (numbers/10,000 hooks)
1960 1970 1980 1990
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2
194
 
Fig. 19 Time-series of regional abundance 
indices for the entire PBT core area.  The trend 
with a dashed line and open circles is the time 
series estimated from the safe abundance indices.  
The trend with a solid line and filled circles is the 
time series estimated from pooling the safe and the 
extrapolated abundance indices (see Watters 1999 
for details). 
 
 
Albacore tuna 
 
The status of albacore tuna in the Pacific Ocean is 
summarized by Anonymous (2001a).  There are 
two stocks of albacore in the Pacific Ocean, one 
occurring in the northern hemisphere and the other 
in the southern hemisphere.  In the North Pacific, 
the adults live mostly in the Kuroshio Current, the 
North Pacific Transition Zone, and the California 
Current, but spawning occurs in tropical and 
subtropical waters.   
 
Albacore are caught by longliners in most of the 
North Pacific, but not often between about 10°N 
and 5°S, by trollers in the eastern and central 
North Pacific, and by baitboats in the western 
North Pacific (Anonymous 2001a).  Albacore are 
caught by fisheries from several nations, including 
Canada, Japan, Republic of Korea, Mexico, 
People’s Republic of China, Taiwan, U.S.A, and 
others.  During the 1980s and 1990s, the catches 
have ranged between about 45,000 and 75,000 
metric tons in the North Pacific.   
 
There appear to be two subgroups of albacore in 
the North Pacific Ocean.  The fish of the northern 
subgroup occur mostly north of 40°N when they 
are in the eastern Pacific Ocean.  There is 
considerable exchange of fish of this subgroup 
between the troll fishery of the eastern Pacific 
Ocean and the baitboat and longline fisheries of 
the western Pacific Ocean.  The fish of the 
southern subgroup occur mostly south of 40°N in 
the eastern Pacific, and relatively few of them are 
caught in the western Pacific.  Fish that were 
tagged in offshore waters of the eastern Pacific 
and recaptured in the coastal fishery of the eastern 
Pacific exhibited different movements, depending 
on the latitude of release.  Most of the recaptures 
of those released north of 35°N were made north 
of 40°N, and most of the recaptures of those 
released south of 35°N were made south of 40°N. 
 
Childers and Miller (2000) presented the 
distribution of catches per day’s fishing for 
albacore caught by U.S. troll vessels in 1999 in the 
North Pacific (Fig. 20).  Childers and Miller also 
presented maps of albacore catch distributions in 
relation to SSTs in the North Pacific.  Anonymous 
(2001a) presented distributions of catches per 
hook of albacore by Japanese longliners averaged 
over 1952-1976 (Fig. 21). 
 
Time-series of recruitment, biomass, and average 
weights have not been prepared by the IATTC for 
albacore in the North Pacific Ocean.  A time-series 
of length-frequency histograms of albacore caught 
by U.S. troll vessels in the North Pacific are 
presented in a series of reports by Childers and 
Miller (the latest is Childers and Miller 2000). 
 
Fig. 20 Distribution of albacore CPUEs by U.S. troll vessels in the North Pacific Ocean during 1999 
(from Childers and Miller 2000). 
 
 
 
Fig. 21 Distribution of catches per hook of 
albacore by Japanese longliners averaged over the 
1952-1976 period (from Anonymous 2001a). 
 
 
Ecosystem model and climate forcing 
 
The staff of the IATTC has been developing a 
modeling approach to evaluate the ecological 
implications of alternative fishing strategies in the 
pelagic tropical (EPO).  Additional development 
and evaluation of the EPO ecosystem model was 
accomplished by a working group funded by the 
National Center for Ecological Analysis and 
Synthesis (NCEAS) in Santa Barbara, California.  
One of the products of the working group was an 
evaluation of the implications of climate forcing 
on ecosystem dynamics of the tropical EPO.  One 
of the ways that the physical environment affects 
ecosystem dynamics is by inducing variation in 
primary production at the base of the food web.  
The tropical EPO is strongly influenced by El 
Niño and La Niña events.  Over a large portion of 
the tropical EPO, the chlorophyll concentrations 
are reduced during El Niño and increased during 
La Niña.  To simulate ENSO-scale variations in 
producer biomass in the ecosystem model, the 
working group constructed an empirical model 
that relates SST anomalies to surface chlorophyll 
concentrations.  They used time-series of SST 
anomalies to specify trajectories of producer 
biomass, and simulated the ecosystem effects of 
ENSO-scale pulses and cycles and a time-series of 
producer biomass predicted from a greenhouse-
warming scenario for the 21st century.  A 
manuscript describing the analysis has been 
submitted to Fisheries Oceanography, and is in 
review at the present time.  The abstract of the 
manuscript (Olson et al. submitted) follows: 
 
Evaluating the top-down effects of fishing on 
marine ecosystem dynamics requires an 
195
understanding of the role of bottom-up physical 
processes.  We used a recently-developed 
ecosystem model for the pelagic eastern tropical 
Pacific Ocean (ETP) to explore how El-Niño-
Southern-Oscillation (ENSO)-scale variability 
might affect the animals at middle and upper 
trophic levels.  We forced the model with ENSO-
scale variations in primary-producer biomass that 
were estimated from an empirical relationship 
between observed sea-surface temperature (SST) 
anomalies and surface chlorophyll concentrations.  
We used time series of SST anomalies to specify 
trajectories of producer biomass, and simulated 
the ecosystem effects of 1) single, positive (La 
Niña-like) and negative (El Niño-like) pulses in 
producer biomass, 2) regular warm-cold cycles in 
producer biomass, and 3) a time series of 
producer biomass predicted from a greenhouse-
warming scenario for the 21st century.  Pulses in 
producer biomass in the model ecosystem affected 
components at middle trophic levels (forage fishes 
and cephalopods) more than the apex predators.  
Bottom-up forces acted as a wave propagating 
through the ecosystem at various time lags.  
Regular warm-cold cycles with low periodicity 
had the greatest impact, increasing the relative 
biomasses and biomass variability of organisms at 
middle trophic levels and decreasing those of 
organisms at higher trophic levels.  The biomasses 
of all ecosystem components decreased during the 
long-term trend of the greenhouse-warming 
scenario, and only components with relatively 
high production/biomass ratios were sensitive to 
the high-frequency ENSO signal. Comparing 
simulations with and without fishing mortality 
allowed us to identify which ecosystem 
components are primarily top-down controlled by 
fishing and which are primarily bottom-up 
controlled by resource dynamics.   
 
References 
 
Anonymous.  1999.  Report of the Sixth Joint 
NRIFSF-IATTC Workshop on Pacific Bluefin 
Tuna.  Dec 8-9, 1999. Shimizu, Japan.  
Anonymous.  2000a.  Annual Report of the Inter-
American Tropical Tuna Commission, 1998.  
IATTC, La Jolla. 357p. 
Anonymous.  2000b.  Report of the Interim 
Scientific Committee Bluefin Tuna Working 
Group. Nov 30-Dec 1, 2000. Shimizu, Japan.  
Anonymous.  2001a.  Status of albacore tuna in 
the Pacific Ocean.  IATTC, Stock Assessment 
Rep. 1: 255-283. 
Anonymous.  2001b.  Status of skipjack tuna in 
the eastern Pacific Ocean.  IATTC, Stock 
Assessment Rep. 1: 87-108. 
Bayliff, W.H.  1994.  A review of the biology and 
fisheries for northern bluefin tuna, Thunnus 
thynnus, in the Pacific Ocean.  FAO Fish. 
Tech. Pap. 336: 244-295. 
Bayliff, W.H.  1996.  Indices of abundance of 
northern bluefin tuna, Thunnus thynnus, in the 
eastern Pacific Ocean.  FAO Fish. Tech. Pap. 
365: 460-475. 
Bayliff, W.H.  2001a.  Organization, functions, 
and achievements of the Inter-American 
Tropical Tuna Commission. IATTC, Spec. 
Rep. 13: 1-122. 
Bayliff, W.H.  2001b.  Status of bluefin tuna in the 
Pacific Ocean.  IATTC, Stock Assessment 
Rep. 1: 211-254. 
Bell, R.R.  1963.  Synopsis of biological data on 
California bluefin tuna Thunnus saliens Jordan 
and Evermann 1926.  FAO Fish. Rep. 6: 380-
421. 
Childers, J., and Miller, F.R.  2000.  Summary of 
the 1999 U.S. North and South Pacific 
albacore troll fisheries.  NMFS-SWFSC 
Admin. ReportLJ-00-06. 42p. 
Fournier, D.A., Hampton, J., and Sibert, J.R.  
1998.  MULTIFAN-CL: a length-based, age-
structured model for fisheries stock 
assessment, with application to South Pacific 
albacore, Thunnus alalunga.  Can. J. Fish. 
Aquat. Sci. 55: 2105-2116. 
Maunder, M., and Watters, G.  2000.  A-SCALA:  
an age-structured statistical catch-at-length 
analysis for assessing tuna stocks in the 
eastern Pacific Ocean.  Draft manuscript 
presented to the Scientific Working Group of 
the Inter-American Tropical Tuna 
Commission . 
Maunder, M.N., and Watters, G.M.  2001.  Status 
of yellowfin tuna in the eastern Pacific Ocean.  
IATTC, Stock Assessment Rep. 1: 5-86. 
Olson, R. J., Watters, G.W., Francis, R.C., Fiedler, 
P.C., Polovina, J.J., Reilly, S.B., Aydin, K.Y., 
Boggs, C.H., Essington, T.E., Walters, C.J., 
and Kitchell, J.F.  2001.  Climate forcing and 
ecosystem dynamics in the eastern tropical  
Pacific Ocean. Fish. Oceanogr.(submitted)  
196
Tomlinson, P.K.  1996.  Movement of large 
bluefin tuna, Thunnus thynnus, in the north 
Pacific Ocean, as determined from the 
Japanese longline fishery, and implications 
regarding interactions between the fisheries of 
the western and eastern Pacific Ocean.  FAO 
Fish. Tech. Pap. 365: 425-459. 
Tsuji, S., Itoh, T., Nitta, A., and Kume, S.  1999.  
The trans-Pacific migration of young bluefin 
tuna, Thunnus thynnus, recorded by an 
archival tag. Working document submitted to 
the Second Meeting of the Interim Scientific 
Committee for Tuna and Tuna-Like Species in 
the North Pacific. January 15-23, 1999. 
Honolulu, Hawaii. 
Watters, G.  1999.  CPUEs of Pacific bluefin tuna 
in a core fishing area extending from the coast 
of Japan to 150W:  using regression trees to 
hypothesize about CPUEs for times and areas 
in which there was no fishing. Document 7.  
Sixth Joint NRIFSF-IATTC Workshop on 
Pacific Bluefin Tuna, December 8-9, 1999. 
Shimizu, Japan. 10p. 
Watters, G.M., and Maunder, M.N.  2001.  Status 
of bigeye tuna in the eastern Pacific Ocean. 
IATTC, Stock Assessment Rep. 1: 109-210. 
 
 
Biological time-series for the central North Pacific 
 
Jeffrey J. Polovina 
Honolulu Laboratory, Southwest Fisheries Science Center, National Marine Fisheries Service, NOAA, 
2570 Dole Street, Honolulu, HI 96822-2396, U.S.A.  E-mail: Jeffrey.Polovina@noaa.gov 
 
The Northwestern Hawaiian Islands time-series 
 
Since the early 1980s a number of the components 
of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands (NWHI) 
ecosystem have been monitored annually.  The 
following biological time-series are used as 
indicators of ecosystem dynamics:  i) the 
reproductive success of red-footed booby and red-
tailed tropic birds at French Frigate Shoals;  ii) the 
composition of spiny and slipper lobster in the 
commercial landings at Maro Reef;  and  iii) the 
girth of weaned monk seal pups from 6 islands in 
the NWHI (Table 2).   
 
The reproductive success of these two seabirds has 
been estimated by US Fish and Wildlife since 
1980 as the ratio of number of chicks surviving to 
fledge to number of eggs laid (Fig. 22).  Both 
seabirds feed on juvenile flying fish and squids 
around the NWHI, and variation in reproductive 
success is interpreted as a response to variation in 
prey availability.   
 
Spiny (Panulirus margintus) and slipper lobsters 
(Scallarides squamossus) are both caught in the 
commercial trap fishery for lobster.  While the two 
species appear to have a similar ecology, the spiny 
lobster has a 12-month pelagic larval period while  
the slipper lobster has a 3-month larval period.  
Fishery data has been collected with logbooks 
since 1983.  Changes in their composition in the 
commercial catches reflect changes in relative 
abundance which may reflect changes in oceano-
graphic process around the NWHI (Fig. 23).   
 
Monk seal pup girth has been collected since the 
early 1980s at many of the islands in the NWHI.  
Pup girth measured within 2 weeks of weaning is 
thought to be an indicator of female foraging 
success during gestation which is transferred to the 
pup in the form of milk. 
 
The Transition Zone time-series 
 
The Transition Zone time-series are:  i) the 
reproductive success of the black-footed albatross 
and the Laysan albatross;  ii) the catch-per-unit of 
effort (CPUE) from the US troll fishery for 
albacore in the North Pacific;  and  iii) the winter 
position of the Transition Zone Chlorophyll Front 
(TZCF) (Table 2).   
 
The reproductive success of the albatross have 
been estimated since 1980 by US Fish and 
Wildlife at French Frigate Shoals, as the ratio of 
chicks that fledge to number of eggs laid (Fig. 23). 
 
197
Table 2 Biological indicators for the central 
North Pacific. 
Northwestern Hawaiian Island 
1. Reproductive success for red-footed booby 
and red-tailed tropicbird, 1980–present.  
Source:  Hawaii and Pacific Island Refuge, 
USFWS (Fig. 22). 
2. Research and commercial fishery lobster 
catches, 1983-present.  Source:  Honolulu Lab, 
NMFS. 
3. Girth of weaned monk seal pups for 6 islands, 
1983-present.  Source:  Honolulu Lab, NMFS. 
Transition Zone 
1. Reproductive success of black-footed and 
Laysan albatross, 1980-present.  Source:  
Hawaii and Pacific Islands Refuge, USFWS 
(Fig. 22). 
2. US North Pacific albacore troll fishery CPUE, 
1960-present.  Source:  SWFSC, NMFS. 
(Fig. 23). 
3. Winter position of the Transition Zone 
Chlorophyll Front, 1997-present.  Source:  
Honolulu Lab, NMFS (Fig. 23). 
 
Fig. 22 Reproductive success of 4 species of 
seabirds nesting at French Frigate Shoal, Hawaiian 
Archipelago.  Data from B. Flint, USFWS, 
Honolulu, HI. 
 
Fig. 23 Top:  Catch-per-unit of effort in the US 
troll fishery for albacore;  middle:  winter position 
of the Transition Zone Chlorophyll Front;  bottom:  
percentage of spiny and slipper lobster in 
commercial lobster fishery at Maro Reef, 
Hawaiian Archipelago.  All data from Honolulu 
Laboratory, SWFSC, NMFS. 
 
 
These birds forage north from Hawaii in the 
Transition Zone and perhaps beyond while rearing 
chicks.  Variation in reproductive success is 
thought to reflect variation in prey availability.   
 
Fishery data from the US troll fishery for albacore 
is available since 1961 (Fig. 23).  The fishery 
begins in May in the Transition Zone near midway 
and follows albacore as they migrate eastward, 
reaching the coast of North America in the fall.  
An important part of the variation in troll CPUE is 
198
thought to reflect the abundance and availability of 
albacore in the Transition Zone and hence is likely 
to be a function of population size and frontal 
strength.   
 
The position and shape of the TZCF in January 
and February is measured from satellite ocean 
color data as the boundary between the high 
surface chlorophyll water of the Transition Zone, 
and the low surface chlorophyll water of the 
subtropical gyre.  The boundary is measured as the 
0.2mg/cubic ml chlorophyll-a contour line 
estimated with OCTS data in 1997 and Seawifs 
data beginning in 1998 (Fig. 23).   
 
Interpretation of variation in time-series 
 
The NWHI time-series show changes occurring 
during the period 1985-1991. Reproductive 
success of red-footed booby and red-tail tropicbird 
dropped from about 80% to 40% in the mid-1980s.  
There was a change in the composition of lobster 
in the fishery from about 70% spiny and 30% 
slipper from 1983-1991, followed by a sharp 
reversal of the proportion of spiny and slipper 
lobsters in the landings since 1992.  Monk seal 
pup girth dropped at many of the islands in the late 
1980s or early 1990s.  These trends have 
previously been interpreted as part of a regime 
shift in the mid- to late 1980s  (Polovina et al. 
1994, Hare and Mantua 2000).  However it is 
interesting that monk seal pup girth has shown an 
increase in 1998 and 1999, but no coherent change 
has been observed in lobster or sea bird data. 
In the Transition Zone time-series, the albatross 
showed an increase in the mid-1980s and a drop in 
the late 1990s.  The albacore CPUE shows a 
declining trend from the early 1960s to the early 
1990s, followed by some evidence of an increase 
in the later 1990s.  The TZCF shows 1999 and 
2000 to be different from 1997 and 1998.  The 
increase in albatross reproductive success in the 
mid-1980s is coherent with the changed in the 
NWHI time-series.  It has been proposed that the 
decline in albacore CPUE since the mid-1970s 
was a response to the 1977 regime shift (Al Coan, 
Richard Parrish, pers. comm.).  The changes in the 
late 1990s in the albatross, albacore, and TZCF 
may be responses to the strong El Niño and La 
Niña events or the beginning of a new regime.  
The change in the TZCF appears to reflect a 
warming in the central North Pacific and a cooling 
in the eastern North Pacific in 1999 and 2000, 
compared to 1997 and 1998 (Polovina and Seki 
2000).  
 
References 
 
Hare, S.R., and Mantua, N.J.  2000.  Empirical 
evidence for North Pacific regime shifts in 
1977 and 1989.  Prog. Oceanogr. 47: 103-145. 
Polovina, J.J., and Seki, M.S.  2000.  Sensors 
detect biological change in mid-latitude North 
Pacific.  EOS. Oct. 31, pp. 519. 
Polovina, J.J., Mitchum, G.T., Graham, N.E., 
Craig, M.P., Demartini, E.E., and Flint, E.N.  
1994.  Physical and biological consequences 
of a climate event in the central North Pacific.  
Fish. Oceanogr. 3: 15-21. 
 
 
Recent progress in salmon migration research in Japan 
 
Hiroshi Ueda
1
, Masahide Kaeriyama
2
 and Shigehiko Urawa
3 
1 
Field Science Center for Northern Biosphere, Hokkaido University, Kita 9 Nishi 9, Kita-ku, Sapporo 
060-0809, Japan.  E-mail: hueda@fsc.hokudai.ac.jp 
2 
Department of Marine Sciences and Technology, Hokkaido Tokai University, Minamisawa, Minami-
ku, Sapporo 005-8601, Japan.  E-mail: salmon@dm.htokai.ac.jp 
3 
National Salmon Resources Center, Fisheries Agency of Japan, 2-2 Nakanoshima, Toyohira-ku, 
Sapporo 062-0922, Japan.  E-mail: urawa@salmon.affrc.go.jp 
 
In Japan, almost all chum salmon (0ncorhynchus 
keta) are produced by artificial enhancement 
programs.  The number of adult chum salmon 
returned to Japan from 1900 through 1970 
averaged about 3 million individuals per year, 
ranging from 1 to 5 million individuals.  Since the 
199
late 1970s, adult returns have exponentially 
increased to more than 50 million individuals 
through the late 1980s, and reached 88 million 
individuals ( 57 million individuals in Hokkaido 
and 31 million individuals in Honshu) in 1996 
(Fig. 24).  This population size accounted for 70-
80% of all the chum salmon caught in the North 
Pacific Ocean.  The number of juveniles released 
increased from 800 million individuals in the early 
1970s to 2 billion individuals in 1982, and has 
been limited to about 2 billion individuals since 
the early 1980s (Fig. 24).  The rapid increase in 
chum salmon abundance, however, may have led 
to population density-dependent effects such as 
reduction in somatic growth and increase in age at 
maturity (Kaeriyama 1999).  Therefore, it is 
extremely important to investigate the migration 
mechanisms of salmon in the North Pacific Ocean. 
 
Since m ass marking of hatchery salmon using 
otolith thermal marks is highly effective for stock 
identification of salmon, thermal mark programs 
have been carried out by the National Salmon 
Resources Center, Fisheries Agency of Japan, for 
the purpose to investigate ocean migration and 
survival of each regional salmon stocks.  In April 
1999, approximately 4 million chum salmon (1998 
brood year) with three thermal mark patterns were 
released from the Chitose Hatchery in Hokkaido.  
This was the first trial of thermal otolith marking 
for anadromous salmon in Japan.  We are planning 
to increase the number of thermal mark releases 
from hatcheries.  A computer-programmed chiller 
system was developed to control water 
temperature, producing high quality thermal marks 
in the otoliths of chum salmon.  To increase 
available thermal mark patterns, we employed 
narrow rings, which were formed at 12 h intervals.  
In the spring of 2000, approximately 16 million 
chum and pink salmon (1999 brood year stocks) 
were released from hatcheries after thermally 
marked.  We expect that more than a hundred 
million thermally marked chum salmon may be 
released in the spring of 2003.  Figure 24 occupies 
about 5% of total hatchery releases in Japan 
(Urawa et al. 2000). 
 
Recent rapid advances in biotelemetry technology 
on free-swimming fish make it possible not only to 
monitor underwater fish movement in greater 
detail, but also to analyze physiological aspects of 
fish behaviour.  Three biotelemetrical instruments 
(ultrasonic transmitter, electromyographic 
radiotransmitter, and micro-datalogger) have been 
applied to investigate homing mechanisms in 
lacustrine sockeye salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka) 
and masu salmon (O. masou) in Lake Toya, Japan.  
These fishes offer good model systems for 
studying orientation ability in open water, 
energetics of migration, and environmental 
preferences of migrating fish.  Moreover, hormone 
implantation experiments have revealed the direct 
influence of the brain-pituitary-gonadal axis on 
homing migration of lacustrine sockeye salmon in 
Lake Shikotsu, Japan.  Although each technique 
has great advantages as well as minor 
disadvantages for clarifying physiological 
mechanisms of fish behaviour, combining 
different physiological biotelemetry has allowed 
us to understand the physiological mechanisms, 
and ultimately evolutionary adaptations, that 
facilitate successful homing migration (Ueda et al. 
2000).   
 
Release (billion fish)
1.5
1.0
 
Fig. 24 Annual changes in number of adult returns and juvenile releases of chum in Japan during 1965-
1999. 
200
We are also trying to develop an automatic 
salmon-tracking robot boat that is composed of 
four interrelated equipment systems:  1) a robot 
boat, 2.5 m in length, 1.3 m in width, with a 
loading capacity of 120 kg, operated by two 
electric thrusters at 2 knots;  2) an ultrasonic 
tracking system detecting distance and direction of 
miniature pingers;  3) a signal processing and 
control system consisting of DGPS, acoustic 
signal, and gyroscope;  and  4) a telecommu-
nication system between a land base and the boat.  
The final goal of this project is to build a robot 
boat that can track an acoustic signal acquired 
from a salmon at a distance of 100 m.  In the 
future, we plan to track salmon using the robot 
boat in the ocean. 
 
We believe that salmon is one of the key species 
for monitoring climated-linked changes in 
biodiversity in the North Pacific Ocean, and will 
carry out collaborative research to investigate the 
homing migration and maturing mechanism by 
means of biotelemetrical as well as fish 
physiological analyses.  
 
References 
 
Kaeriyama, M.  1999.  Enhancement program and 
stock management of salmonid population in 
Japan.  In: Stock Enhancement and Sea 
Ranching.  Edited by B. R. Howell, E. 
Moksness, and T. Svasand.  Blackwell Science 
Ltd., London. pp. 153-167.  
Ueda, H., Leonard, J.B.K., and Naito, Y.  2000.  
Physiological biotelemetry research on the 
homing migration of salmonid fishes.  In: 
Advances in Fish Telemetry.  Edited by A. 
Moore and I. Russell.  CEFAS, Lowestoft.  
pp. 89-97. 
Urawa, S., Kawana, M., and Ishiguro, T.  2000.  
Releases of thermally marked salmon from 
Japan in 1999 and 2000 with a thermal mark 
plan for 2000 brood year stocks.  NPAFC 
Doc. 461, 7p. 
 
 
Seabird monitoring program at Teuri Island, Hokkaido, Japan 
 
Yutaka Watanuki  
Graduate School of Agriculture, Hokkaido University, North-9, West-9, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido  
060-8589, Japan.  E-mail: ywata@res.agr.hokudai.ac.jp 
 
A seabird monitoring program at Teuri Island  
(44°25'N, 141°19'E, Fig. 25) is carried out to 
analyze how annual variation of physical marine 
processes in the northern part of the Japan Sea 
affect seabird breeding performance through fish 
stock change.  Target seabird species (Table 3) 
and time-series are:  
- Black-tailed Gulls (BTG): 1980, 1984, 1985, 
1987, 1992-2000;  
- Slaty-backed Gulls (SBG): 1980, 1984, 1985, 
1987, 1992-2000;  
- Rhinoceros Auklet (RA): 1984, 1985, 1987, 
1992-2000;  and  
- Japanese Cormorants (JC): 1992-2000.  
A few parameters were missing in some years. 
Parameters including breeding number, timing of 
breeding (egg laying or hatching), breeding 
success (clutch size, egg size, no fledgling, chick 
growth), diet for chicks (prey composition in the 
diet for chicks, meal size, fish size and number for 
bill load of RA) are measured according to the 
Teuri Island Seabird Monitoring Manual  
(Table 3).  
 
Fig. 25 Map showing the position of Teuri 
Island (marked by star). 
201
Table 3 Monitoring seabird species and 
parameter at Teuri island.  
 BTG SBG RA JC 
Number of nests 
• • 
 
• 
Time of egg laying 
• • 
 
• 
Time of hatching 
• • • • 
Egg size 
• • 
  
Clutch size 
• • 
 
• 
Hatching success 
• • • • 
No. fledgling per nest 
• • • • 
Chick growth rate 
• • • • 
Fledgling mass   
• 
 
Fledging period   
• 
 
Fledgling size   
• 
 
Adult size and mass   
• 
 
Prey composition 
• • • • 
Prey fish size   
• 
 
 
The breeding numbers of SBG and JC on the 
entire island are directly counted at the end of egg-
laying season (late May).  That of BTG is 
estimated with the number of birds on the entire 
island and number of nest/number of birds ratio 
obtained at 3 approximately 10 x 10 m plots.  Egg 
laying, egg dimension, breeding success and chick 
growth of gull species are measured in a single 
permanent SBG plot (ca. 30 nests) and 2-3 BTG 
plots (ca. 30-60 nests).  Each chick is color banded 
and weighed every 5 days.  Those surviving more 
than 30 and 35 days are assumed to fledge for 
BTG and SBG, respectively.  Nest contents of RA 
are checked and their chicks are weighed every 5 
days in a permanent plot where more than 50 
artificial nest boxes are used (at least 30 nests).  
Nest contents of JC in a semi-permanent plot 
(more than 30 nests) on a cliff are observed from a 
distance.  JC chicks older than 45 days are 
assumed to fledge.  Chicks of at least 10 nests of 
JC are weighed every 5 days between late May 
and late June.  Site of chick weighing plots is 
changed every year.  Chick growth rate is 
calculated as the slope of linear regression through 
the linear growth stage (5-25 days for SBG, 5-20 
days for BTG, 0-20 days for RA, and 0.2-2.0 kg 
for JC).  Fledgling mass and age of RA in the plot 
and final mass of chicks of two gull species are 
reported.  Body size and mass of more than 30 
fledglings of RA captured arbitrarily are reported 
also. 
 
More than 30 regurgitations from chicks and chick 
rearing adults are collected from BTG, SBG and 
JC each year.  Wet mass proportion and number of 
samples contained in each prey categories are 
measured.  About 10 food loads of RA are 
collected every week from birds landing at night 
with food.  Fish are identified and length and mass 
are measured.  At the same time, body size and 
mass of these birds are measured.  Mass prey 
composition in the diet for Black-tailed Gulls 
(BTG) and Rhinoceros Auklets (RA) chicks at 
Teuri Island is shown in Figure 26. 
 
 
Fig. 26 Between-year difference in mass prey 
composition in the diet for chicks from Black-
tailed Gulls (BTG) and Rhinoceros Auklets (RA) 
at Teuri Island.  Abbreviation are PSL, sandlance; 
SAR, sardines;  ENG, anchovy;  PSA, saury;  
JGR, juvenile Japan Sea greenling. 
 
202
APPENDIX 1 
 
PICES/CoML/IPRC Workshop on “Impact of Climate Variability on Observation and 
Prediction of Ecosystem and Biodiversity Changes in the North Pacific” 
March 7-9, 2001, East-West Center, University of Hawaii 
 
Workshop Agenda 
 
Wednesday March 7 
 
08:30-09:00 Registration 
 
PLENARY SESSION 
09:00-09:20 Opening remarks and overview of workshop objectives from a PICES perspective:  
 Vera Alexander and Patricia Livingston, workshop convenors 
09:20-09:40 Overview of the Census of Marine Life program 
 Cynthia Decker 
09:40-10:00 Climate variability in the Pacific Ocean and theories as to its cause 
 Julian P. McCreary, Jr. –Director, International Pacific Research Center 
10:00-10:20 GOOS-LMR Panel recommendations and relationship to CoML 
 Warren S. Wooster  
 
10:20-10:40 COFFEE BREAK 
 
10:40-11:00 The development of CLIVAR’s strategy for the Pacific Ocean  
  Humio Mitsudera 
11:00-11:20 A short overview of POGO and plans for a CoML Workshop on Canadian marine 
biodiversity, Pacific, Arctic, and Atlantic 
  Kees Zwanenburg 
11:20-11:40 Report of the CoML Pacific Tagging Workshops 
  David W. Welch 
11:40-12:00 Brief discussion of plenary talks and instructions for breakout groups 
 
12:00-13:30 LUNCH 
 
BREAKOUT GROUP SESSIONS 
13:30- 15:00 Breakout groups meet 
Group 1  Physical/chemical oceanography and climate 
Group 2  Phytoplankton, zooplankton, micronekton and benthos 
Group 3  Fish, squid, crabs and shrimps 
Group 4  Highly migratory fish, seabirds and marine mammals 
 
15:00-15:20 COFFEE BREAK 
 
15:20-17:00 Breakout sessions re-convene  
 
17:30-19:30 RECEPTION 
203
Thursday, March 8 
 
BREAKOUT SESSIONS 
 
08:30-10:00 Breakout sessions re-convene 
 
10:00-10:20 COFFEE BREAK 
 
PLENARY SESSION  
10:20-10:40 The work of the Data Buoy Cooperation Panel and the formation of an Action Group for 
the North Pacific 
Brian O’Donnell 
10:40-12:00 Preliminary reports of breakout groups and cross-disciplinary discussion of monitoring 
needs and opportunities 
  David L. Mackas, discussion leader 
 
12:00-13:00 LUNCH 
 
BREAKOUT SESSIONS 
 
13:00-14:30 Breakout sessions re-convene 
 
14:30-14:50 COFFEE BREAK 
 
14:50-16:30 Conclude breakout sessions/prepare breakout group reports 
 
 
Friday, March 9 
 
PLENARY SESSION 
08:30-08:40 Overview of final day objectives 
08:40-09:00 Breakout Group 1 Report:  Physical/chemical oceanography and climate 
09:00-09:20 Breakout Group 2 Report:  Phytoplankton, zooplankton, micronekton and benthos 
09:20-09:40 Breakout Group 3 Report:  Fish, squid, crabs and shrimps 
09:40-10:00 Breakout Group 4 Report:  Highly migratory fish, seabirds and marine mammals 
 
10:00-10:20 COFFEE BREAK 
 
10:20-11:50 Plenary discussion 
 
11:50-12:30 WORKSHOP CLOSING REMARKS 
 
204
APPENDIX 2 
List of participants 
 
 
Japan 
 
Dr. Sanae Chiba 
Ecosystem Change Research Program 
Frontier Research System for Global Change 
Sumitomo-Hamamatsucho Building 4 F. 
Hamamatsu-cho, Tokyo, 
Japan.  105-0013 
e-mail: chibas@frontier.esto.or.jp 
 
Dr. Kimio Hanawa 
Department of Geophysics 
Graduate School of Science 
Tohoku University 
Aoba, Sendai, 
Japan.  980-8578 
e-mail: hanawa@pol.geophys.tohoku.ac.jp 
 
Dr. Shin-ichi Ito 
Fisheries Oceanography 
Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute 
3-27-5 Shinhama, 
Shiogama, Miyagi, 
Japan.  985-0001 
e-mail: goito@myg.affrc.go.jp 
 
Dr. Makoto Kashiwai 
Subarctic Fisheries Oceanography Division 
Hokkaido National Fisheries Research Institute 
116 Katsurakoi, 
Kushiro, Hokkaido, 
Japan.  085-0802 
e-mail: kashiwai@ss.hnf.affrc.go.jp 
 
Dr. Hidehiro Kato 
Cetacean Population Biology Section 
National Research Institute of Far Seas Fisheries 
5-7-1 Orido, 
Shimizu, Shizuoka, 
Japan.  424-8633 
e-mail: katohide@enyo.affrc.go.jp 
 
Prof. Michio J. Kishi 
Graduate School of Fisheries Sciences 
Hokkaido University 
3-1-1 Minato-cho, 
Hakodate, Hokkaido, 
Japan.  041-8611 
e-mail: kishi@salmon.fish.hokudai.ac.jp 
Dr. Toru Kobari 
Miyagi Prefecture Fisheries Research and 
Development Center 
Japan Science and Technology Co. 
97-6 Sodenohama, Watanoha, 
Ishinomaki, Miyagi, 
Japan.  986-2135 
e-mail: toru.k@f3.dion.ne.jp 
 
Dr. Kosei Komatsu 
Marine Productivity Division 
National Research Institute of Fisheries Science 
2-12-4 Fukuura, Kanazawa, 
Yokohama, Kanagawa, 
Japan.  236-8648 
e-mail: kosei@nrifs.affrc.go.jjp 
 
Dr. Yukihiro Nojiri 
Global Environmental Research Group 
National Institute for Environmental Studies 
16-2 Onogawa, 
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 
Japan.  305-0053 
e-mail: nojiri@nies.go.jp 
 
Dr. Sei-ichi Saitoh 
Graduate School of Fisheries Science 
Hokkaido University 
3-1-1 Minato-cho, 
Hakodate, Hokkaido, 
Japan.  041-8611 
e-mail: ssaitoh@salmon.fish.hokudai.ac.jp 
 
Dr. Hiroyuki Sakano 
Resource Enhancement Department 
Fisheries Agency of Japan 
1-2-1 Kasumigaseki, Chiyoda-ku, 
Tokyo, 
Japan. 
e-mail: hiroyuki_sakano@nm.maff.go.jp 
 
Dr. Yasunori Sakurai 
Faculty of Fisheries 
Hokkaido University 
3-1-1 Minato-cho, 
Hakodate, Hokkaido, 
Japan.  041-8611 
e-mail: sakurai@pop.fish.hokudai.ac.jp 
205
Dr. Naonobu Shiga 
Lab. of Marine Biodiversity 
Graduate School of Fisheries 
Hokkaido University 
3-1-1 Minato-cho, 
Hakodate, Hokkaido, 
Japan.  041-8611 
e-mail: nao@fish.hokudai.ac.jp 
 
Dr. S. Lan Smith 
Global Warming Group 
Carbon Cycle Project 
Frontier Research System 
SEAVANS, N, 7F, 1-2-1 Shiba Ura, Minato-ku, 
Tokyo, 
Japan.  105-6791 
e-mail: lanimal@frontier.esto.or.jp 
 
Prof. Takashige Sugimoto 
Ocean Research Institute 
University of Tokyo 
1-15-1 Nakano-ku, 
Tokyo, 
Japan.  164-8639 
e-mail: sugimoto@ori.u-tokyo.ac.jp 
 
Dr. Kazuaki Tadokoro 
Ecosystem Change Research 
Frontier Research System for Global Change 
1-18-16 4F, Hamamatsu-cho, Minato-ku, 
Tokyo, 
Japan.  105-0013 
e-mail: denden@frontier.esto.or.jp 
 
Prof. Hiroshi Ueda 
Toya Lake Station for Environmental Biology 
Faculty of Fisheries 
Hokkaido University 
Kita 9, Nishi 9, Kita-ku, 
Sapporo, Hokkaido, 
Japan.  060 
e-mail: hueda@ccms1.hucc.hokudai.ac.jp 
 
Dr. Yutaka Watanuki 
Laboratory of Animal Ecology 
Graduate School of Agriculture 
Hokkaido University 
North-9, West-9, Kita-ku, 
Sapporo, Hokkaido, 
Japan.  060-8589 
e-mail: ywata@res.agr.hokudai.ac.jp 
 
Dr. Akihiko Yatsu 
National Research Institute of Fisheries Science 
2-12 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, 
Yokohama, 
Japan.  256-8648 
e-mail: yatsua@nrifs.affrc.go.jp 
 
Mr. Takahito Iida 
Lab. of Marine Environment & Resource Sensing 
Graduate School of Fisheries Sciences 
Hokkaido University 
3-1-1 Minato-cho, 
Hakodate, Hokkaido, 
Japan.  041-8611 
e-mail: tiida@salmon.fish.hokudai.ac.jp 
 
Mr. Kohei Mizobata 
Lab. of Marine Environment & Resource Sensing 
Graduate School of Fisheries Sciences 
Hokkaido University 
3-1-1 Minato-cho, 
Hakodate, Hokkaido, 
Japan.  041-8611 
e-mail: mizobata@salmon.fish.hokudai.ac.jp 
 
 
Korea 
 
Dr. Young-Shil Kang 
National Fisheries Research and Development  
Institute 
408-1 Shirang-ri, Kijang-gun, 
Pusan, 
Republic of Korea. 
e-mail: yskang@haema.nfrda.re.kr 
 
Dr. Suam Kim 
Department of Marine Biology 
Pukyong National University 
599-1 Daeyeon 3-dong, Nam-gu, 
Pusan, 
Republic of Korea.  608-737 
e-mail: suamkim@pknu.ac.kr 
 
206
China 
 
Prof. Fangli Qiao 
First Institute of Oceanography 
State of Oceanic Administration 
Xian-Xia-Ling Road, 
Qingdao, Shandong, 
People’s Republic of China.  266061 
e-mail: lagfd@public.qd.sd.cn 
Prof. Qi-Sheng Tang 
Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute 
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences 
106 Nanjing Road, 
Qingdao, Shandong, 
People’s Republic of China.  266071 
e-mail: ysfri@public.qd.sd.cn
 
 
Canada 
 
Dr. Richard J. Beamish 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada 
Pacific Biological Station 
3190 Hammond Bay Road, 
Nanaimo, B.C., 
Canada.  V9R 5K6 
e-mail: BeamishR@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
Dr. Douglas F. Bertram 
Canadian Wildlife Service 
5421 Robertson Road, 
Delta, B.C., 
Canada.  V4K 3N2 
e-mail: bertramd@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
Dr. David L. Mackas 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada 
Institute of Ocean Sciences 
P.O. Box 6000, 
Sidney, B.C., 
Canada.  V8L 4B2 
e-mail: MackasD@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
Mr. Gordon A. (Sandy) McFarlane 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada 
Pacific Biological Station 
3190 Hammond Bay Road, 
Nanaimo, B.C., 
Canada.  V9R 5K6 
e-mail: McfarlaneS@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
Dr. Richard E. Thomson 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada 
Institute of Ocean Sciences 
P.O. Box 6000, 
Sidney, B.C., 
Canada.  V8L 4B2 
e-mail: ThomsonR@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
Dr. Daniel M. Ware 
Earth and Ocean Sciences 
University of British Columbia 
3674 Planta Road, 
Nanaimo, B.C., 
Canada.  V9T 1M2 
e-mail: ware_mrc@island.net 
 
Dr. David W. Welch 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada 
Pacific Biological Station 
3190 Hammond Bay Road, 
Nanaimo, B.C., 
Canada.  V9R 5K6 
e-mail: WelchD@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
 
Russia 
 
Dr. Andrei S. Krovnin 
Russian Federal Research Institute of Fisheries 
  & Oceanography (VNIRO) 
17 V. Krasnoselskaya Street, 
Moscow, 
Russia.  107140 
e-mail: akrovnin@vniro.ru 
Dr. Vyacheslav B. Lobanov 
V.I. Il’ichev Pacific Oceanological Institute 
43 Baltiyskaya Street, 
Vladivostok, 
Russia.  690041 
e-mail: lobanov@poi.dvo.ru 
 
207
United Kingdom 
 
Dr. Sonia D. Batten 
Sir Alister Hardy Foundation for Ocean Science 
1 Walker Terrace, The Hoe, 
Plymouth, 
United Kingdom.  PL1 3BN 
e-mail: soba@wpo.nerc.ac.uk 
 
 
U.S.A. 
 
Dr. Vera Alexander 
Dean, School of Fisheries and Ocean Sciences 
University of Alaska 
245 O’Neill Bldg., 
Fairbanks, AK  99775-7220 
U.S.A. 
e-mail: vera@ims.alaska.edu 
 
Dr. Harold Batchelder 
College of Oceanic & Atmospheric Sciences 
Oregon State University 
104 Ocean Administration Building, 
Corvallis, OR  97331-5503 
U.S.A. 
e-mail: hbatchelder@oce.orst.edu 
 
Dr. Steven J. Bograd 
NOAA/NMFS 
Pacific Fisheries Environmental Laboratory 
1352 Lighthouse Avenue, 
Pacific Grove, CA  93950 
U.S.A. 
e-mail: sbograd@pfeg.noaa.gov 
 
Dr. Richard D. Brodeur 
College of Ocean & Atmospheric Sciences 
Oregon State University 
Newport, OR  97365 
U.S.A. 
e-mail: Rick.Brodeur@noaa.gov 
 
Dr. David M. Checkley, Jr. 
Marine Life Research Group 
Scripps Institution of Oceanography 
9602 La Jolla Shores Drive, 
La Jolla, CA  92093-0218 
U.S.A. 
e-mail: dcheckley@ucsd.edu 
 
Dr. Anne B. Hollowed 
Alaska Fisheries Science Center 
National Marine Fisheries Service, NOAA 
7600 Sand Point Way NE, 
Seattle, WA  98115 
U.S.A. 
e-mail: Anne.Hollowed@noaa.gov 
 
Dr. Rita Horner 
School of Oceanography 
University of Washington 
Box 357940, 
Seattle, WA  98195-7990 
U.S.A. 
e-mail: rita@ocean.washington.edu 
 
Ms. Patricia Livingston 
Alaska Fisheries Science Center 
7600 Sand Point Way NE, 
Seattle, WA  98115-0070 
U.S.A. 
e-mail: Pat.Livingston@noaa.gov 
 
Mr. Allen Macklin 
Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory 
7600 Sand Point Way NE, 
Seattle, WA  98115-6349 
U.S.A. 
e-mail: macklin@pmel.noaa.gov 
 
Dr. Bernard A. Megrey 
Alaska Fisheries Science Center 
7600 Sand Point Way NE, 
Seattle, WA  98115 
U.S.A. 
e-mail: Bern.Megrey@noaa.gov 
 
Dr. H. Geoffrey Moser 
Southwest Fisheries Science Center 
P.O. Box 271, 
La Jolla, CA  92038 
U.S.A. 
e-mail: Geoff.Moser@noaa.gov 
208
Dr. James E. Overland 
Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Research, NOAA 
7600 Sand Point Way NE, 
Seattle, WA  98115-0070 
U.S.A. 
e-mail: James.E.Overland@noaa.gov 
 
Dr. William T. Peterson 
Estuarine & Ocean Ecology 
Hatfield Marine Science Center 
National Marine Fisheries Service 
2030 S. Marine Science Drive, 
Newport, OR  97365 
U.S.A. 
e-mail: Bill.Peterson@noaa.gov 
 
Dr. Jeffrey J. Polovina 
Chief, Ecosystem & Environment Investigation 
National Marine Fisheries Service, NOAA 
Honolulu Laboratory 
2570 Dole Street, 
Honolulu, HI  96822-2396 
U.S.A. 
e-mail: Jeffrey.Polovina@noaa.gov 
 
Dr. Warren S. Wooster 
School of Marine Affairs 
University of Washington 
3707 Brooklyn Avenue, 
Seattle, WA  981105-6715 
U.S.A. 
e-mail: wooster@u.washington.edu 
 
Organizations 
 
CLIVAR (Climate Variability & Predictability 
Program) 
Dr. Humio Matsudera 
International Pacific Research Center 
University of Hawaii 
2525 Correa Road, 
Honolulu, HI  96822 
U.S.A. 
e-mail: humiom@soest.hawaii.edu 
 
CoML (Census of Marine Life) Program 
Dr. Cynthia Decker 
Consortium for Oceanographic Research and 
Education 
Suite 800, 1755 Massachusetts Ave. NW, 
Washington, DC  20036 
U.S.A. 
e-mail: cdecker@brook.edu 
 
DBCP (Data Buoy Cooperation Panel) 
Mr. Ron McLaren 
Meteorological Service of Canada 
Environment Canada 
700-1200 W. 73
rd
 Avenue, 
Vancouver, B.C., 
Canada.  V6P 6H9 
e-mail: Ron.McLaren@ec.gc.ca 
 
DBCP (Data Buoy Cooperation Panel) 
Mr. Brian O’Donnell 
Meteorological Service of Canada 
Environment Canada 
700-1200 W. 73
rd
 Avenue, 
Vancouver, B.C., 
Canada.  V6P 6H9 
e-mail: Brian.O’Donnell@ec.gc.ca 
EVOS (Exxon Valdez Oil Spill) Trustee Council 
Dr. Robert Spies 
Applied Marine Sciences 
4-749 Bennett Drive, Suite L, 
Livermore, CA  94550 
U.S.A. 
e-mail: spies@amarine.com 
 
GEM (Gulf Ecosystem Monitoring) Program 
Dr. Phillip Mundy 
Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Restoration Office 
645 G Street, Suite 401, 
Anchorage, AK  99501 
U.S.A. 
e-mail: Phil_mundy@oilspill.state.ak.us 
 
GOOS (Global Ocean Observing System Project) 
Dr. Michael Laurs 
NOAA National Marine Fisheries Service 
Honolulu Laboratory 
2570 Dole Street, 
Honolulu, HI  96822 
U.S.A. 
e-mail: Mike.Laurs@noaa.gov 
 
IATTC (Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission) 
Dr. Robert Olson 
8604 La Jolla Shores Drive, 
La Jolla, CA  92037 
U.S.A. 
e-mail: rolson@iattc.ucsd.edu 
 
209
IPHC (International Pacific Halibut Commission) 
Dr. Steven Hare 
P.O. Box 95009, 
Seattle, WA  98145-2009 
U.S.A. 
e-mail: hare@iphc.Washington.edu 
 
IPRC (International Pacific Research Center) 
Dr. Julian McCreary 
International Pacific Research Center 
School of Ocean & Earth Science & Technology 
University of Hawaii 
2525 Correa Road, 
Honolulu, HI  96822 
U.S.A. 
e-mail: all@musashimaru.soest.hawaii.edu 
 
PICES (North Pacific Marine Science Organization) 
Dr. Alexander S. Bychkov 
C/o Institute of Ocean Sciences 
P.O. Box 6000, 
Sidney, B.C., 
Canada.  V8L 4B2 
e-mail: bychkov@ios.bc.ca 
PICES (North Pacific Marine Science Organization) 
Dr. Skip McKinnell 
C/o Institute of Ocean Sciences 
P.O. Box 6000, 
Sidney, B.C., 
Canada.  V8L 4B2 
e-mail: mckinnell@ios.bc.ca 
 
POGO (Partnership for Observation of the Global 
Oceans) 
Dr. Kees Zwanenburg 
Marine Fish Division 
Bedford Institute of Oceanography 
P.O. Box 1006, 
Dartmouth, NS 
Canada.  B2Y 4A2 
e-mail: Zwanenburgk@mar.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
210
