

TABLE OF CONTENTS
FOREWORD
Part 1. GENERAL INTRODUCTION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Page
vii
1.0 RECOMMENDATIONS FOR INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION IN
THE OKHOTSK SEA AND KURIL REGION 3
1.1 Okhotsk Sea water mass modification 3
1.1.1 Dense shelf water formation in the northwestern Okhotsk Sea 3
1.1.2 Soya Current study 4
1.1.3 East Sakhalin Current and anticyclonic Kuril Basin flow 4
1.1.4 West Kamchatka Current 5
1.1.5 Tides and sea level in the Okhotsk Sea 5
1.2 Influence of Okhotsk Sea waters on the subarctic Pacific and Oyashio 6
1.2.1 Kuril Island strait transports (Bussol', Kruzenshtern and shallower
straits) 6
1.2.2 Kuril region currents: the East Kamchatka Current, the Oyashio
and large eddies 7
1.2.3 NPIW transport and formation rate in the Mixed Water Region 7
1.3 Sea ice analysis and forecasting 8
2.0 PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHIC OBSERVATIONS 9
2.1 Hydrographic observations (bottle and CTD) 9
2.2 Direct current observations in the Okhotsk and Kuril region 11
2.3 Sea level measurements 12
2.4 Sea ice observations 12
2.5 Satellite observations 12
Part 2. REVIEW OF OCEANOGRAPHY OF THE OKHOTSK SEA
AND OYASHIO REGION 15
1.0 GEOGRAPHY AND PECULIARITIES OF THE OKHOTSK SEA 16
2.0 SEA ICE IN THE OKHOTSK SEA 17
2.1 Sea ice observations in the Okhotsk Sea 17
2.2 Ease of ice formation in the Okhotsk Sea 17
2.3 Seasonal and interannual variations of sea ice extent 19
2.3.1 Gross features of the seasonal variation in the Okhotsk Sea 19
2.3.2 Sea ice thickness 19
2.3.3 Polynyas and open water 19
2.3.4 Interannual variability 20
2.4 Sea ice off the coast of Hokkaido 21
2.4.1 Seasonal variations 21
2.4.2 Interannual variations 22
2.5 Operational sea ice forecasting 23
nl
3.0 PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY OF THE OKHOTSK SEA
25
3.1 Oceanographic observations 25
3.2 Circulation in the Okhotsk Sea
27
3.2.1 Gross features of the circulation
27
3.2.2 Inflow from the North Pacific Ocean and the
West Kamchatka Current
27
3.2.3 Currents in the northern Okhotsk Sea
28
3.2.4 The East Sakhalin Current
28
3.2.5 The Soya Current 29
3.2.6 Anticyclonic Kuril Basin gyre and anticyclonic eddies
in the southern Okhotsk Sea 29
3.2.7 Exchange through the southern passages of the Kuril Islands
30
3.3 Water mass distributions in the Okhotsk Sea
30
3.3.1 Gross features of the water mass distribution
30
3.3.2 Vertical mixing over banks, shelf edges and narrow passages
32
3.3.3 Formation and advection of dense shelf water in the northwestern
Okhotsk Sea
33
3.3.4 Seasonal variation of the surface and dichothermal layers in the
southern Okhotsk Sea
34
3.3.5 Water mass modification in the Kuril Basin and the influence of
the Soya Current Water
34
3.3.6 Deep water in the Okhotsk Sea
35
3.4 Heat and salinity budgets for the Okhotsk Sea
35
3.5 Tides in the Okhotsk Sea
36
4.0 THE SOYA CURRENT REGION
37
4.1 Introduction
37
4.2 Soya Current forcing
37
4.3 Oceanic conditions in the vicinity of Soya Strait
37
4.4 Water masses in the Soya Current region
38
4.5 The Soya Current and its seasonal variations off the western Okhotsk coast
of Hokkaido in the warm season
39
4.6 Oceanic conditions off the northwestern Okhotsk coast of Hokkaido in the
pack-ice season
41
4.7 The Soya Current off the eastern Okhotsk coast of Hokkaido 42
4.8 The Structure and variation of the front marking the offshore-side of the
Soya Current
43
4.8.1 Cold water belt
43
4.8.2 Structure of the Soya Current Front
43
4.8.3 Frontal waves and breaking
44
5.0 THE KURIL AND MIXED WATER REGIONS
46
5.1 Introduction
46
5.2 The East Kamchatka Current
47
5.2.1 Water characteristics north of Kruzenshtern Strait
47
5.2.2 Circulation north of Kruzenshtern Strait
48
5.2.3 Circulation between Kruzenshtern Strait and Bussol' Strait:
large eddies
50
5.3 The Oyashio
51
iv
5.3.1 Water characteristics between Bussol' Strait and southern Hokkaido:
origin of the Oyashio Water
51
5.3.2 Circulation between Bussol' Strait and Hokkaido 52
5.3.3 Oyashio circulation off Hokkaido 53
5.3.4 Oyashio Water in the Mixed Water Region 54
5.4 Formation of North Pacific Intermediate Water: the role of the Okhotsk
Sea and Oyashio
55
TABLES AND FIGURES 58
REFERENCES
158
A. The Okhotsk Sea and Sea Ice
158
B. The Oyashio Region and western subarctic North Pacific
174
C. Mixed Water Region
182
D. Russian papers concerning the Okhotsk Sea
192
E. Russian papers, concerning the Oyashio Region and western subarctic North Pacific
202
F. Russian papers concerning the Mixed Water Region
203
APPENDICES (A)
206
Acronyms
206
Addresses of agencies and institutes where Okhotsk Sea/Oyashio data
are held
206
Terms of Reference for PICES Working Group 1
207
Members and observers of Working Group 1
207
APPENDICES (B)
208
Translations from Hydrometeorology and Hydrochemistry of the Seas, Vol. 9,
Okhotsk Sea. Part 1 - Hydrometeorological conditions. Gidrometeoizdat:
Sankt-Petersburg, 1993, in press.
Luchin, V. A. 1993. Russian hydrographic studies in the Okhotsk Sea -
historical background
208
Luchin, V. A. 1993. System of currents and peculiarities of temperature
distribution in the Okhotsk Sea
211
V
FOREWORD
This is a final report (1993) of PICES Working Group 1. The objective of the report was to present a
review of the importance of the Okhotsk Sea and Oyashio Region on the ventilation of the North
Pacific Ocean, such as the formation of the North Pacific intermediate water.
This report was written through the efforts of the Working Group 1 members. The Chairman would
like to thank all members and others (see Appendix A) for their efforts in developing a good report
that provides the Physical Oceanography and Climate Committee (POC) with a comprehensive review
of the oceanography of the region. I would particularly like to thank Prof. Yutaka Nagata (as co-
editor), for his diligent efforts in helping me put together the report.
Lynne D. Talley
Chairman
vii
Part 1. GENERAL INTRODUCTION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The northwestern North Pacific is the site
of the densest ventilation of the North Pacific
Ocean. Ventilation of the oceans is the primary
means by which the ocean transports heat, fresh
water and surface properties such as dissolved
carbon dioxide into the interior of the ocean
where it is then carried far from its source. The
North Pacific is the one ocean basin in which
very deep ventilation does not occur; its deep
waters originate in the northern North Atlantic
and around Antarctica and are very old relative
to the deep waters of other oceans. However,
the North Pacific is ventilated to a depth of
1,000 to 2,000 in, mainly as a result of dense
shelf water formation in the northern Okhotsk
Sea. Deeper and denser ventilation occurs in the
Sea of Japan, but this marginal sea is nearly
completely isolated from the North Pacific, so its
ventilation does not have a great effect on the
North Pacific. The ventilated water from the
Okhotsk Sea flows out into the North Pacific;
while much remains in the subarctic North
Pacific, a portion flows southward into the
subtropical region, where the top of this water is
characterized by a salinity minimum. Thus the
northwestern North Pacific is connected to a
much larger scale ocean circulation.
About two-thirds of the Okhotsk Sea is
covered with sea ice in winter: ice formation in
the Okhotsk Sea is at a very low latitude for the
world ocean. Ice formation in the northwest
shelf region results in deep ventilation and dense
water production. The dense water is believed to
be important in formation of the North Pacific
Intermediate Water and is the only mechanism
for ventilation of the North Pacific for a
considerable density range.
The northern North Pacific is also a
region of great biological abundance. Fisheries
in the Bering Sea, Oyashio region and the
Okhotsk Sea are among the most productive in
the world. The biomass of the Okhotsk Sea
rivals that of the Bering Sea. The "Oyashio"
takes its name from its high productivity:
parents (oya) current (shio) in Japanese.
The
Oyashio waters originate in the Okhotsk Sea and
East Kamchatka Current, which is also the source
of water for the Okhotsk Sea. However, the high
oxygen and nutrient content of Oyashio and
Okhotsk Water is not apparent in the East
Kamchatka Current whose water is strongly
modified in the Okhotsk Sea before it returns to
the Oyashio.
In this report, we confine our attention to
the physical oceanographic aspects of the
Okhotsk Sea and Oyashio area. The biological
and chemical aspects of the region should be
discussed at some point, but will not be reviewed
by this PICES Working Group.
Since two countries border the Okhotsk
Sea and several other countries are also involved
in observations, data availability is a central issue
for this important region of the North Pacific.
We devote a section to physical oceanographic
observations including as much information as
we could gather on what data have been
collected, and what should be available and from
whom. A very large amount of work remains to
be done to bring all of the unclassified data to a
stage where it is of the greatest use.
Because of the new political conditions
which have made at least a certain level of
international work in the Okhotsk Sea feasible
and because of the importance of this region to
fisheries and climate, a section on recommended
observational programs is included.
A major deficiency in this report and the
discussion of this working group is extensive
input from Russian scientists, including a
comprehensive bibliography and general acquain-
tance with their large amount of knowledge on
the Okhotsk Sea and Kuril region. Therefore we
recommend that PICES sponsor an international
meeting in Vladivostok so that Russian scientists
1
engaged in work in this region may have a
chance to communicate their knowledge and so
that communication and planning for projects
which require international cooperation and/or
support may be facilitated.
Principal recommendations of Working Group
1 are:
(a) PICES should encourage organization of a
meeting on the Okhotsk Sea and Kuril region
in Vladivostok sometime in the near future,
with discussions of physical oceanography,
fisheries and data exchange. Continued
communication between scientists interested
in this region is vital for the success of the
types of projects recommended below.
(b) Data exchange and archiving:
Full efforts should be made to facilitate
incorporation of unclassified Russian
hydrographic, sea level and sea ice
measurements into the appropriate
international databases, and to identify
datasets which are not archived in
WDCB which should be part of the
international archive.
Efforts should be made to ensure that all
special (non-routine) Japanese hydro-
graphic and current (ADCP and current
meter) data sets in the Okhotsk Sea are
archived in the appropriate international
databases.
CTD data collected in the Okhotsk Sea,
Kuril region and along major routine
network lines in the Mixed Water Region
should be archived in high density form
(1-2 decibars or meters) as well as at
standard depths.
(c) International cooperation should be sought
for observations relating to ventilation of the
North Pacific and the exchange of Okhotsk
Sea waters with the North Pacific. The
greatest deficiencies are in quantitative
estimates of all processes: rates, transports,
variability and budgets. Recommended
projects and studies for the Okhotsk Sea are:
sea ice formation, dense shelf water
formation in the northwestern Okhotsk
Sea, and the polynya over Kashevarov
Bank.
Kuril straits exchanges and mixing.
Soya Current volume, fresh water and
heat transports; how the Soya Current
leaves the shelf.
influence of mesoscale eddies in the
southern Okhotsk Sea on water struc-ture
and dynamics, including mixing of saline
Soya Current water.
(d) Recommended projects and studies for water
mass transformation in the Oyashio region
are:
Oyashio transport monitoring.
transformation of waters in the Oyashio/
East Kamchatka Current region,
including the role of large anticyclonic
eddies in NPIW formation, water
exchange and branching of the Oyashio
current.
NPIW formation in the Mixed Water
Region, including investigation of the
role of Kuroshio warm core rings in
NPIW formation, water exchange and
branching of the Oyashio.
(e) International cooperation should be sought
for the following logistical items which are
deemed of great importance to the success of
physical oceanographic work in the Okhotsk
Sea and Kuril region:
linkage of Japanese and Russian geodetic
networks (tide gauge leveling).
permission be sought and precedents set
to allow Russian research vessels to enter
Japanese ports and vice versa, to avoid
excessive deadheads when working in the
Okhotsk Sea.
exchange of SST and sea ice obser-
vations and for technical improvements
for Russian data collection and staff
training.
2
1.0 RECOMMENDATIONS FOR INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
IN THE OKHOTSK SEA AND KURIL REGION
The two areas of suggested cooperation
for physical oceanography are in observations
and data exchange. Section 2 below describes
the data which are available, as best we can
determine, and the current state of progress in
archiving them.
The greatest lack of information is in
quantitative estimates of transformation rates,
transports, time scales, and budgets of heat and
salt. Observational programs of the greatest
importance, because they are central to under-
standing water mass transformation, and for
which there is a lack of enough information to
make quantitative estimates at present, are:
(a) water mass modification in the Okhotsk Sea
(b)
including formation of the intermediate water
mass
exchange of Okhotsk Water with the
Oyashio/East Kamchatka Current, including
transports through the Kuril Island straits, the
role of large eddies in mixing the waters
along the Kurils, and the formation of NPIW
in the Mixed Water Region where Oyashio
Water meets Kuroshio Water
(c) improvement in sea ice analysis and fore-
casting.
1.1 Okhotsk Sea water mass modification
As described in Moroshkin (1962) and
reviewed in Section 2.3 below, the Okhotsk Sea
Water is considerably different from the East
Kamchatka Water which is its source. The
dichothermal layer (temperature minimum) of the
Okhotsk Sea is deeper and colder, high levels of
oxygen are found at depth, and the intermediate
waters are considerably fresher and colder at the
same density. These taken together imply that
the Okhotsk Sea is a major region of ventilation
for the intermediate depth layer in the North
Pacific (Moroshkin, 1962; Reid, 1965; Kitani,
1973; Wakatsuchi and Martin, 1990; Talley,
1991). Important factors in understanding this
modification are dense shelf water formation in
the northern Okhotsk Sea, the inflow and fate of
saline Soya Current water, dilution from the
Amur River outflow, mixing in the Kuril Island
straits, and transport into the Okhotsk Sea
through the deeper Kuril Island straits. Overall
salinity and heat balances for the Okhotsk Sea are
an important part of this study.
1.1.1 Dense shelf water formation in the
northwestern Okhotsk Sea
In the northwestern Okhotsk Sea, there
are shallow shelves and the shallow Kashevarov
Bank. It has been demonstrated that sea ice
formation in winter produces dense bottom water
in this region (Kitani, 1973; Alfultis and Martin,
1987). This dense water is an important source
of the intermediate water mass of the Okhotsk
Sea (Moroshkin, 1962; Kitani, 1973). Since this
intermediate water mass is the primary source of
surface properties for the intermediate layer of
the North Pacific, it is important to study its
formation, production rate, properties and
variability.
The polynya which is located over
Kashevarov Bank in winter (Kovshov and
Sinyurin, 1982) is a site of intense heat loss
which may lead to dense water formation
(Alfultis and Martin, 1987). The polynya is due
to strong upwelling and vertical mixing, which
may be related to large tidal amplitudes. The
very limited hydrographic observations, all from
summer, have not shown dense bottom water,
rather greatly enhanced vertical mixing, but the
surface heat flux through the wintertime polynya
is very large and dense water production is
suggested. A special project to study this
polynya should be undertaken from a ship with
ice-breaking capability during January-March. A
detailed CTD/tracer survey and moored mea-
surements under the ice, including currents,
temperature and salinity is recommended.
Deployment of newly-developed moored
instruments which measure sea ice thickness and
3
concentration,
drifters deployed in and below the
ice, and continuing AVHRR and SSM/I satellite-
based studies are recommended.
Very limited data from the northwestern
shelf of the Okhotsk Sea, close to the Kashevarov
Bank, revealed saline bottom water on the shelf
at a density of 27.05 ae (Kitani, 1973). Based on
property scatter, Talley (1991) suggested that
shelf water production could be even higher,
perhaps to 27.2 ae. Measuring the properties
and production rate in winter could be carried out
by deploying a number of moorings on the shelf
and slope, in the downstream direction from the
formation region, by using current meters and
temperature and conductivity recorders, in high
concentration near the bottom. In addition, a
CTD/tracer survey should be carried out during
deployment and recovery. If done in conjunction
with the Kashevarov polynya study, an
icebreaker could look at properties in winter.
Tracers should include CFC's and delta 018.
AVHRR and SSM/I measurements and
information from JMA and Russian SST and sea
ice bulletins to provide surface boundary
conditions. An attempt at calculating surface
heat flux, ice growth rates and brine rejection
rates should be undertaken.
Good quality standard meteorological
observations are also required. The first step
should be to check and calibrate the Russian
instruments at the permanent sites around the
Okhotsk Sea. A tower might be constructed to
collect meteorological data on one of the
uninhabited islands which are located in the
northwestern Okhotsk Sea close to the region of
interest.
1.1.2 Soya Current study
The Soya Warm Current is important in
the overall salinity balance of the Okhotsk Sea.
Its relatively saline waters originate far to the
south in the Tsushima Current and it is suspected
that it is its high salinity which sets the maximum
density of ventilation in the Okhotsk Sea. The
reason for the difference in density of ventilation
between the Okhotsk Sea and Bering Sea, which
lies at a much higher latitude, might well be the
saline waters of the Soya Current. Not all of the
inflow from the Sea of Japan is saline however;
there is also very cold and fresher water which
originates near Tartar Strait (west of Sakhalin
and north of Soya Strait) in the northern portion
of Soya Strait. There are two issues regarding
the Soya Current: its transports and how its
waters leave the shelf.
To obtain the volume transport of the
Soya Warm Current, direct current measurements
in the strait on both the Russian and Japanese
sides are desirable. However, it is unlikely that
such measurements can be carried out in the near
future. Therefore, to estimate the volume trans-
port of the Soya Warm Current, the relationship
between the sea level difference between
Wakkanai (Hokkaido) and Korsakov (Sakhalin)
and current velocities in the southern part of
Soya Strait can be investigated. The two tidal
stations will need to be leveled. Currents in
Soya Strait could be measured by ADCP from a
ferry between Wakkanai and Korsakov if regular
service resumes. There is probably an old
undersea telephone cable between Hokkaido and
Sakhalin which can be used to monitor transport.
Properties of the Soya Warm Current Water will
continue to be monitored along the standard
seven lines north of Hokkaido.
1.1.3 East Sakhalin Current and anticyclonic
Kuril Basin flow
The East Sakhalin Current appears to be
strong in winter based on pack-ice drift and very
weak in summer, based on dynamic topography.
Data sufficient for calculating transports of the
current are somewhat limited. Deep flow south-
ward along Sakhalin is the main route for dense
water flowing southward from the northwestern
shelf region and it can be traced by the presence
of high oxygen (Wakatsuchi and Martin, 1990;
Talley, 1991). Almost nothing is known
quantitatively about the transport and seasonal
variability of this flow. Tidal variability in this
region may be large. Upwelling eddies along the
coast have also been observed (Sapozhnikov,
4
personal communication). Ana-lysis of existing
data, followed by good CTD transects with
tracers perpendicular to the coast of Sakhalin are
suggested.
The Kuril Basin includes a large number
of anticyclonic eddies of 50-150 km scale based
on satellite imagery of sea ice and SST data
(Kuzmina and Sklyarov, 1984; Hatakeyama et
al., 1985; Wakatsuchi and Martin, 1990; Mitnik
and Kalmykov, 1992), and the Basin may also
have some permanent anticyclonic circulation
(Wakatsuchi and Martin, 1990; various
Kawasaki et al. depictions in Section 5.3.2). The
eddies or circulation are the vehicle for mixing
saline Soya Current water into the Okhotsk Sea,
and the northern side of an anticyclonic gyre is
the route by which newer water from the East
Sakhalin Current flows towards Bussol' Strait.
Additional analysis of satellite images, pack-ice
drift, historical data, and extension of the present
JFA surveys of the Kuril Islands farther into the
Kuril Basin is suggested.
1.1.4 West Kamchatka Current
The West Kamchatka Current is assumed
to be the region of primary northward flow into
the Okhotsk Sea from Kruzenshtern Strait.
Although the region is apparently fairly well
sampled by hydrographic observations (Figs.
1.1.1, 1.1.2, 1.1.3), there appear to be no good
syntheses of the observations. Not much has
been published regarding the transport or
variability of the West Kamchatka Current. It
might be that the northward flow is intermittent,
offshore of the Kamchatka coast, or severely
dominated by tides. A primary question regard-
ing the water mass structure of the West
Kamchatka region is how far the Pacific water
entering at Kruzenshtern Strait extends into the
Okhotsk Sea and where the main modification of
this water occurs. It is suggested that an analysis
of the historical data in collaboration with
Russian scientists be done.
1.1.5 Tides and sea level in the Okhotsk Sea
Tidal amplitudes and currents are very
large in some parts of the Okhotsk Sea, due to
the relatively weak vertical stability, and severe
tidal mixing takes place in passages and straits,
over shelf breaks and over banks. Tidal currents
are up to 5 knots in some of the straits. As
reviewed below, tidal mixing is an important part
of the overall water mass modification in the
Okhotsk Sea and any study of exchange and
mixing through the Kuril straits must include
study of tidal processes. Also, it has been
suggested by Russian scientists that the internal
tide is sufficiently large to overwhelm the
baroclinic shear signature of geostrophic currents
in regions such as the East Sakhalin Current and
West Kamchatka Current as well as in the Kuril
straits, so it might be necessary to consider the
tides when estimating geostrophic currents within
the Okhotsk Sea. Present knowledge of the
circulation has been deduced primarily from
water mass analysis rather than geostrophic
calculations.
There are several tidal stations around
the Okhotsk Sea: three along Hokkaido, at least
one on Sakhalin, several along the Siberian coast,
one on the west coast of Kamchatka, and some in
the Kuril Islands. Diurnal components of the tide
are important in the Okhotsk Sea. Recent
Japanese moored current meter observations in
the central Okhotsk Sea suggest that inertial
components are significant. With the various sea
level stations around the periphery, it should be
possible to make tidal corrections accurately with
a relatively simple numerical model. However,
in the Kuril straits where tidal mixing is an
important process, a special tidal observation
program matched with water mass analysis
should be designed.
An additional important potential use of
sea level measurements is to estimate geostrophic
current transports across straits such as Soya
Strait, important Kuril Straits (Bussol' and
Kruzenshtern Straits in particular), and
Kamchatka Strait (east of Kamchatka). In order
to do this, the sea level stations need to be
5
leveled periodically. In particular the stations
across Soya Strait should be leveled relative to
each other. Japanese stations are leveled relative
to Tokyo every few years; it is not known to us
how often the Russian stations are leveled.
1.2 Influence of Okhotsk Sea waters on the
subarctic Pacific and Oyashio
The waters that flow out of the Okhotsk
Sea are fresher and more oxygenated than those
which flow in. The Okhotsk Sea Water is mixed
with East Kamchatka Current Water which does
not flow into the Okhotsk Sea. Tidal mixing
along the Kuril Islands results in a mixed water
which may be the principal type of water which
flows out of the Okhotsk Sea. The resulting
Oyashio water may also contain recognizably
different components of Okhotsk Sea and
subarctic waters. The Oyashio flows
southwestward past Hokkaido and into the Mixed
Water Region where it meanders and its water
mass front turns northeastward. Some Oyashio
water intrudes southward in the Mixed Water
Region where it interacts with Kuroshio Water to
form NPIW. An important aspect of the mixing
of Okhotsk Sea and subarctic waters throughout
this region is the large warm core rings which
are spawned by the Kuroshio, move slowly
northeastward following the deep trench, and
may be found far north along the Kurils (Section
2.5). Mixing within the Kuril Island straits may
also be important in modifying Okhotsk Sea
Water prior to exchange with the North Pacific.
1.2.1 Kuril Island strait transports (Bussol',
Kruzenshtern and shallower straits)
Connection between the Okhotsk Sea and
the North Pacific takes place through a number
of different straits. The most important are
Bussol' and Kruzenshtern Straits. The latter is
slightly shallower than Bussol' and is the
northernmost deep passage through the Kuril
Islands. It is believed that most flow into the
Okhotsk Sea occurs through this strait. Bussol'
Strait is located in the central Kuril Islands and is
the deepest passage. It is the main location of
flow out of the Okhotsk Sea although it is
believed that there is also some inflow there
particularly of the deepest waters. Outward flow
of the shallowest waters may also occur through
the southernmost Kuril passages. Clear priorities
for new observational programs are Bussol'
Strait, Kruzenshtern Strait and Etorohu (Friza)
Strait, in that order.
Within the straits, tidal flows are
extremely strong (up to 5 knots) and dominate
the mean flow. Vertical mixing has been demon-
strated to be of great importance to 'the waters
flowing in and out. Tidal fronts along the islands
are also very strong. It is possible that the net
Eulerian transport through a strait is zero
whereas the Lagrangian transport water mass
exchange might not be. Russian observations
suggest that there is usually inflow into the
Okhotsk Sea on the north side of a strait and
outflow on the south side (see the Luchin reports
in Appendix B). Quantifying the net Eulerian
flow and the net water property exchange will
require a mix of coastal and large-scale
oceanographic observations.
Russian scientists have conducted surveys
of the passage periodically since 1948 (e.g.,
Bogdanov, 1968). Between 1948 and 1953,
seven surveys of the passages were carried out on
R/V Vityaz. Recent POI programs consisted of
closely spaced CTD stations across the strait (2-5
nm), repeated CTD profiles (every half hour for
about 36 hours) to account for the tides, and sea
level measurements at a coastal area close to the
strait (Gladyshev, 1993). Direct current
measurements of several days duration have been
made several times within these years, but
maintenance of surface moorings and inter-
pretation of the measurements is difficult because
of the very swift currents.
Future work in Kuril passages must rely
heavily on cooperation with Russian scientists.
The first priority is to encourage publication of
scientific papers analyzing existing data. A
suitable framework for collaborative field
observations must be found and pilot
observations made. This type of observational
program is a mix of coastal and large-scale
6
oceanography. Measurements of the straits'
transports would consist of:
(1) repeated sections across the strait by ship-
borne ADCP with closely-spaced CTD casts,
to estimate the Eulerian through-flow
transport,
(2) use of surface and subsurface floats to
(3)
(4)
(5)
estimate the Lagrangian transport,
tracer measurements,
use of any existing cables to monitor
through-flow transport,
repeated transects along the axis of flow by
ship-borne ADCP with CTD casts, to analyze
Lagrangian transport and tidal exchange,
(6) moored arrays of pressure gauges, inverted
(7)
Doppler profilers and current meters,
monitoring of tidal fronts by satellite obser-
vations, and
(8) assessment of strait transport driven by
differences in atmospheric pressure.
1.2.2 Kuril region currents: the East
Kamchatka Current, the Oyashio and large
eddies
The structure of the Oyashio is strongly
influenced by the mesoscale eddies found east of
the Kuril Islands. These rings, with a diameter
of 150 - 200 km, provide an effective offshore
transport and branching of the Oyashio. They
also control northward advection of warm water
by streamers along the eddy chain. Eddies in the
southern region have warm, saline cores and that
they originate as Kuroshio warm core rings. In
contrast, the eddies in the northern area have
cold, fresh cores and their origin is not clear,
although it is thought that winter convection,
entrainment of fresher East Kamchatka Current
and Okhotsk Sea water, and deepening at the
eddy center may result in a transformation of the
anticyclonic Kuroshio ring's warm core into the
anticyclonic Kuril cold core ring.
Special investigation of the Kuril eddies
with international collaboration may be proposed.
Three key problems to study are:
(1) climatological study of the rings (statistical
parameters of their distribution and move-
ment, size, number etc.),
(2) kinematics and dynamics of the eddies,
(3) transformation of the physical structure of the
eddies in the central Kuril area.
The first study would employ historical data
(satellite IR images, hydrographic data,
temperature maps), based on cooperation and
data exchange between Russia and Japan. The
second project requires a large number of
satellite-tracked drifters and could be done
through international cooperation. The third
requires synoptic surveys of the eddies during the
period from fall to spring when surface cooling
transforms the core.
1.2.3 NPIW transport and formation rate in
the Mixed Water Region
The Oyashio flows southward along
Hokkaido and usually forms two "intrusions" or
meanders around a warm core feature which
originally comes from the Kuroshio (Kawai,
1972). Part of the Oyashio waters break off and
intrude even farther south into the Mixed Water
Region, whose northern boundary is usually
defined as the Oyashio front. The bulk of the
Oyashio waters flow northeastward and back
around the subarctic gyre, forming the northern
boundary of the Mixed Water Region. Thus
waters from the Okhotsk Sea which are modified
by mixing with North Pacific waters and by local
air-sea interaction come into contact with waters
from the Kuroshio. The salinity minimum which
characterizes NPIW is formed when the Oyashio
waters intrude beneath the more saline Kuroshio
waters (Hasunuma, 1978).
Many questions remain about exactly
how the Oyashio and Kuroshio waters meet in
the mixed water region. There are few estimates
of the amount of transport of Oyashio water into
the Mixed Water Region and hence into
redesignation as NPIW in the subtropical gyre of
the North Pacific. Knowledge of this transport is
important for study of subarctic/ subtropical gyre
exchange.
Direct measurements of Oyashio trans-
port are a basic; the Oyashio may have a large
barotropic component, but estimates of its
7
transport have been based mainly on calculations
relative to zero at 1,000 to 1,500 m. Continuing
support for the two sets of measurements now
being conducted southeast of Hokkaido is
essential.
Estimates of how much Oyashio Water
enters the Mixed Water Region and hence the
subtropical gyre should be improved. Meridional
hydrographic (preferably CTD) sections located
somewhere between 150°E and 160°E (152°E
or
155 °E have been used before) yield basic
transport estimates of NPIW eastward out of the
Mixed Water Region and continuation of
measurements in this region is needed. Indepen-
dent estimates of NPIW formation rate rely
on
measuring the amount of Oyashio and Kuroshio
water which enter the Mixed Water Region and
understanding the role of Tsugaru Warm Water.
This clearly becomes the question of where the
Oyashio water preferentially meets the Kuroshio
water, where mixing occurs between them, and
what the mixing mechanism is. Concerted efforts
to analyze the high-resolution CTD data set from
the Mixed Water Region as part of routine
surveys is needed, and special larger-scale
synoptic programs such as recently reported by
Yasuda et al. (1993 Nemuro Workshop) are
required.
1.3 Sea ice analysis and forecasting
The JMA forecasts sea ice in the Okhotsk
Sea based on a model which used a fixed pattern
of currents. The results of their forecast are
fairly impressive; improvements could be made
by using better realizations of the currents and
possibly mixing patterns. Russian aircraft
observations could be included profitably in
overall analyses of sea ice. Improvements to
Russian analysis and forecasting will require
technological improvements.
8
2.0 PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHIC OBSERVATIONS
Observations listed here include research
vessel hydrographic observations (temperature,
salinity, oxygen and nutrients), direct current
observations using current meters, IES's, and
drifters, sea level measurements, sea ice
observations using aircraft, ships, and radar, and
satellite observations. As indicated below,
coverage of the Okhotsk Sea by hydrographic
observations is excellent in the Soya Warm
Current Region, reasonable along the Kuril
Islands and the West Kamchatka Current region,
and very poor in the important northern shelf
region. Direct current measurements are
exceedingly sparse and any improvement to this
situation would be welcome. No availability or
international cooperative use of Russian data in
the Okhotsk Sea has been reported, although
present observational programs are changing this
situation very slightly.
2.1. Hydrographic observations (bottle and
CTD)
Favorite et al. (1976) showed the distri-
bution of all oceanographic stations available to
him north of 30°N between 1960 and 1971.
These are updated here (Fig. 1.1.1), based on the
holdings of WDCA. The total WDCA holdings
for the North Pacific are 339,370 bottle stations
where temperature was measured. Figure 1.1.1
(a-c) outlines which data are available in WDCA
north of 40°N. It is apparent from looking at
station distribution in the Okhotsk Sea that the
Soya Current region along the north coast of
Hokkaido is sampled the best. The West
Kamchatka Current region is also relatively well
sampled, although there do not appear to be
extensive analyses of these data in the literature
(see Section 2.3). Prior to 1976 there were
regular Japanese cruises to the central Okhotsk
Sea. When the 200 nm EEZ was established in
1976, there were disagreements between Japan
and Russia over interpretation of the zones which
effectively eliminated Japanese observations in
the central Okhotsk. WDCA observations in the
important northern shelf regions are extremely
limited.
The WDCA data set is deficient in both
Japanese and especially Russian observations.
No Russian observations for the Okhotsk Sea are
included in this archive. Current efforts by the
WDCA should vastly increase the holdings of
Japanese and Russian data, with a promised
increase of approximately 300,000 stations,
mostly in coastal Japanese waters, and an
unknown increase in Russian stations (Levitus,
personal communication). WDCB in Moscow
apparently contains many more Russian stations
including large numbers in the Okhotsk Sea and
Kuril region.
Japanese observations in the Okhotsk Sea
are made regularly by the MSA along the
northern Hokkaido coast in the Soya Warm
Current. There are seven lines occupied 1 - 3
times per year. Examples are shown in Fig.
2.3.3. Routine data collection consisted of bottle
stations prior to 1992 and only CTD observations
since then. CTD standard depth values are
reported relatively quickly to the JODC, and it is
expected that high resolution data (1 - 2 dbar)
will be collected in the future. Since 1989, a
regular set of stations along the Kuril Islands has
been sampled by the JFA/Hokkaido in September
of each year, under a special fisheries treaty with
Russia, in which data are exchanged and Russian
observers participate in the cruises. Fig. 2.3.16
shows the station pattern, which is repeated each
year; in 1993 the pattern was extended north to
Kamchatka. Standard depth values are archived
at JODC.
Routine Japanese hydrographic obser-
vations southeast and south of Hokkaido are
made by the JFA, JMA and Hydrographic
Department (examples in Fig. 2.3.4). Standard
depth data are archived at JODC. Special
measurement programs are also carried out in
this region, but these data are not always
9
archived at JODC.
Russian data are collected by the
Academy of Sciences, the Committee on Hydro-
meteorology, the Committee on Fisheries, and
the Navy Hydrographical Service. The Russian
Academy of Sciences (POI and P.P. Shirshov
Institute of Oceanology) conducts hydrographic,
direct current, and non-standard measurements.
Hydrographic data collection is not necessarily
regular and data are not always archived at a
national data center. Significant amounts of data
were collected in the Okhotsk Sea region by the
R/V Vityaz during 1949-1957, on 25 special
cruises (e.g., Moroshkin, 1962, 1966). Since the
mid-1970's POI has been conducting special
programs in this region. The hydrographic data
set amassed at POI for the Okhotsk Sea is very
large and none of it is at WDCA at present; it is
a subset of the data in Fig. 1.1.2.
The Russian Pacific Navy Hydro-
graphical Service makes irregular hydrographic
measurements, analyzes satellite imagery
(NOAA, Meteor), and produces regular SST
bulletins.
The Russian Committee on Fisheries
started intensive observational programs during
the 1950's through TINRO and the Sakhalin,
Kamchatka and Magadan TINRO branches.
These observations include local hydrographic
surveys (BT's), bottle salinities since the 1970's,
and CTD's since the mid-1980's. Measurements
made by TINRO local branches cover coastal
areas off Sakhalin, western Kamchatka, and the
northern shelf of the Okhotsk Sea. Since 1988
TINRO's special programs have covered all of
the Okhotsk Sea each year with a regular grid of
CTD and chemical measurements. A large part
of the data is archived at TINRO on magnetic
disks (16,000 stations) while most data from the
local branches are archived only locally.
The most regular observations along
fixed sections and by standard methods have been
conducted by the Committee on Hydro-
meteorology through FERHRI and the Sakhalin,
Kolyma, Kamchatka and Primorsky Regional
Hydrometeorological Administrations (RHA's).
Besides shipboard hydrographic measurements,
satellite imagery (NOAA IR, Meteor, Ocean),
aircraft reconnaissance of sea ice and sea-surface
temperature, regular SST bulletins (5 - 10 days),
and standard meteorological measurements and
sea level at permanent coastal stations (Fig.
1.1.2) are also collected and analyzed by the
RHA's.
The large research vessels of FERHRI
make regular observations of hydrography and
meteorology in the North Pacific, Japan Sea and
Kuroshio region. The "Sections" program from
1981-1991 made 44 surveys of the Kuroshio
region, covering each season. Within the
Okhotsk Sea, the Sakhalin RHA at Yuzhno-
Sakhalinsk has conducted most of the regular
observations. These began in the mid-1950's and
continues to the present, although coverage has
not been complete every year. The Sakhalin
coastal area has been the most intensively
covered. There are about 30 standard sections of
more than 300 fixed stations in the Sea (Fig.
1.1.2).
As of 1987, more than 38,000 hydro-
graphic stations had been collected by
(Pishchalnik and Klimov, 1991):
Sakhalin RHA 48%
TINRO 32%
FERHRI 8%
Other Russian 4%
Foreign data 5%
Data prior to 1948 3%
Thus most of the data are archived at the
Sakhalin RHA.
Russian data are collected by three
national data centers: WDCB (Moscow), ODC
(Obninsk), and the ROC (St. Petersburg). These
are intended to be in parallel and have the same
holdings, but in practice the data holdings differ.
Local data sets which might not be archived in
these three centers are held by POI, FERHRI,
IAPC, RHAs and TINRO local branches. A
large hydrographic data base for the Okhotsk Sea
has been collected by FERHRI, consisting of 876
cruises with 51,607 stations (Fig. 1.1.2) as listed
10
below (Luchin and Motorykina, 1993). We note being analyzed by the MSA.
that the total Japanese and U.S. holdings in
WDCA are larger than in this database, but that
no Russian Okhotsk Sea stations are in WDCA.
Long-term moored current meter obser-
vations are being conducted by the Japanese in
the Oyashio southeast of Hokkaido. There are at
Country # cruises # stations Period
USSR/ 767 49237 1930-1988
Russia
Japan 105 2342 1932-1948,
1954,
1957-1976
U.S.A. 4 28 1962-1963
Much Russian data is in manuscript
form, so conversion to digital format is required.
The data archeology project of the WDCA and
WDCB is working on rectifying this situation.
The Russian contact for data from the
northwestern Pacific is Igor D. Rostov of POI;
he recently spent several months at WDCA. The
WDCA contact is Sydney Levitus.
SST analyses for the Okhotsk Sea include:
(a) JMA (Japan): monthly ocean report
including the ten-day marine report,
available from the JMA in Tokyo
(b) JFA (Japan): Quick Bulletin (every 5
days)
(c) MSA (Japan): Quick Bulletin (2/month)
(d) Sakhalin RHA: 5-day bulletin based on
ship of opportunity reports (Yuzhno-
Sakhalinsk)
(e) Kolyma RHA: 10-day SST based on
airborne radiometer measurements
(Magadan)
2.2 Direct current observations in the
Okhotsk and Kuril region
Moored current observations have been
made by the Japanese in the central Okhotsk
(August 1990 - August 1991; 52° - 54°N,
150°E), off Abashiri at the site of Kitaude-
Yamato bank (1989-1990), and in the Soya
Current at various locations in the 1970's.
Results are reviewed in Section 2.4 below. At
this time we do not know the data source for the
earlier Soya Current observations. The central
Okhotsk and Abashiri measurements are still
least four mooring sites along the continental
slope; deeper moorings include both shallow and
deep current meters. JFA/Hokkaido sites are at
42°05'N, 145°21'E and 42°35'N, 144°56'E
(Kawasaki et al., 1990). The two Hokkaido
University moorings are located at 41 °30'N,
144°0'E and 144°30'E (Miyake et al., 1991).
WOCE current meter observations of
deep flow along the western boundary off
Hokkaido are being conducted by the U.S.A.'s
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. (B.
Warren and B. Owens are the contacts.)
It was reported that direct current mea-
surements were made in the Kuril Island straits
by Russia in the late 1970's, but because surface
buoys were used, they were not very successful
because of the strong currents and measurements
were not made for long periods. Hydrographic
and sea level measurements have been used much
more successfully by Russian scientists to look at
exchange through the straits. No report was
presented on other direct current measurements
in the Okhotsk Sea, and there might be a problem
of confidentiality in making data available.
Gladyshev and Bogdanov of POI are the principal
contacts for the extensive Russian work in the
Kuril straits.
Two surface drifters released in the
Bering Sea by NOAA/PMEL in 1990 followed
the East Kamchatka Current and entered the
Okhotsk Sea through Chetvertyy Strait, close to
Kamchatka, near the end of their lifetimes. They
showed very large tidal currents in the strait.
One drifter went northward presumably in the
West Kamchatka Current. P. Stabeno is the
contact at PMEL.
Large numbers of drift bottles were
released in the Kuril region by Japanese oceano-
graphers from 1893 - 1913 and we are collecting
the references for these observations.
11
2.3 Sea level measurements
Japanese sea level stations are located at
Wakkanai, Mombetsu, Abashiri, and Hanasaki.
Sea level stations are leveled every few years
relative to Tokyo. Data are available from the
JODC.
Russian sea level stations are located at
the permanent hydrometeorological stations
operated by the Sakhalin, Kolyma and Kamchatka
RHA's and shown in Fig. 1.1.2. Additional
short records of sea level (2 - 3 days) have also
been made at numerous locations. Station pairs
which span straits should be leveled relative to
each other (e.g., Soya Strait: Wakkanai and
Korsakov). Data availability for international
exchange is still under consideration by the
government.
2.4 Sea ice observations
Japanese observations of sea ice in the
Okhotsk Sea are reviewed extensively in Part 2.
Sixteen coastal observation stations (JMA - 7;
MSA - 9), and regular aircraft observations
(3/week) are carried out. Sea ice radar
observations at Esashi, Mombetsu and Abashiri
(Figs. 2.2.3, 4) have been made since 1966 by
the Sea Ice Research Laboratory of Hokkaido
University. Results are published annually in the
Data Report of Low Temperature Science.
Visible and infrared satellite measurements have
also been used (Aota et al., 1985) to look at sea
ice concentration. Satellite microwave radio-
meter (ESMR, SMMR) and visible and infrared
images are also used together, including mea-
surements from the U.S. Nimbus satellites and
the Japanese GMS (Cavalieri and Parkinson,
1998; Alfultis and Martin, 1987; Wakatsuchi
and Martin, 1990).
Russian sea ice observations are carried
out by the Sakhalin, Kolyma and Kamchatka
RHA's. Observations are made from aircraft and
cover Tartar Strait, the Okhotsk Sea and the
western part of the Bering Sea. Meteor and
NOAA satellite images are also used. All coastal
stations (Fig. 1.1.2) report ice observations.
SLR from the Russian Ocean satellites has been
used recently in sea ice analysis (Mitnik and
Kalmykov, 1992).
2.5 Satellite observations
A number of different satellite data sets
have been used to study sea ice, SST and
circulation in the Okhotsk Sea, as mentioned in
the preceding sections. The first satellite infor-
mation became available in the 1970's: visible
and infrared images of the northwestern Pacific,
Okhotsk and Japan Sea from the NOAA and
Meteor operational satellites, and later from the
geostationary satellite GMS. These data are
received by the Russian Hydrometeorological
Service (Far Eastern Regional Receiving Center,
Khabarovsk [FERRC] and local hydrometeo-
rological observatories, on a regular basis
(NOAA AVHRR - 4 times per day, Meteor and
GMS - 2 times per day). In spite of their low
resolution (1 - 3 km for Meteor and 4 km for
NOAA) these images provided the first findings
of important mesoscale features in the region
(Isatullin and Nazirov, 1972; Bulatov, 1978) and
because of their regularity they remain an
important data set. Recently high resolution
NOAA AVHRR data (HRPT) have become
available in Russia, and are collected on an
occasional basis. They are received for the
southern Okhotsk Sea on a regular basis by the
JMA.
Satellite observations of sea ice using the
Multichannel Scanning System of Medium
Resolution from the Meteor and Okean satellites
have provided resolution of 200 to 600 in since
the early 1980's. This permitted detailed study
of sea ice structure and small scale water
dynamics (Kazmina and Sklyarov, 1984;
Fedorov and Ginsburg, 1988). MSS-M images
are collected at the head receiving center
(Moscow) and some data are at FERRC.
Much satellite imagery is useful only in
cloud-free conditions and when SST contrasts are
large. Sea ice structure and water dynamics may
be studied successfully in March - April when the
most cloudfree conditions obtain. SST analyses
12
have been restricted mostly to the period from
July to October. Sea ice data which are indepen-
dent of cloudiness are obtained from the Side
Looking Radar systems of the Kosmos and Okean
satellites from 1983 to 1991 (Mitnik and
Viktorov, 1990). These images have a resolution
of about 2 km with a swath of 460 km width.
All data in the form of films are available from
the ARC archives.
Prospective Russian programs are
connected with the multisystem space station
Priroda and the synthetic aperture radar system
Almax, which are to be launched in 1995 and
1996, respectively.
Data from GMS, MOS-1, NOAA and
LANDSAT satellites are received and collected
by the JMA and NASA. Radar altimeter data
from GEOS-3, SEASAT and GEOSAT are also
available from some Japanese and U.S. sources
and have been exploited for Okhotsk Sea studies
(e.g., Wakatsuchi and Martin, 1990).
Sea ice bulletins are published by:
(a) MSA: local bulletins
(b) JMA: entire area
(c) Kolyma RHA (Magadan): operational
and annual reports
13
Part 2. REVIEW OF OCEANOGRAPHY OF THE OKHOTSK SEA AND
OYASHIO REGION
Early comprehensive papers on the
physical oceanography of the Okhotsk Sea are
those of Leonov (1960), who describes the water
mass distributions, and Moroshkin (1968) whose
monograph on water masses and circulation is
recommended reading for anyone interested in
learning about the Okhotsk Sea. Neither includes
much in the way of transport estimates,
description of the role of sea ice, description of
large eddies, or details on exchange through the
Kuril Island straits. Discussion of the Kuril
Island region in winter (Reid, 1972), discussions
of the Okhotsk Sea circulation and water masses
in relation to the North Pacific circulation
(Dodimead et al., 1963; Reid, 1965; Favorite et
al., 1976) and discussion of saline shelf water
formation under Okhotsk sea ice (Kitani, 1973)
are also highly recommended as basic back-
ground material. Other recommended papers are
discussed throughout Part 2.
15
1.0 GEOGRAPHY AND PECULIARITIES OF THE OKHOTSK SEA
The Okhotsk Sea is one of the marginal
seas of the North Pacific Ocean, and is bounded
by the Kamchatka Peninsula, Siberia, Sakhalin
Island, Hokkaido and the Kuril Islands (Chishima
Islands in some Japanese documents). Figs. 2.1.
1 and 2.1.2 show the whole of the Okhotsk Sea
and the Kuril Islands. Many features have both
Russian and Japanese names; Table 1 and Fig.
2.1.2 show these names; "old" indicates that the
Russian is clearly preferred. The Okhotsk Sea's
area is about 1,528,000 km2, and its mean depth
is about 800 m (Yamaji indicates 838 m and
Yoneda 777 m as the averaged depth in Coastal
Oceanography of Japanese Islands, 1985). There
is a broad continental shelf along the Kamchatka
and Siberian coasts, and a relatively deep basin
of triangular shape in the central and southern
portions. The deepest portion is the Kuril Basin
(Chishima Basin in old Japanese documents),
located in the southwest, the bottom of which is
very flat (3,200 - 3,300 m).
The Okhotsk Sea is connected to the
Japan Sea through Soya Strait and Tartar Strait
(Mamiya Strait). The latter is north of Sakhalin
and is very narrow (8 km in the narrowest
portion) with a sill depth of only 12 m; its
effects on the oceanography of the Okhotsk Sea
apparently are negligible although the region
south of the strait in the Japan Sea may be
important for deep water formation in the Japan
Sea and may affect the properties of water
flowing through Soya Strait into the Okhotsk
Sea. The mouth of the Amur River is located
near the northern part of Tartar strait, and almost
all of the discharged fresh water flows into the
Okhotsk Sea. The width of Soya Strait is about
42 km and its sill depth is about 55 m. As
discussed later, warm and saline water, origi-
nating from the Tsushima Warm Current in the
Japan Sea, flows into the Okhotsk Sea and forms
the Soya Current flowing southeastward along
the coast of Hokkaido. This connection with the
Japan Sea profoundly affects the water properties
of the Okhotsk Sea, ventilation in the Okhotsk
Sea, and hence water properties in the Oyashio.
The Okhotsk Sea is separated from the
North Pacific Ocean by the Kuril Islands and
their associated ridge (Figs. 2.1.1 and 2.1.2:
note that geographical names vary with authors
and countries). Part of the East Kamchatka
Current flows into the Okhotsk Sea through the
northern passages of the islands; this water then
flows out through the southern passages after
considerable modification. This modified
Okhotsk Sea Water is important in formation of
the Oyashio Water. Among the northern
passages, Kruzenshtern Strait (Mushiru Strait) is
the deepest, with sill depth of about 1,400 m.
Bussol' Strait (Uruppu Strait), located in the
center, is the deepest, at about 2,300 m
(Yasuoka, 1967).
The surface layer of the Okhotsk Sea
contains very fresh water, and winter convection
occurs only within a thin surface layer. This
peculiar condition allows sea ice formation at a
very low latitude in the Okhotsk Sea in com-
parison with other seas and oceans: new sea ice
is formed just off Hokkaido in mid-winter, the
latitude of which is only 44°N. Active sea ice
formation in the northwestern shelf region
generates dense shelf water. This water loses its
high salinity character before it flows out to the
central part of the Sea. However, this water is
believed to be important in the ventilation of
intermediate waters of the entire North Pacific.
These features are discussed in the
following sections. Most of the review below is
based on the substantial Japanese literature and
on the few other papers written or translated into
English. An extensive review of Russian litera-
ture must await more complete involvement in
this work by Russian oceanographers. Though
the accumulation of recent knowledge on the
Okhotsk Sea allows a reasonable qualitative
description of the physical nature of the Okhotsk
Sea, quantitative discussion and detailed
dynamics remain for future research.
16
2.0 SEA ICE IN THE OKHOTSK SEA
2.1 Sea ice observations in the Okhotsk Sea
Systematic visual observations of sea ice
in the Okhotsk Sea were started by Japan in 1892
at six coastal locations: five meteorological
observatories at Soya, Esashi, Abashiri, Nemuro,
and Sana, and the lighthouse at Cape Ochiishi.
The number of the Japanese observation points
had increased to 34 by 1935. Observations of
offshore sea ice were started in 1930 by vessels
of the Japanese Navy, and in 1935 by aircraft of
the Japanese Meteorological Agency. The pur-
pose of the latter observations was to forecast
abnormal cold weather in northern Japan. these
activities were interrupted by the Second World
War.
Sixteen Japanese coastal observation
stations (7 observatories of the Japan Meteo-
rological Agency and 9 of the Hydrographic
Department, MSA) are operating now. Aircraft
sea ice observations in the southern Okhotsk Sea
are conducted by the Hydrographic Department
and by the Japanese Defense Agency 3 times per
week in the sea ice season. Locations of
Japanese stations are shown in Fig. 2.2.1
(Akagawa, 1969).
Near the coast of Hokkaido a sea-ice
radar network was established in 1966 by the Sea
Ice Research Laboratory of Hokkaido University
(Tabata et al., 1969; Tabata, 1972a and b). The
network consists of three radars on the coastal
mountains at Esashi, Monbetsu and Abashiri.
Results are published annually in the Data Report
of Low Temp Science (for example Tabata et al.,
1969). Examples of sea ice distribution obtained
with the sea-ice radar network are shown in Fig.
2.4.28: detailed structures and movements of the
ice field are detectable from this network.
Knowledge of the sea ice extent and its
seasonal and interannual variations has been
much improved by satellite observations (e.g.,
Watanabe, 1962d; Campbell et al., 1981;
Kimura, 1983; Parkinson and Gratz, 1983;
Cavalieri and Parkinson, 1987; Alfultis, 1987;
Alfultis and Martin, 1987; Parkinson, 1990;
Wakatsuchi and Martin, 1990 and 1991; JMA,
1991).
Infrared and visible images obtained from
the U.S. NOAA, Russian Meteor and Japanese
GMS satellites have yielded information to study
large and small scale features of the Okhotsk Sea
ice cover. In the marginal ice zone, mushroom-
like structures,
coherent vortices and streaks
were found using high resolution Meteor-
Prioroda MSS-M data (Kuzmina and Sklyarov,
1984; Ginsburg, 1988; Federov and Ginsburg,
1988). These data sets have gaps because of low
sun altitude and frequent cloudiness in winter.
Remote sensing in the microwave band is
independent of weather conditions.
Data from
the U.S. Nimbus-7 SMMR allow determination
of overall ice extent in all conditions, so that its
variations can be studied in connection with
atmospheric and hydrographic processes.
Radar
images from the Russian satellites Cosmos and
Ocean permit study of the detailed structure of
sea ice,
its dynamics (Mitnik et al., 1985, 1992;
Mitnik and Kalmykov, 1992), and its properties.
Acronyms and satellites are listed in Appendix
A.
2.2 Ease of ice formation in the Okhotsk
Sea
Prior to discussion of sea ice extent and
its variability, it is useful to consider why ice
formation occurs at the relatively low latitude of
the Okhotsk Sea.
Vertical profiles of tem-
perature, salinity and
sigma-t just off the east
coast of Sakhalin (46°56'N, 145°01'E) on
November 3, 1978 are shown in Fig. 2.2.2.
Water of very low salinity (about 32.5) of
thickness 40 - 50m is found at the surface. The
layer is separated by a sharp pycnocline from the
deeper waters.
The temperature of the surface
layer decreases due to surface cooling in late
autumn to winter, but even when the temperature
is lowered to the freezing point, the pycnocline is
17
maintained by the sharp salinity gradient. Thus
winter convection reaches only to this pycnocline
or halocline. The limitation of winter convection
to a thin surface layer is probably the most
important reason for such formation of sea ice so
far south; a minor contributing factor might also
be the increase in freezing point temperature with
decrease in salinity.
The circulation which spreads low
salinity surface water in the warm season is
sketched in Fig. 2.2.3 (Watanabe, 1963b). The
distribution of fresh water is very similar to that
of the sea ice extent in its expanding stage, as
described later, indicating the important effect of
the fresh surface water on ice formation. As
seen in this figure, the coastal area just off
Hokkaido is affected by the saline warm water of
the Soya Current. However, the Soya Current
weakens in early winter, and ceases to flow or
completely submerges under the fresh, cold water
of the East Sakhalin Current. Thus new ice
formation can be observed along the coast of
Hokkaido in mid-winter.
This fresh surface water is thought to
originate from fresh water discharge mainly from
the Amur River. Aota and Ishikawa (1991)
discussed the fresh water budget in the Okhotsk
Sea. According to their estimates, the average
annual precipitation over the Okhotsk Sea is
about 680 mm, and the average evaporation is
about 400 mm, but error bars are likely to be
large, probably in excess of 50%. This results in
a total flux of fresh water through the sea surface
of 382 km3 per year. The mean annual fresh
water discharge from the Amur River is 315 km3
(Discharge of Selected Rivers of the World
published by UNESCO, 1974). The discharge
from other areas from Siberia to the East
Kamchatka Coast is estimated to be 148 km3,
based on the area of watershed and the
precipitation/evaporation difference. Thus the
total fresh water supply into the Okhotsk Sea is
about 845 km3. This fresh water must be
balanced with salt flux through Soya Strait and
with relatively fresh water outflow into the North
Pacific Ocean. It should be noted that the fresh
water supply through river discharge accounts for
55% of the total fresh water supply for the
Okhotsk Sea. The discharge from the Amur
River alone accounts for 37%. More accurate
estimates of the heat and fresh water balances in
the Okhotsk Sea are needed, particularly of the
portion of the balance due to the Soya Current
and exchange with the North Pacific.
Sea ice formation and extent are
influenced by air and water temperature, wind
conditions and existing ocean currents.
Distributions of the mean surface pressure (mb)
and mean surface temperature (°C) in January are
shown in Fig. 2.2.4 (Watanabe, 1959). Nor-
therly winds prevail in winter since this area is
usually located between the Siberian High to the
west and the Aleutian Low to the east. The air
temperature is lower on the western side; winter
temperature at the northwestern Siberian coast is
-25°C, at the northern Sakhalin coast -20°C and
at the southern Sakhalin coast -10°C.
The
temperature in the eastern part is warmer since
the prevailing winds pass over the Bering Sea
and the northern North Pacific. As discussed
later, the direction of the prevailing wind
significantly affects inter-annual variations of ice
extent.
Sea surface temperature in the cooling
season from October through December is given
by Akagawa (1968, 1972) using Russian
maritime meteorological data for 1960 to 1970
(Fig. 2.2.5). Sea surface temperature is deter-
mined both by oceanographic processes and by
surface cooling. Akagawa pointed out that the
mean temperature in the first half of the analyzed
period (1960-1965) is lower than that in the
second half (1966-1970), and that the average
date of pack ice appearance off Hokkaido in the
first half is 5 days earlier than in the second half.
Together with the resemblance in the patterns
between the ice margin in its earlier stages and of
surface isotherms, this suggests that sea surface
temperature influences the ice formation and
growth in the Okhotsk Sea.
As shown schematically in Fig. 2.2.3,
the relatively warm saline water which enters the
Okhotsk Sea through the northern passages of the
18
Kuril Islands flows northward off the west coast
of the Kamchatka Peninsula and reduces sea ice
formation there. The East Sakhalin Current
flowing southward just off the east coast of
Sakhalin carries sea ice southward and consi-
derably influences the sea ice extent in the
Okhotsk Sea. (Recent evidence suggests that the
East Sakhalin Current is very weak in the warm
seasons, and so the current shown in Fig. 2.2.3
is more representative of the winter situation.)
2.3 Seasonal and inter-annual variations of
sea ice extent
2.3.1 Gross features of the seasonal variation
in the Okhotsk Sea
All sea ice in the Okhotsk Sea is first
year ice. The Japan Meteorological Agency
(1991) analyzed 20 years of sea ice data in the
Okhotsk Sea, showing the days of mean,
maximum and minimum sea ice extent from 1971
to 1990, the probability of sea ice occurrence
from 1971 to 1990, and the normal concentration
of sea ice from 1978 to 1990. These figures are
given for every 10 days starting from December
1, but here we show only the first 10 days of
each month for the mean, maximum and mini-
mum sea ice extent (Fig. 2.2.6), the existence
probability (Fig. 2.2.7) and normal concentration
in the first 10 days of March (Fig. 2.2.8).
Sea ice is formed firstly in northern
Shelikof Bay (especially Penzhinskaya Bay), and
in the western corner of Shantarsky Bay in late
October or early November. Sea ice formation
also occurs along the west coast of the
Kamchatka Peninsula in early November, but
offshore expansion is limited due to the existence
of relatively warm and saline water originating
from the North Pacific. Ice formation usually
starts just off river mouths. The ice-covered area
expands gradually offshore in the northwestern
part of the sea, and its margin tends to be parallel
to depth contours. The ice extent expands
rapidly southward along the east coast of
Sakhalin and reaches the coast of Hokkaido usu-
ally in early February. As discussed before, as
surface fresh water exists in this area, this
southward expansion is partly due to expansion
of the new ice formation area following the
temperature decrease
in early winter. The
expansion is also
induced by drifts of pack ice
due to the prevailing northerly wind and to the
southward East Sakhalin Current.
The maximum sea ice extent occurs
usually in March (in late February in some
years), and then the sea ice area retreats in just
the opposite sequence to its expansion.
In June,
almost all of the Okhotsk Sea is open water, but
some sea ice may persist in the
coastal area of
Shantarsky Bay into July.
2.3.2 Sea ice thickness
Although satellite information is very
useful for sea ice investigation, little information
on ice thickness is produced with present
technology. Quantitative estimates of the sea ice
volume and its variability is required for more
complete understanding of sea ice formation and
its influence on oceanographic conditions in the
Okhotsk Sea. A special project may be required
for improvement of these estimates.
From visual observations, the thickness
of sea ice reaches about 1.5 in at the northern
part of Sakhalin, about 1.0 in at the middle part,
and 0.5 in at the southern part (Akagawa, 1969).
Tabata et al. (1980) analyzed the USSR hydro-
graphic reports for 1958 to 1965, which include
information on sea ice thickness at coastal
stations in the northern Okhotsk Sea.
As an
example, sea ice thickness in the winter of 1969 -
1970 at several stations is shown in Fig. 2.2.9.
2.3.3 Polynyas and open water
Maps of the sea ice extent
in March
through May (Fig. 2.2.6) and the ice existence
probability for March (Fig. 2.2.7) show that a
region of open water tends to develop along the
northern coast from Shantarsky to Tauyskaya
Bay, off Magadan.
This coastal polynya is
created by strong northerly or northwesterly
prevailing winter winds.
19
Kovshov and Sinyurin (1982) showed
recurrent polynyas, including over Kashevarov
Bank, for 1977 - 1980, using photographs from
NOAA satellites. Mitnik and Kalmykov (1992)
used SLR and visible images to depict ice in the
Okhotsk Sea: the coastal polynya in the north,
the polynya over Kashevarov Bank, and areas of
new ice formation along Sakhalin and in
Terpeniya Bay are notable, as were the numerous
eddies found in the southwestern Okhotsk over
the Kuril Basin.
The quantitative analysis of Alfultis and
Martin (1987) utilized the SMMR data for the
winters of 1978 - 1982, with particular reference
to the coastal polynya along the Siberian coast.
They referred also to the AVHRR images of the
Okhotsk Sea on March 3 and March 10, 1982
(Fig. 2.2.10), which show clearly the existence
of the coastal polynya and the thin ice area over
Kashevarov Bank. They showed that once the
ice cover is established, the northwest continental
polynya occurs in all images with low ice
concentration variability. They concluded that
the coastal polynya is persistent, and the polynya
is maintained by the strong northerly or north-
westerly winds in winter. Active ice formation
occurs in the open water associated with this
polynya throughout winter. They estimated the
volume of dense shelf water formed in the
polynya, obtaining an annual rate of about 0.5
Sv. If the water is mixed with surrounding water
with the ratio 1:1 or 1:2, the ratio of the rate of
water supply for the density levels of the
Okhotsk Sea's intermediate water would be 1 - 2
Sv, which yields a renewal time of 10 - 40 years.
Another polynya is often found in the
vicinity of Kashevarov Bank, northeast of the
northern tip of Sakhalin. When the bank is
completely surrounded by ice, low ice concen-
tration regions overlie the bank. This
Kashevarov Polynya is ascribed to forced
upwelling or vertical mixing due to the tides.
The heat flux needed to maintain the polynya is
50 - 100 W/m2. This flux can be provided by an
upwelling of 6 - 12 km3 of 2°C water per day,
which is equivalent to an upwelling of 0.3 - 0.6
m per day over the entire bank (Alfultis and
Martin, 1987).
The coastal polynya and the Kashevarov
Polynya will be discussed again with reference to
water mass generation and modification.
Wakatsuchi and Martin (1990, 1991)
discussed the open water area over the Kuril
Basin, and argued that severe winter heat loss
there is important in water mass modification just
before the Okhotsk Water flows out into the
North Pacific.
2.3.4 Interannual variability
Okhotsk Sea ice conditions change on
various time scales, as seen in the difference bet-
ween the minimum and maximum extent for each
month (Fig. 2.2.6). Knowledge of the variations
has been improved by satellite, aircraft and sea
ice radar observations. However, there is a lack
of information on sea ice thickness, ocean
currents and other hydrographic phenomena.
The efforts of Japanese investigators are
mainly focused on the sea ice in the southern
Okhotsk Sea off Hokkaido, as information on sea
ice is important for navigation and fisheries and
as sea ice conditions may be used for forecasting
abnormal cold summer weather in northern Japan
(e.g., Akagawa, 1980), which brings severe
damage to agriculture there.
Parkinson and Gratz (1983) and
Parkinson (1990) analyzed ESMR data obtained
by NIMBUS-5 for 1973 - 1976. The maximum
ice extent differs from year to year as seen in the
February sea ice extents, with sea ice covering
almost all of the Okhotsk Sea in 1973.
The
unusually heavy ice in 1973 can be explained by
the interannual contrast in the atmospheric
pressure fields over the Okhotsk Sea.
The
prevailing winter winds are influenced by the
positions and strengths of the Siberian High and
the Aleutian Low. Parkinson (1990) showed that
northerly winds from Siberia prevailed in 1973,
and that in other years the winds blew around the
northern margin of the Aleutian Low. In this
20
usual case, the air mass travels over the Bering
Sea instead of the Okhotsk Sea.
Campbell et al. (1981) showed that sea
ice in the Bering Sea was light in 1973 when the
Okhotsk Sea ice was heavy, and conversely that
the heavy Bering Sea ice cover in 1976
corresponded to light ice cover in the Okhotsk
Sea. By using zonal Fourier harmonics 1
through 3 of sea level pressure averaged between
45°N and 70°N, Cavalieri and Parkinson (1987)
showed that the out-of-phase relation between the
two seas is caused by the change in atmospheric
systems including the Siberian High and the
Aleutian Low. In January and February, 1973,
southerly winds prevailed over the eastern Bering
Sea and northwesterly winds prevailed over the
entire Okhotsk Sea.
Sea ice extent also varies on shorter time
scales. Parkinson and Gratz (1983) reported
pulsation of the ice margin in the Okhotsk Sea
during its developing stage. Cavalieri and
Parkinson (1987) reported 10 - 15 day period
variations of sea ice extent in both the Okhotsk
and the Bering Seas, showing an out-of-phase
relation also for these shorter period fluctuations.
For very unusual cases such as the heavy
sea ice cover in 1973, the correlation between the
sea ice extent and the atmospheric pressure
system appears to be clear. However, the
smaller variations such as seen in 1974 - 1976
(Parkinson, 1990) are difficult to explain solely
by atmospheric pressure. For example, Sato et
al. (1989) found a good correlation between the
area covered by sea ice in the Okhotsk Sea south
of 46°N at the end of February and the surface
air temperature averaged for January-February of
the same year at Abashiri (Fig. 2.2.11). As
discussed in Section 2.3.2, surface air and sea
temperatures also should be taken into account.
The interannual variability of the sea ice
extent in the southern Okhotsk Sea is different
from that of the northern Okhotsk Sea, as
discussed separately in the next subsection.
2.4 Sea ice off the coast of Hokkaido
2.4.1 Seasonal variations
Directly adjacent to the coast of
Hokkaido is the warm and saline Soya Current
Water originating from the Sea of Japan through
Soya Strait; colder and fresher water is usually
observed to intrude offshore of the Soya Current
Water (see Section 2.4). The Soya Current
exhibits large seasonal variations as discussed
later; the largest volume transport occurs in
summer, decreases through autumn to
early
winter, and is submerged or ceases in mid-
winter. In mid- or late November, the surface
salinity drops suddenly as the Soya Current
Water in the surface layer is replaced with fresh
and cold water originating from the East Sakhalin
Current.
The changes in surface salinity (con-
verted to a, at 15°C) at Mombetsu from October
to December are shown in Fig. 2.2.12 for 1957
to 1962 (Watanabe, 1963b). The sudden
decrease of salinity is indicated with a wide
arrow in each figure.
New local ice formation
usually starts in early January (white arrow)
when the air temperature decreases.
In mid-
January to mid-February, the pack ice usually
invades this region from off the East Coast of
Sakhalin (black arrow). There are counter-
examples, such as in 1974 when the coastal sea
surface temperature was abnormally high, and
drift ice invaded Lake Saroma before the
occurrence of local ice formation (Aota and
Uematsu, 1989).
In addition, it is difficult to
differentiate pack ice from Sakhalin from locally-
formed ice, and some ambiguity occurs in the
first days of pack ice appearance.
The fresh winter surface water along
Hokkaido is so light that the dense Soya Water
submerges
and continues to flow near the bottom.
The invasion of this fresh and light water causes
a sea level rise along the coast. The variations of
the 5-day mean sea level during October to
December at Wakkanai (located on the Japan Sea
side of Soya Strait) and Abashiri and the
difference between two stations are shown in Fig.
2.2.13 (Akagawa, 1977).
The sea level dif-
ference drops by 10.5 cm over this period. The
21
atmospheric pressure shifts from autumn to
winter conditions during this period, and the air
pressure effect on sea level is estimated to be 7.5
cm. The residual difference results from the
replacement of heavy (saline, warm) Soya
Current Water by light (fresh, cold) East
Sakhalin Current Water.
Seasonal variations of the pack ice
concentration off Hokkaido are shown in Fig.
2.2.14, as observed by the ice radar network of
the Sea Ice Research Laboratory, Hokkaido
University (from Aota). Ice concentration is
shown in percentage for each radar image (at
Esashi, Monbetsu and Abashiri) and for all
observation ranges. The concentration is highly
variable even in mid-winter mainly due to the
change of wind direction as discussed later. The
pack ice disappears from the coast of Hokkaido
in late March - early May. The date of the first
ice appearance is almost identical for all stations,
and its variation is small, while the last date
tends to be delayed towards the south from
Esashi to Abashiri, and the deviation is
considerably larger than that of the first date
(Aota et al., 1988; Aota and Uematsu, 1989).
Pack ice often flows out into the Pacific
Ocean through the southern passes of the Kuril
Islands. The pack ice and the very cold, fresh
water generated by ice melt flowing out through
Kunashiri and Nemuro Straits are the origin of
the Coastal Oyashio (Ohtani, 1989) and influence
ocean conditions off the southeast coast of
Hokkaido.
2.4.2 Inter-annual variations
Large inter-annual variability in the
seasonal evolution of the pack ice concentration
off the coast of Hokkaido was seen in Fig.
2.2.14. In particular, sea ice amounts after 1988
are very small off the coast of Hokkaido; no
explanation has been offered. Ogata and
Akagawa (1985) obtained long time series (1961
- 1979) for the first and last dates of sea ice
appearance, the maximum area of the sea ice
(within visual ranges), and the total amount of
sea ice (integration of the sea area from the first
day of appearance to the last day), by using the
visual observation data at Esashi, Ohmu,
Monbetsu and Abashiri. For a broader area,
Sato et al. (1989) investigated the interannual
variation of sea ice area in the Okhotsk Sea south
of 46°N. All of these indicate considerable
interannual fluctuations of ice extent in the
southern Okhotsk Sea.
As discussed in Section 2.3.4, Parkinson
and Gratz (1983), Cavalieri and Parkinson
(1987), and Parkinson (1990) discussed the
unusually large extent of sea ice in the northern
Okhotsk Sea in winter 1972-1973, using ESMR
data from NIMBUS-5. In contrast, Fig. 2.2.14
and Ogata and Akagawa (1985) and Sato et al.
(1989) show that the ice area in winter 1972-
1973 in the southern Okhotsk Sea and off the
coast of Hokkaido was well below the mean.
Except for the low ice cover in 1973 and
the high ice cover in 1978, correlations between
the sea ice strengths for the whole Okhotsk Sea
and for the area covered by the sea ice radar
network is 0.17 (with only 14 data points), and
that between for the Okhotsk Sea south of 50°N
and for the radar network area is 0.04. Namely,
no correlation can be found among them (Aota
and Uematsu, 1989).
The pack ice just off the coast of
Hokkaido is carried out of the observable radar
range of 30 miles when strong winds blow from
land to sea. Aota and Uematsu (1989) used the
surface pressure difference between Wakkanai
and Nemuro as an index of wind strength in the
direction orthogonal to the coast, and correlated
it with the changing rate of sea ice amount seen
in the radar. The good correlation between the
two quantities indicates that the sea ice concen-
tration near the coast is strongly influenced by
the local winds.
The correlation between sea ice charac-
teristics and meteorological conditions off the
coast of Hokkaido have been studied by various
investigators (Tabata, 1952a; Eda, 1962; Sasaki,
1963; Schell, 1964; Hata, 1966; Ogata, 1969,
22
1976a, b; Akagawa, 1973; Yamamoto, 1981
and 1982; Obata and Akagawa, 1985).
Akagawa (1973) analyzed the first and
the last ice appearance dates off Hokkaido, at
Esashi, Ohmu, Monbetsu and Abashiri, for 1946-
1972. In years of abnormally early first
appearance of sea ice, the Siberian High was well
developed and cyclones passed frequently along
the Kuril Islands to the Aleutian Islands;
therefore the northerly-northwesterly monsoon
with outburst of cold air mass was strong over
the Okhotsk Sea. In years of abnormally late
first appearance, the Siberian High and the
Aleutian Low were weaker, and the North Pacific
High shifted northward, so the monsoon was
weak. Differences in air temperature accom-
panied these anomalies. On the other hand, local
meteorological conditions appeared to be more
important for the date of the last appearance of
the sea ice. His results may indicate that the sea
ice condition off the coast of Hokkaido might be
correlated with the ice condition in the whole
Okhotsk Sea, although we cannot find good
correlations in discussions cited above. The
discrepancy may result from lack of information
on ice thickness, as the area of ice extent does
not necessarily represent the volume of the sea
ice.
2.5 Operational sea ice forecasting
As an operational service the Japan
Meteorological Agency publishes Sea Ice Infor-
mation for the whole Okhotsk Sea and its
adjacent seas twice a week (example in Fig.
2.2.15), and Sea Ice Information for the seas
adjacent to Japan every day (example in Fig.
2.2.16).
The JMA produces both a one-week and
a one-month forecast for the Okhotsk Sea south
of about 49°N. For the one-week forecast, a
numerical sea ice model is used which includes
dynamical processes (drift and deformation of ice
field by winds and oceanic currents) and thermo-
dynamic processes (formation and melting of sea
ice due to heat exchanges among air, sea water
and ice) (Sinohara, 1989 and 1990; Sato et al.,
1989). An example of the one-week forecast is
shown in Fig. 2.2.17 for the increasing sea ice
phase (Kamihira et al., 1991).
For the one-month forecast, a statistical
method based on the climatological mean distri-
bution of sea ice is used. The deviation from the
climatological mean is assumed to persist to some
degree, the coefficient of which is empirically
determined for each month.
Then, also using
empirical relations, a correction
is made for
meteorological effects derived from the 500 mb
surface. An example of the one-month forecast
is shown in Fig. 2.2.18 for the increasing sea ice
phase (Sato and Kano, 1992).
The accuracy of the JMA's one-week and
one-month forecasts is fairly good, given our
limited knowledge of sea ice in the Okhotsk Sea
as discussed in the previous section. Some of the
assumptions used are not very reliable. For
example, the one-week forecast model uses a
fixed oceanic current field, but it does not
include, for instance, the cyclonic eddy over the
Kuril Basin discussed by Wakatsuchi and Martin
(1990, 1991).
China operates a sea ice forecasting
model for the Bohai Gulf area, which is not a
part of the Okhotsk Sea, but which has one-year
ice at a very southern location.
The numerical
model in the National Research Center for
Marine Environmental Forecasts, Beijing, has
been developed in recent years (Wu et al., 1988,
1990). An example of a 3-day forecast from the
model is shown in Fig. 2.2.19. The forecast is
in good agreement with sea ice observations
based on satellite imagery (Fig. 2.2.20), as
developed by Huang et al. (1990, 1992, 1993a,
1993b).
No information on Russian sea ice
modeling for the Okhotsk Sea was available to us
for purposes of this report, but we are aware that
there is a significant effort in this area.
23
Table 1. Geographical locations in the Okhotsk Sea region: (old) indicates that the Russian is
preferred.
Label Russian Japanese Note
a Peryyy Kuril's Proliv Simusyu Kaikyo (old) strait
b Ostrov Shumshu Simusyu To (old) island
c Ostrov Paramusir Paramusiru To (old) island
d Chetvertyy Kuril'skiy Proliv Onekotan Kaikyo (old) strait
e Ostrov Onekotan Onekotan To (old) island
f Proliv Krenitsyna Harumukotan Kaikyo (old) strait
g Proliv Cevergina Syasukotan Kaikyo (old) strait
h Proliv Kruzenshterna Musiru Kaikyo (old) strait
i Proliv Nadezhdy Rasyuwa Kaikyo (old) strait
Proliv Rikorda Ketoi Kaikyo (old) strait
k Proliv Dian Simusiru Kaikyo (old) strait
I Ostrov Shimushir Simusiru To (old) island
m Proliv Bussol' Kita-Uruppu Suido (old) strait
n Proliv Urup Minami-Uruppu Suido (old) strait
o Ostrov Urup Uruppu To (old) island
Proliv Friza Etorohu Kaikyo strait
Ostrov Ituru Etorohu To (old) island
r Proliv Ekaterina Kunasiri Kaikyo island
s Ostrov Kunasir Kunasiri To island
t ? Nemuro Kaikyo strait
u Siretoko Misaki cape
v Soya Misaki cape
w La Perouse (strait) Soya Kaikyo strait
x Mys Kril'on Nisi-Notoro Misaki (old) cape
y Zaliv Aniva Aniwa Wan old bay
z Mys Aniwa Naka-Siretoko Misaki (old) cape
A Zaliv Te eni a Taraika Wan old bay
B My s Te eni a Kita-Siretoko Misaki (old) cape
C Gulf of Tartary strait
D Mys Telizavety cape
E Sakhalinskiy Zaliv bay
F Ostrov Ion island
G Kashevarov Bank rise
H De in Basin basin
I Instituta Okeanologii Rise rise
J Akademii Nauk Rise rise
K Kuril Basin basin
L Penzhinsky Zaliv (Shelikova Zaliv) bay
M Tinro Basin basin
24
3.0
PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY OF THE OKHOTSK SEA
The Okhotsk Sea is connected to the
North Pacific Ocean through the Kuril Islands.
Because of the constrictions due to the island
chain, in which only two straits are deeper than
1,000 in, the Okhotsk Sea circulation is
connected in a complex way with the cyclonic
circulation of the subarctic North Pacific. Water
properties in the Okhotsk Sea are very different
from those of the North Pacific at most locations
along the Kuril Islands, also reflecting the
physical barrier. The Okhotsk Sea connection to
the Japan Sea through Soya Strait (La Perouse
Strait) is important particularly for the salinity
balance of the Okhotsk Sea because of the
relatively high salinity of Japan Sea waters. This
input of salinity into the Okhotsk Sea is likely to
be crucial for dense water formation.
amplitude tides. Important steps for improved
communication with Russian experts in
this
region have been taken; we believe that even
with the observations and analyses which they
have undertaken, these quantitative questions will
not be answered. Hence we have made a set of
recommendations for experiments in the Okhotsk
Sea in the first chapter of this report.
Appendix B is a translation of two recent
reports by V.A. Luchin of FEHRI summarizing
Russian papers on the hydrography and currents
in the Okhotsk Sea. These were obtained after
the working group meeting, and so are included
in total since the information in them has not
been fully integrated into the working group
report.
Because of its importance in ventilation
of the North Pacific, heat and salinity budgets for
the Okhotsk Sea, clarifying the rates of dense
water formation and the mechanisms are of great
interest. However, very little has been done on
heat budgets, and almost nothing on salinity
budgets.
Early extensive discussions of Okhotsk
Sea water properties and circulation available in
English are found in Leonov (1960 - water
properties) and Moroshkin (1962 - circulation
and water properties). The papers summarized
below show what we believe to be the state of
knowledge of the circulation and water masses.
In these many papers, we found relatively little
quantitative information, for instance discussions
of current transports, water mass modification
rates, circulation time scales, and heat/salinity
budgets. We also found little quantitative
information on variability of water masses. Few
data have been collected in the important
northwestern shelf and Kashevarov Bank region
where modification is important,
and inter-
pretation of data even in relatively well sampled
regions such as Bussol' Strait, the East Sakhalin
Current and West Kamchatka Current requires
good understanding and measurement of the large
3.1 Oceanographic observations
Oceanographic observations available
outside of Russia are limited both in numbers and
quality in the Okhotsk Sea, particularly relative
to the extraordinarily well sampled waters around
Japan, including the Soya Warm Current region
along the northern coast of Hokkaido. Data
collection is limited in winter because of severe
weather and ice coverage, and has been limited in
all seasons in the last two decades because of
political conditions. (Only a small portion of the
central Okhotsk Sea is outside the 200 nm
Exclusive Economic Zone.) A summary of
available observations was presented in Part 1,
but more details are given here.
The history of oceanographic obser-
vations in the Okhotsk sea started with the
Russian vessel Vitiaz which made the first
observations in 1887. The first Japanese obser-
vations were made on Kumotaka-maru of the
Imperial Fisheries Experimental Station in
summer 1916 - 1917, and extensive observations
were carried out in 1927 on the Manshu of the
Imperial Japanese Navy. Shigematu (1933) used
these data to present a comprehensive current
distribution in the Okhotsk Sea based on dynamic
25
height relative to 400 dbar. The first Soviet
expedition was carried out in 1932, encom-
passing the main features of temperature
distribution in the Okhotsk Sea. The WDCA
data set, which includes no Russian data in the
Okhotsk Sea, was shown in Fig. I.I.I. Over
1,000 stations are available north of 50°N in the
Okhotsk Sea. There were active Japanese obser-
vational programs in the central Okhotsk Sea
prior to 1974; the sparse U.S. observations
ceased after 1968 except for U.S. Navy obser-
vations in 1974 and 1987. The overall number
of observations in this archive dropped preci-
pitously in the 1970's. The density of obser-
vations is much higher in the West Kamchatka
Current and Soya Current regions than
elsewhere. It is apparent from various
references, particularly Kitani's (1973), that
some important Japanese data are not included in
the archive, including the Oyashio-maru cruises
of 1969 and 1970.
Although no Russian observations in the
Okhotsk Sea are available through WDCA,
Moroshkin (1962) indicated that he used 11,000
deep water stations for his synthesis of water
properties and circulation, and that cruises of the
Vityaz' from 1949 to 1953 were crucial for his
work. Luchin and Motorykina (1993) (1.1.3)
indicate that 51,607 observations in the Okhotsk
Sea for 1930 - 1988 have been made available at
the Russian World Data Center, of which only
2,370 are of Japanese and U.S. origin. Since the
actual Japanese and U.S. data sets in the Okhotsk
Sea include many more than 2,370 stations, this
indicates that there is indeed a rich existing data
base for the Okhotsk Sea and that avenues to
make the Russian portion available should be
vigorously pursued. WDCA is working cur-
rently with Russian experts to incorporate a large
amount of Russian data worldwide, including the
Okhotsk Sea, so it is likely that these data will
become available in a few years (S. Levitus,
personal communication). It is expected that a
large quality control effort will be required in
order for the data to be of wide use.
Winter observations are very sparse even
in the open water regions because of pack ice and
ice accretion on ships (Fig 2.3.1). Fig. 2.3.2
shows WDCA observations for January - March
of all years. The observations north of 50°N
were collected by the Imperial Japanese Navy's
icebreaker Oodomari in 1938-39 and by the
Kaiho-maru, also in 1938-39. We have no infor-
mation on winter coverage by Russian vessels.
The coverage of the southern Okhotsk
Sea off Hokkaido has been excellent through all
the years. Seven winter observation lines (Fig.
2.3.3) have been made twice a year since 1987
by the Hydrographic Department, MSA: in the
open sea period from November to December
and in the ice period in January on the icebreaker
Soya (Ishii, 1991). For all other seasons a fairly
dense routine observation network has been
occupied by Japanese agencies for many years.
The Japan Meteorological Agency usually makes
observations in the Okhotsk Sea parallel to the
southern Kuril Islands in August. Frequent
observations are made by the Japan Fisheries
Agency and the Prefectural Fisheries Experi-
mental Stations. The Japanese Fisheries
observations for 1985 are shown as an example
(Fig. 2.3.4 (i)-(iii)) (JFA, 1989). Through a
fisheries exchange agreement with Russia, the
JFA has been occupying stations in the southern
Okhotsk Sea since 1988 (Fig. 1.2.1). In addition
to routine observations, many special programs
have been carried out in this region, examples of
which are shown in Fig. 2.3.4.
Direct current measurement records are
very limited in the Okhotsk Sea. Some
observations have been made in the Soya Current
Region (Aota and Kawamura, 1978, 1979) and in
the central portion of the Okhotsk Sea (Yoritaka,
personal communication) and were referred to in
Part 1. We have no information on Russian
observations.
As unclassified data are abundant in the
Soya Current Region, its oceanographic structure
and variability are considered separately in
Section 2.4.
26
3.2 Circulation in the Okhotsk Sea
3.2.1 Gross features of the circulation
The circulation of the whole of the
Okhotsk Sea has been presented in several
papers. Figs. 2.2.6 and 2.3.5 show the eight that
we have found, based on dynamic topography
(Fig. 2.3.5a - d), GEK measurements (Fig.
2.3.5e), and composite schematics (Fig. 2.2.4
and 2.3.5f,g). All figures indicate cyclonic cir-
culation in general, but more complicated local
structures. Favorite et al. (1976) summarized in
a table and figure (Fig. 2.3.6) the various current
nomenclatures recognized up to that time, based
primarily on work by Leonov (1960), Moroshkin
(1962), Yasuoka (1968), and Watanabe (1963b).
The nomenclature which we adopt is the
East Kamchatka Current for southward flow
north of Kruzenshtern Strait, the West
Kamchatka Current for northward flow west of
Kamchatka, the East Sakhalin Current for
southward flow just east of Sakhalin, and the
Soya Current for southeastward flow through
Soya Strait and along the northern coast of
Hokkaido.
In the simplest schemes, the Okhotsk Sea
circulation is cyclonic and connected to the
cyclonic circulation of the subpolar North
Pacific.
Flow into the Okhotsk Sea occurs
primarily through Kruzenshtern Strait and is fed
by the East Kamchatka Current. Flow out of the
Okhotsk Sea occurs primarily through Bussol'
Strait, whence it feeds the Oyashio and Subarctic
Current (Favorite et al., 1976). However, there
is evidence for inflow also in Bussol' Strait
according to Moroshkin (1962) and Yasuoka
(1968), and surface water outflow through the
southern Kuril Islands. Flow also enters the
Okhotsk Sea from the Japan Sea through Soya
Strait.
Important details which differ from one
scheme to another are:
(1) the presence of anticyclonic circulation in the
Kuril Basin which is suggested in Fig. 2.3.5
a, d, and g, but is difficult to see in the other
figures and
(2) the presence and strength of the East
Sakhalin Current which is sometimes difficult
to discern.
Kajiura (1949) argued that the East Sakhalin
Current cannot be identified in the summer
dynamic topography.
These discrepancies might be resolved
with more data, and also might result from the
weakness of the currents in the Okhotsk Sea:
even for the conspicuous Soya Current, the mean
current speed is 0.5 - 0.9 knots in summer when
the current is strong. However, it should be
noted that the currents exhibit strong seasonal or
shorter variabilities and there are many eddies
(e.g., Fig. 2.3.5g and discussion of Soya Current
front in Section 2.4). Tidal amplitudes are very
large (Section 2.3.5). Also, dynamic compu-
tations may not be applicable in shallow shelf
regions, and are not accurate if currents are
strongly barotropic. In most of the Kuril straits,
there appears to be flow into the Okhotsk Sea on
the northern side and flow out of the Okhotsk on
the southern side (see Appendix B).
There are few numerical simulations of
the circulation. Sekine (1990) estimated the
wind-induced current in the Okhotsk Sea using a
barotropic model assuming inflow and outflow
through the Kuril Islands. He suggested that the
induced current is confined to the deep portion
including the Kuril Basin, and that wind effects
would be important only in the strong winter
monsoon. Knowledge of fresh water supply from
rivers and through the sea surface is very limited
and would be essential for a more complete
model in which the salinity stratification and
mixing in a weakly stabilized ocean are included.
The following sub-sections survey our
present knowledge of details of the circulation in
the Okhotsk Sea, however with little input from
the Russian literature.
27
3.2.2 Inflow from the North Pacific Ocean
and the West Kamchatka Current
It is believed that relatively warm and
saline water intrudes through the northern
passages of the Kuril Islands, primarily through
Kruzenshtem Strait. However, actual observa-
tional evidence of this inflow is very limited.
Surface temperature in February 1938 (Kurashina
et al., 1967) and at 50 m depth in August 1941
(Tabata, 1952) show a warm tongue extending
northward from Kruzenshtem Strait. Tempera-
ture at the temperature minimum ("dichothermal
layer") in the Okhotsk Sea (Fig. 2.3.7) is a more
reliable indicator of the strong influence of the
warmer/saltier Pacific Water just inside the
northern Kuril Islands. Northward advection of
the Pacific Water is suggested by Figs. 2.3.7 and
2.3.8, but the existence of a West Kamchatka
Current is not very clear. The NOAA/PMEL
drifter which came south in early 1991 in the
East Kamchatka Current and entered the Okhotsk
Sea through Chetvertyy strait clearly turned
northward with the West Kamchatka Current
(Fig. 2.3.9 from Stabeno, personal communi-
cation).
A northward West Kamchatka Current is
clear neither in the dynamic topographies of Fig.
2.3.5a - d nor in the GEK field of Fig. 2.3.5e.
In fact, southward flow near the coast is
suggested by Fig. 2.3.5f. It also might be that
this current is weak and masked by tides, local
eddies or large seasonal variation. Thorough
analysis of existing observations (Fig. 1.1.1) and
possibly improved observations are needed to
clarify the nature of this current.
3.2.3 Currents in the northern Okhotsk Sea
The currents in the northern Okhotsk Sea
are not yet clarified based on literature available
to us at this time, which is probably missing
Russian information. If the large scale circu-
lation in the Okhotsk Sea is cyclonic, there
should be westward flow there. However, it is
not known whether the northern margin of such
circulation penetrates into the shallow shelf
region (as suggested in Fig. 2.3.5f) or is located
just at the edge of the deep basin (as suggested in
Fig. 2.3.5g). Kitani and Shimazaki's (1971)
dynamic topography at the surface relative to 100
db (Fig. 2.3.10) shows a slow current over the
shelf which is confined to a thin surface layer 10
- 20 in thick. A notable feature in this figure is
associated with Kashevarov Bank, discussed in
Sections 2.3.3, 2.3.4 and 3.3.2.
3.2.4 The East Sakhalin Current
Based on ice drift and the expansion of
pack ice in winter, a relatively strong southward
current exists along the east coast of Sakhalin, at
least in winter (Part 1, Section 2.3.1). The
current is referred to as the East Sakhalin
Current. Deep expressions of the East Sakhalin
Current are apparent in isopycnal property plots,
so the current apparently extends to the bottom
(Fig. 2.3.12).
Along the northern Sakhalin coast the
current is relatively strong.
Its main flow is
believed to leave the coast off Cape Terpeniya
(Cape Kita Shiretoko) and to flow eastward or
southeastward. The East Sakhalin Current
advects relatively fresh water and pack ice to the
coast of Hokkaido in winter. The less saline
surface water is observed also in summer.
Therefore, some part of the East Sakhalin
Current appears to continue southward south of
Cape Terpeniya. However, the conceptual charts
(Figs. 2.3.5f - g) show gyres of opposite
direction to each other in Terpeniya Bay,
indicating that there is uncertainty even as to
direction of flow.
As discussed above, the East Sakhalin
Current may be weak or absent in summer
(Shigematu, 1933; Kajiura, 1949). Fujii and
Abe (1976) analyzed the oceanic conditions off
the east coast of Sakhalin for the summers of
1969 to 1974. (In 1969, only surface tem-
perature and salinity data were collected.)
Temperature and salinity at the sea surface and at
100 m are shown in Figs. 2.3.11 through 2.3.13.
These show large variations from year to year.
Surface water with extremely low salinity, from
the Amur River and sea ice melt, is commonly
28
found in the vicinity of the northern tip of
Sakhalin (Fig. 2.3.13). This low salinity water
was transported southward by the East Sakhalin
Current in 1971, 1972 and 1973 but not in 1969,
1970 and 1974. In 1971 there was a conspicuous
southward expansion of low salinity water along
the northern Sakhalin coast, but not along the
middle coast. The surface temperature
distributions are much noisier than salinity
presumably because of seasonal heating. The
southward-intruding low salinity water is colder
than the offshore water in 1972, but warmer in
1973. It is hard to find the signature of the East
Sakhalin Current from surface temperature in
1971. These figures suggest that the East
Sakhalin Current is variable and may be weak in
summer.
At 100 m, which is below the dicho-
thermal layer which marks the depth of winter
convection, the horizontal contrast in temperature
and in salinity is weaker (Fig. 2.3.13). A
southward, longshore intrusion of relatively
saline water is seen in 1970, 1971, and 1972, just
as in the surface salinity. As discussed below in
Section 3.3.3, dense, saline water is produced in
the northwestern shelf region of the Okhotsk Sea.
Dodimead et al. (1962) showed that the coldest
temperatures on the isohaline 33.8 psu for the
whole of the North Pacific occurred in the East
Sakhalin Current (his Fig. 198); the lowest tem-
perature was less than -0.5°C along Sakhalin,
and less than 1 °C in the western Okhotsk Sea.
Talley (1991) showed a southward intrusion of
fresh, cold, oxygenated water from the
northwestern shelf in the East Sakhalin Current
area (Fig. 2.3.14), on isopyc-nals ranging from
near the surface to about 1,000 m. This
isopycnal intrusion was fresh because it was
cold; the corresponding salinity at 100 m in Fig.
2.3.13 is high because dense water lies high up
on the shelf in this location.
In 1971, a domain of low surface
temperature and high surface salinity was seen
over Kashevarov Bank, northeast of the northern
tip of Sakhalin (Figs. 2.3.11 and 2.3.12).
Temperature at 100 m depth on the other hand
was relatively high (Fig. 2.3.13), as also seen in
Fig. 2.3.7. This structure appears to be created
by strong vertical mixing in the vicinity of the
bank, probably due to strong tides (Section
2.3.5).
3.2.5 The Soya Current
The Soya Warm Current flows along the
northern coast of Hokkaido. Its water originates
from the Tsushima Current in the Japan Sea and
enters the Okhotsk Sea through the Soya Strait.
The water originates from the subtropical water,
and is characterized by relatively high tem-
perature and high salinity, although it is signi-
ficantly modified in the Japan Sea through air-sea
interaction. Its typical speed is 0.5 - 0.9 kt (25 -
45 cm/s) off Mombetsu in summer-autumn (Aota,
1975). The highest speed, observed with a GEK,
is about 3.0 kt in the vicinity of Soya Strait
(Wakao and Kojima, 1962).
The Soya Current is strongly seasonally
variable, with maximum flow in summer. It
becomes very weak in winter, when it may exist
only near the bottom. Southeastward flow along
the coast is observed in winter, but the surface
water under pack ice is fresh and cold. This
flow is believed to be a continuation of the East
Sakhalin Current which strengthens in winter.
Details of the Soya Current Region are
discussed below in Section 2.4.
3.2.6 Anticyclonic Kuril Basin gyre and
anticyclonic eddies in the southern Okhotsk
Sea
Wakatsuchi and Martin (1990, 1991)
hypothesized the existence of anticyclonic circu-
lation in the Kuril Basin, based on satellite
images and in situ data in the southern Okhotsk
Sea. Their dynamic topographies at the sea
surface relative to 1,000 db for four periods in
1977-1978 are shown in Fig. 2.3.15 (a-d).
Although the shape of the circulation is variable
and is separated into two smaller sub-gyres in
two of the four graphs, it seems to be a
permanent feature. The JFA surveys of the
southern Okhotsk Sea since 1989 also reveal
29
anticyclonic flow, with variable location and
shape, but persistent occurrence (Fig. 2.3.16 (a-
d)). On the other hand, well-developed
anticyclonic eddies are apparent in winter sea ice
and summer-autumn SST satellite images
(Isatullin and Nazirov, 1972; Kuzmina and
Sklyarov, 1984; Hatakeyama et al., 1985;
Rogachev and Lobanov, 1990; Wakatsuchi and
Martin, 1990, 1991). Each year 2 - 4 large
eddies with diameter of 100 to 150 km are
observed in the Kuril Basin. Their location, size
and number vary inter-annually. Satellite
imagery reveals that these eddies are less stable
than eddies on the Pacific side of the Kuril
Islands. An individual Kuril Basin eddy can
move very rapidly, changing its shape, and
decaying in a few weeks, or change to a new
eddy. However, there are always anticyclonic
eddies in this region throughout the year.
The eddies trap and advect into the
central Kuril Basin jets of both Soya Current
warm water and cold mixed water from the Kuril
straits. These eddies are thus responsible for
mesoscale variability in the hydrography and
mixing processes resulting in water mass
transformation in the basin.
If there is a permanent gyre, it is
plausible that the eastward flow of the northern
margin of the gyre is continuous with the East
Sakhalin Current, which often leaves the
Sakhalin coast off Cape Terpeniya (Cape Kita
Shiretoko) flowing eastward or southeastward.
The situation on the western side of the Kuril
Basin gyre is not clear: the figures indicate
relatively strong northward flow, whereas there
is also evidence that fresher, colder water is
brought to the coastal area of Hokkaido by a
southward flow from the East Sakhalin Current
Region. The anticyclonic gyre or eddies may be
important in the problem of how the Soya
Current leaves the coast of Hokkaido and how its
relatively saline waters are mixed into the
Okhotsk Sea.
The oceanographic structure of the Kuril
Basin Gyre and its seasonal variations is
discussed in Section 3.3.4 in regards to water
mass modification in the Okhotsk Sea.
3.2.7 Exchange through the southern
passages of the Kuril Islands
The Okhotsk Sea Waters flow out into
the North Pacific Ocean through the deep Bussol'
Strait and to a lesser extent through other,
shallower straits to the south. These waters are
important for formation of the Oyashio Water
and the North Pacific Intermediate Water. The
outflows are discussed in Section 2.5 on the
Oyashio.
In the lower layers, the Pacific Ocean
waters flow into the Okhotsk Sea through both
Kruzenshtern and Bussol' straits. This will also
be discussed later with regard to the structure of
the deep layer of the Okhotsk Sea.
3.3 Water mass distributions in the
Okhotsk Sea
3.3.1 Gross features of the water mass
distribution
That the Okhotsk Sea is somewhat
isolated from the North Pacific is manifested
primarily in its water properties. All of the basic
references (Leonov, 1960; Dodimead et al.,
1962; Moroshkin, 1962; Yasuoka, 1967, 1968;
Favorite et al., 1976) show that the dichothermal
layer (temperature minimum) in the Okhotsk Sea
is colder than outside, the mesothermal layer
(temperature maximum) is much deeper, and that
fresh, cold, oxygenated water penetrates much
deeper within the Okhotsk Sea than in the East
Kamchatka Current which is its primary source.
Reid (1965) shows this contrast most strikingly
in vertical sections around the subpolar gyre.
Because water flows out from the Okhotsk Sea
through Bussol' Strait and into the Oyashio, the
water mass transformation which produces this
striking difference results in a large contrast
between Oyashio and East Kamchatka Current
Water. The maximum sill depth in the Kuril
Islands is 2,300 in, at Bussol' Strait.
30
Within the Okhotsk Sea, important
influences on changing the incoming North
Pacific water properties are the relatively saline
Soya Current Water, the fresh Amur river
discharge, and the sea ice production which each
winter transforms relatively fresher surface
waters to more saline shelf bottom waters, which
flow out into the Okhotsk Sea to mid-depth,
producing a characteristic fresh tongue on
isopycnals due to the coldness of the waters
(Talley, 1991). Also important are mixing
processes which are enhanced in the Kuril Straits
and over Kashevarov Bank.
Five summer temperature and salinity
sections are shown in Figs. 2.3.17 and 2.3.19:
one roughly along 150°E and the others roughly
along 55°N, 51°N, 49°N and 47°N. A warm
summer surface layer is found over a sharp
thermocline at 20 to 30 in. Just below the
thermocline is a thin temperature minimum. This
dichothermal layer is well developed in the
northern and western part of the Okhotsk Sea,
but is obscure in the vicinity of the Kuril Islands
and the Kamchatka Peninsula, where a vertically
homogeneous layer appears to be generated (Fig.
2.3.18e). The homogeneous layer suggests that
strong vertical mixing occurs there (Moroshkin,
1962; Talley, 1991). Kawasaki and Kono's
(1993) map of potential temperature at 26.65 ae
clearly shows the effect of mixing around the
Kuril Islands (high temperatures), and also flow
through Bussol' Strait (Fig. 2.3.19).
The temperature of the dichothermal
layer is lower than -1.7°C near the northwestern
shelf region. Winter convection reaches to the
depth of the dichothermal layer, and the
temperature at the minimum represents the
temperature of the winter surface mixed layer.
Below the dichothermal layer, the water tem-
perature increases with depth, reaching a
maximum at about 1,000 in, where the tem-
perature is 2.0°C or more. This is often called
the mesothermal layer. Kitani (1973) called this
the "deep warm water", and the layer between
the dichothermal water and the deep warm water
the "transitional water". Below the deep warm
water, the temperature decreases gradually. This
has been called the Okhotsk Proper Water, but
Yasuoka (1967) divided it into two layers, Basin
Water and Bottom Water, since another
temperature minimum appears at about 2,500 in
in the Kuril Basin.
In summer, the surface salinity is very
low, less than 32.8 0/00, indicating the influence
of ice melt and/or river discharge. A sharp
thereto-cline, halocline, and pycnocline is seen in
the summer surface layer above the temperature
minimum. Salinity in the dichothermal layer is
about 33.0 0/00. Salinity increases gradually
with depth to the bottom indicating North Pacific
influence. Salinity between 2,000 in and 3,000
in is greater than 34.5 psu.
In the deep southern Okhotsk Sea, the
temperature minimum (dichothermal layer) at 150
cl/t has an oxygen maximum which is
occasionally super-saturated (Fig. 2.3.20). This
indicates that winter convection reaches to the
temperature minimum, and that surface heating in
the surface layer caps the dichothermal layer in
summer. Below the dichothermal layer, dis-
solved oxygen decreases with depth, reaching a
minimum of about 1 ml/1 in the deep warm layer
(thermosteric anomaly of about 70 cl/t). Below
the deep warm layer, the dissolved oxygen
increases again with depth, as appropriate given
its North Pacific origin.
Dichothermal layers are also observed in
the Bering Sea and the East Kamchatka Current
Region, but not in the Japan Sea (Kitani, 1973;
Dodimead et al., 1963). Temperature at the
Okhotsk Sea temperature minimum was shown in
Fig. 2.3.7. It is lowest in the north-west and
increases southeastward, reaching 0.5 - 1.0°C in
the vicinity of the Kuril Islands. The minimum
temperature observed in the source of inflow
from the North Pacific into the Okhotsk Sea, the
East Kamchatka Current, is about 0°C. So,
though the formation mechanism is very similar,
the dichothermal layer in the Okhotsk Sea has no
direct connection to that in the East Kamchatka
Current Region and instead represents the winter
temperature of the observed area.
31
The mesothermal layer (deep temperature
maximum) in the Okhotsk Sea differs greatly
from those in the Bering Sea and in the East
Kamchatka Current: the temperature maximum
in the Okhotsk Sea is deep (around 1,000 m),
while that outside the Kuril Islands is about 300
in or less. As discussed before, part of the East
Kamchatka Current Water enters through the
northern passage of tie Kuril Islands
(Kruzenshtern Strait).
Temperature/salinity relations at various
locations in the Okhotsk Sea are shown in Fig.
2.3.21. (The locations are shown in Fig.
2.3.18.) Within the upper part of the transitional
layer the T/S relation is not necessarily smooth,
often including a secondary maximum and
secondary minimum. These undulations suggest
that interleaving of waters occurs in the
transitional layer.
From this it can be concluded that water
mass modification takes place to a depth of about
1,000 in in the Okhotsk Sea, and a thick
transitional layer is developed (Moroshkin,
1962). The thickness of oxygen-rich water is
also increased during this water mass
transformation. As shown in Talley (1991),
demonstrable modification actually occurs to
about 2,000 in, which is the maximum sill depth
through the Kuril Islands; the deeper part of the
modification is a result of vertical mixing. As
discussed in Section 2.5 on the Oyashio, the
development of the transitional layer in the
Okhotsk Sea is essential to the formation of the
Oyashio Water and the North Pacific Inter-
mediate Water. In the following sections,
phenomena which are important in formation and
modification of the transitional layer will be
discussed.
3.3.2 Vertical mixing over banks, shelf edges
and narrow passages
Kitani and Shimazaki (1971) described
the detailed oceanic structure of the northwestern
Okhotsk Sea, using data obtained from the
Oyashio-maru in September 1970. The most
striking feature is the low temperature and high
salinity found over Kashevarov Bank (Fig.
2.3.22). This low temperature domain has been
pointed out already in the discussion on the
Kashevarov Polynya in Section 2.3.3, and on the
East Sakhalin Current in Section 3.2.4 (Fig.
2.3.7 and 2.3.11). This domain also is charac-
terized by high temperature and salinity at 100 in
(Fig. 2.3.23). Temperature, salinity and oxygen
sections over the bank are shown in Fig. 2.3.24.
It can be seen that the water is nearly
homogeneous in temperature, salinity and oxygen
over the bank. This suggests strong mixing over
the bank, presumably due to strong tidal currents
(Section 2.3.4).
T-S relations in the northern Okhotsk Sea
from 1970 are shown in Fig. 2.3.25. Just over
Kashevarov Bank (sta. 151) the T-S curve is a
short straight line, reflecting vertical mixing. It
contrasts strongly with those taken at the other
stations except for the station which was located
on the shelf near the mouth of Penjinskii Bay
(Sta. 121). The similarity of the Penjinskii Bay
and Kashevarov Bank T-S curves suggests that
strong vertical mixing takes place in both
regions. Temperature, salinity and dissolved
oxygen sections from the northern shelf
southward (Kitani and Shimizaki, 1971) show a
thick homogeneous bottom layer over the shelf
and at the shelf break. Though a sharp
thermocline and halocline appears below the thin
surface layer, this suggests that strong vertical
mixing occurs along the northern shelf regions of
the Okhotsk Sea.
As discussed before, thick homogeneous
layers occur in the shelf regions along the east
coast of the Kamchatka Peninsula and in the
vicinity of the Kuril Islands. Mixing of the
upper water column around the Kurils was
evident in Fig. 2.3.19. Yasuoka's (1968) map of
dissolved oxygen at 1,000 in depth near the Kuril
Islands (Fig. 2.3.26) shows high oxygen tongues
extending both into the Okhotsk Sea and into the
North Pacific from Bussol' Strait, indicating that
strong vertical mixing reaches to more than
1,000 in in the strait, as earlier indicated by
Moroshkin (1962). Talley (1991) also showed
high oxygen at 27.4 co (near 1000 m) in the
32
vicinity of Bussol' Strait (Fig. 2.3.14). Tidal
currents might cause strong vertical mixing due
to the weakness of stability in the subarctic
oceans and seas, especially on shallow shelves
and in shallow straits.
3.3.3 Formation and advection of dense shelf
water in the northwestern Okhotsk Sea
Kitani (1973a) found highly saline water
near the freezing point just above the bottom of
the northwestern shelf of the Okhotsk Sea (Fig.
2.3.27), using data from the very small number
of Japanese cruises to the shelf region. In this
important work, it was concluded that this heavy
water is generated in winter due to active ice
formation in the coastal polynya of this area
(Section 2.3.3). The densest water ever observed
was near the bottom (149 m) at 57°22'N, 142°E
in August, 1970 from the Oyashio-maru. The
water properties were -1.76°C, 33.5 0/00, with
thermosteric anomaly of 102 cl/t (27.05 ae), and
dissolved oxygen of 6.1 ml/l. However this
observation was not at the bottom, so the actual
bottom water could have been denser. Kitani
(1973a) extrapolated a bottom thermosteric
anomaly of about 100 cl/t (27.07 ae).
This heavy water appears to flow down
along the sea bottom into the deep to the west of
the Kashevarov Bank, as seen in the temperature
and salinity sections (Fig. 2.3.24). Because this
water is so cold, it appears as a fresh tongue on
isopycnals (Fig. 2.3.14). At 27.0 ae, water with
as low a salinity as found by Kitani is not seen in
the central Okhotsk Sea, presumably due to
mixing of the shelf water plume as it leaves the
shelf.
To further illustrate the water mass
modification in the Okhotsk Sea, Kitani (1973a)
classified the water types in the Okhotsk Sea.
The vertically well-mixed water is limited to the
Kashevarov Bank region discussed in the
preceding sub-section.
Water properties at the temperature
minimum (Fig. 2.3.29) show clearly the northern
waters near the freezing point (types A and A');
the location of the stations with these properties
is shown in Fig. 2.3.28. The very saline, cold
waters attain the high salinity through brine
rejection from sea ice formation. The highest
salinity freezing waters do not join smoothly with
the rest of the waters in the Okhotsk Sea. Thus
it appears that this salty, dense water may flow
down along the bottom of the shelf edge, but its
high salinity is mixed away before it flows into
the central part of the Okhotsk Sea. It retains its
temperature which is near the freezing point.
Such water mass modification can be made only
by vertical mixing with fresh surface water near
the freezing point, presumably in late winter or
in early spring. Alfultis and Martin (1987; see
Section 2.3.3) estimated the annual rate of the
dense water formation to be about 0.5 Sv.
These very cold, saline waters (A and
A') are found throughout the northwestern
Okhotsk Sea except over Kashevarov Bank where
much warmer waters are found (Fig. 2.3.28).
Most of the dense shelf bottom water appears to
be carried clockwise around the bank and to mix
horizontally with slightly warmer and fresher
water (type B). The data are too sparse to tell if
some of the dense shelf water flows southward
through the passage between the northern tip of
Sakhalin and Kashevarov Bank, although some of
this very cold water is found to the south, east of
Terpeniya Bay, suggesting some southward flow.
Just off northern Sakhalin are found mostly
waters with multiple temperature inversions (type
D); these might be influenced by the dense shelf
bottom water.
The deep temperature maximum in the
Okhotsk Sea is considerably deeper than in the
North Pacific, where it lies at about 250 in and
105 cl/t (27.02 ae). This is about the same
density as that of the dense shelf water in the
northwestern Okhotsk Sea. Temperature and
oxygen at 105 cl/t from Kitani (1973a) shows the
influence of both the Pacific and northern shelf
water (Fig. 2.3.30). Cold water with high
oxygen arises in the northwest on the shelf and
influences the western Okhotsk and up along the
western side of the Kurils. The inflowing Pacific
33
water with which it mixes is much warmer and
has much lower oxygen. A secondary source for
this isopycnal is possibly suggested by the high
oxygen just east of Soya Strait.
While the densest water observed at the
shelf bottom is at 100 cl/t (Kitani, 1973a), water
mass modification appears to occur down to the
deep temperature maximum at about 800 - 1,200
m depth and 60 cl/t (27.5 ae) (Fig. 2.3.20).
Mixing in Bussol' Strait appears to be the
mechanism for modification of the denser water
(Section 3.3.2), although Fig. 2.3.14b also
suggests that some mixing in the East Sakhalin
Current region is also occurring.
3.3.4 Seasonal variation of the surface and
dichothermal layers in the southern Okhotsk
Sea
In winter, the sea surface temperature
drops nearly to freezing. In spring, surface
heating increases the temperature, and salinity
decreases due to ice melting and river discharge.
The surface temperature reaches a maximum and
the salinity a minimum in summer. As eva-
poration dominates precipitation in autumn, and
runoff is low in this season, the salinity then
increases. This seasonal variation in surface
waters was illustrated by Kitani (1973b) (Fig.
2.3.31). The seasonal change is smaller in the
vicinity of the Kuril Islands, reflecting either the
moderate winter there or the effects of vertical
mixing.
The seasonal variation penetrates into the
upper transitional layer below the temperature
minimum. Seasonal variation of temperature in
the southern Okhotsk Sea in 1964 is shown in
Fig. 2.3.32. Winter convection reaches to about
100 m. A sharp thermocline is created in
summer. It is interesting that the dichothermal
layer (temperature below 0°C) tends to become
deeper after the overlying seasonal thermocline
develops.
At the temperature minimum, tem-
perature increases from winter to summer, while
salinity and density increase (Kitani, 1973b).
Salinity and density continue to increase into
autumn. This may be explained partly by the
seasonal salinity variation at the sea surface.
However, as discussed in the next sub-section,
the influence of the saline Soya Current Water or
the North Pacific Water appear to be important
for this increase. The salinity and density
increase may explain why the dichothermal water
descends into the upper transitional layer in
summer and autumn as shown in Fig. 2.3.32.
3.3.5 Water mass modification in the Kuril
Basin and the influence of the Soya Current
Water
The Kuril Basin contains an anticyclonic
gyre (Section 3.2.6), or a vigorous anticyclonic
eddy field. Considerable heat loss occurs in this
region, and it remains ice-free through much of
the winter. As the heat loss is not used for ice
formation, it might be used directly for con-
vective cooling of the surface water (Wakatsuchi
and Martin, 1990). The circulation exhibits large
seasonal variation; the circulations in October,
1977, and November, 1978, are considerably
stronger than in June - July, 1977, and July,
1988 (Fig. 2.3.15 from Wakatsuchi and Martin,
1991). Wakatsuchi and Martin concluded the
circulation is strengthened in summer and
weakened in winter.
Properties at about 27.0 ae (Figs. 2.3.14,
2.3.30 and 2.3.33) suggest that this isopycnal in
the Kuril Basin is influenced by the colder,
fresher, and more oxygenated water which
originates from the shelf bottom water and has
flowed southward along the Sakhalin coast. The
isopycnal depth is greatest in the center of the
gyre, exceeding 800 in (Fig. 2.3.33a). Surface
temperature and salinity in November, 1978,
(Fig. 2.3.34) show warm, saline water extending
northward into the Kuril Basin Gyre, suggesting
the influence of the Soya Current Water.
Higher temperature and salinity waters
(T > 2.5'C and S > 32.75 o/oo) were documented
in the Kuril Basin region in November, 1978,
compared with July, 1978 (Wakatsuchi and
Martin, 1991), using volumetric tempera-
34
ture/salinity analysis. The origin of such high
temperature and high salinity water can only be
the Soya Current. As discussed in the following
section, many investigators argue that some part
of the Soya Current Water is known to be carried
into the Kuril Basin Region in late summer and
autumn.
The Soya Current water is saline enough
that if it were cooled to freezing, it would be
denser than 27.0 ae (Talley, 1991; Wakatsuchi
and Martin, 1991). However, Talley (1991)
hypothesized, based on the limited winter surface
data available for the Kuril Basin, that surface
convection to this density probably does not
occur, and hence the saline Soya Current water is
mixed into the Okhotsk Sea before it can be
cooled to near freezing.
Late winter observations in the Kuril
Basin are clearly desirable, along with obser-
vations and analyses which reveal how the Soya
Current leaves the coast and its waters mix into
the Okhotsk Sea.
3.3.6 Deep water in the Okhotsk Sea
Below the deep warm layer (mesothermal
layer), temperature decreases slightly and salinity
and dissolved oxygen increase with depth in the
Kuril Basin of the Okhotsk Sea (Fig. 2.3.20).
The increases of salinity and dissolved oxygen
indicate that the water is supplied from the
Pacific Ocean.
Bussol' Strait is the deepest passage
through the central Kurils and appears to contain
both inflow and outflow (Moroshkin, 1962).
Vertical sections of temperature and salinity
through Bussol' Strait (Fig. 2.3.35) suggest that
the deep water is directly connected to the waters
in the Pacific Ocean between 1,500 and 2,000 in.
From this, Yasuoka (1967, 1968) hypothesized
the vertical flow indicated by arrows.
At 27.4 ae (Figs. 2.3.12 and 2.3.36),
which is much denser than any shelf water
production in the Okhotsk Sea, and where only
the Kruzenshtern and Bussol' Straits contribute to
water exchange between the Pacific Ocean and
the Okhotsk Sea, there is still clearly modifi-
cation of the inflowing Pacific waters in the
Okhotsk Sea. Yasuoka concluded that two types
of waters flow into the Okhotsk Sea through
these straits: warmer (2.57°C), less dissolved
oxygen (1.20 ml/1) and higher salinity (34.31
o/oo) through Kruzenshtern Strait, and colder
(2.08°C), more dissolved oxygen (2.00 ml/I) and
lower salinity (34.26) through Bussol' Strait.
However, Talley (1991) concluded that the
colder, more oxygenated water at Bussol' Strait
arises from vertical mixing of overlying waters
there, rather than from a different source in the
Pacific Ocean.
These and the maps at 27.4 ae shown in
Fig. 2.3.12 indicate that even at this density, the
waters of the Okhotsk Sea are significantly
fresher than in the Pacific, but since there is no
indication that waters as dense as this are formed
directly in the Okhotsk Sea, vertical mixing of
low salinity and high oxygen water from above
must be occurring. The isopycnal distributions
suggest that the principle site of this mixing is
Bussol' Strait.
3.4 Heat and salinity budgets for the
Okhotsk Sea
The heat budget for the Okhotsk Sea has
been dealt with by Alfultis and Martin (1987),
who suggest that the Okhotsk Sea loses heat to
the atmosphere during winter (December-March)
and gains heat during spring (April), when the
atmosphere warms faster than the ocean. The
largest term in the balance during the winter is
the sensible heat flux, averaging nearly 300
W/m2 for 1978 - 1982. During the spring, the
net incoming shortwave radiation is the largest
positive term in the balance and more than offsets
the other three terms. The measurements suggest
that wintertime polynyas in the Okhotsk Sea,
especially the one near Kashevarov Bank, may be
important in the heat balance, by allowing direct,
efficient heat transfer during winter. The year-
to-year variation in the winter-time heat flux can
be apparently sizable, however, and is a strong
35
function of the ice cover and position of the
Aleutian Low (Wakatsuchi and Martin, 1990).
As mentioned elsewhere, a salinity
budget has not been constructed for the Okhotsk
Sea. However, the importance of this budget is
apparent in that its salinity may well be the
reason why the Okhotsk Sea forms quite dense
water while the Bering Sea does not. The
Okhotsk Sea has a relatively saline input from the
Japan Sea, which receives water from the
subtropics. Thus determining the exchange with
the Japan Sea as well as the other major
components of the salinity budget (precipi-
tation/evaporation, runoff from the Amur River,
changes in salinity due to ice production and
melt) is potentially very important.
3.5 Tides in the Okhotsk Sea
It is well-known to those who work in
the Okhotsk Sea that the amplitude of the tides
can be extremely large in places. The effects of
the tides on vertical mixing over Kashevarov
Bank and in the Kuril straits was amply
documented in the previous sections. However,
there appear to be very few English or Japanese
language papers on tides in the Okhotsk Sea.
A large amount of tidal dissipation occurs
in shallow seas. Miller (1966) determined that,
for the world's oceans, maximum dissipation
occurs in the Bering Sea, the Okhotsk Sea, and
Hudson Bay, in that order. However, Munk and
MacDonald (1960) argued that tidal currents of
such great strength cannot be found in the Bering
Sea (Kagan and Polyakov, 1977).
Available Japanese tidal data were
obtained mainly before World War II (Ogura,
1923; Schureman, 1924). This tidal data was
analyzed by Suzuki and Kanari (1986) who
produced a tidal model for the Okhotsk Sea. The
stations were located along the Kuril Islands (36),
the east coast of Sakhalin (17), the Siberian coast
(13), and the west coast of Kamchatka (2). Fig.
2.3.37 (A and B) shows Suzuki and Kanari's
calculated tidal amplitudes and phases, and tidal
ellipses for the different constituents of the tide.
It is clear that the northern shelf, Kashevarov
Bank, Shelikov Bay and the Kuril Islands are
areas of large tidal amplitude. Relatively high
amplitudes are also calculated for Cape
Terpeniya, the northeastern coast of Sakhalin,
and the northern coast of Hokkaido. According
to their model, maximum energy dissipation
occurs in Shelikov Bay and the northwestern bay,
and a somewhat less important site on
Kashevarov Bank. They also modeled the
currents associated with these tides, shown in
Fig. 2.3.37 (c). Shelikov Bay, Kashevarov
Bank, Cape Terpeniya, and the Kuril Islands
stand out as places where the tidally-produced
currents are large.
Because of the very large amplitudes of
the tides in the Okhotsk Sea, particularly in° the
areas which may be of greatest interest for water
mass modification (northern shelves, Kashevarov
Bank, Kuril Islands, Soya Current), observational
programs designed for these areas must take good
account of the tides, which probably also account
for most of the important vertical mixing.
Communication and data exchange with the
Russians, who maintain a number of permanent
sea level stations, should be imperative.
It is
suggested in the recommendations of this
working group that sea level differences across
straits also be used to monitor current transports
(in particular the Soya Current). Determining
both the tidal effects and monitoring longer term
changes in sea level requires that the Russian sea
level measurements be an important input.
Leveling of the stations which span straits will be
needed.
36
4.0 THE SOYA CURRENT REGION
4.1. Introduction
Soya Current water is supplied from the
Japan Sea through the narrow (about 42 km) and
shallow (about 55 m) Soya Strait. The Tsushima
Current carries Subtropical Water (the Kuroshio
Water modified by the shelf water of the East
China Sea) northward along the Japanese coast of
the Japan Sea. Most of the Tsushima Current
Water flows out through Tsugaru Strait forming
the Tsugaru Current flowing southward along the
Japanese Pacific coast. The remaining water
continues to flow along the west coast of
Hokkaido, and part of it flows out into the
Okhotsk Sea. Though the water is considerably
modified before it reaches Soya Strait, the Soya
Current Water reflects its origins as Subtropical
Water. It is the warmest and most saline water
found in the Okhotsk Sea. However, the trans-
port and water properties of the Soya Current
exhibit large seasonal variations; the Soya
Current almost disappears in mid-winter.
The Soya Current and winter pack ice
influence navigation, fisheries, and local climate
along the Okhotsk coast of Hokkaido. The
literature on the Soya Current Region in the
warm seasons is very large, so we confine
ourselves primarily but not exclusively to papers
appearing after 1980. Thus important papers
such as those by Ogura (1927), Maenaka et al.
(1943), Iizuka et al. (1952), Tabata (1952),
Nasukawa (1961), Wakao and Kojima (1962 and
1963), Iida (1962), Maeda (1968), and Aota
(1968) are referred to only briefly when needed.
The geography of the southern Okhotsk
Sea is shown in Fig. 2.4.1. The 200 m depth
contour runs from Cape Notoro to the north, and
separates the shallow western shelf region from
the deeper eastern basin region. The shelves to
the east of Cape Notoro and of the Kuril Islands
are narrow.
4.2 Soya Current forcing
The driving force of the Soya Current
was ascribed originally to the sea level difference
between the Japan Sea and the Okhotsk Sea by
Ogura (1927). Sea level difference between
Wakkanai and Abashiri was used by Aota (1975)
to calculate the current distribution at Mombetsu
and Abashiri assuming a homogeneous sea with a
bottom linearly deepening offshore and that the
current vanishes far offshore and at the bottom
(Fig. 2.4.2; see also Fig. 2.2.13). The sea level
at Abashiri tends to have a secondary maximum,
reflecting the zonal gradient of atmospheric
pressure in winter and the change in the water
density in the surface layer as described in
Section 2.3.1. As an example, calculated sea-
sonal variations of the along shore components of
the surface velocity at Mombetsu in 1973 are
given in Fig. 2.4.3 for various distances from
shore. Aota (1975) found fairly good agreement
between the calculated and velocities observed
with current meters and drifters tracked by ice
radar. The gross nature of the observed large
seasonal variation of the Soya Current discussed
in the following sub-sections appears to be
explained basically by this mechanism.
4.3 Oceanic conditions in the vicinity of
Soya Strait
The Soya Current Water is generally
vertically homogeneous. Its temperature changes
considerably with season but its salinity does not
change and remains higher than 33.6 0/00. The
Soya Current Water characteristics are probably
deter-mined by those of the Tsushima Current
Water to the west of Soya Strait, but few
observations have been made of the
oceanographic structures in the vicinity of Soya
Strait.
Temperature and salinity through Soya
Strait (Fig. 2.4.4), in the Japan and Okhotsk
Seas, in April, 1971 are shown in Fig. 2.4.5 (a-
e) (Aota, 1971). As seen in Fig. 2.2.20, pack ice
37
usually is gone by early April at Esashi and
Monbetsu, and by the end of April at Abashiri.
Thus this 1971 survey is representative of
conditions just after pack ice disappearance off
the western Hokkaido coast. The surface 100 m
is homogeneous in the Japan Sea near Soya
Strait, with temperature of 4 - 5°C and chlorinity
of 18.82 - 18.83 0/00, except on the shelf near
Sta. 30 where fresh water appears to flow out
from the Okhotsk Sea through the northern part
of Soya Strait. In the vicinity of Soya Strait
(Fig. 2.4.5d), the dichothermal layer is observed
offshore of Sta. 39, with a core temperature
below -1.5°C. Judging from the salinity values,
warm and saline water from the Japan Sea lies
inshore of Sta. 36. The isotherms and isohalines
are almost vertical in Soya Strait where both
oceanic and tidal velocities are high and strong
vertical mixing appears to occur (Section 2.4.5).
In the section off Esashi, the highest temperature
is observed near the bottom centered at Sta. 47.
The front between the Soya Current Water and
the cold surface water or the dichothermal layer
deepen offshore, and the cold water tends to
over-ride the warm water, indicating that the
stratification in this area is due mainly to salinity
structure. The influence of intruding Soya
Current Water is seen in the surface layer to the
west of Mombetsu (Fig. 2.4.6), reflecting the
disappearance of the pack ice there by this
observation time. The pack ice was still present
off Abashiri at this time.
Observations crossing the entire Soya
Strait are very few due to territorial problems.
One example from August 19, 1933 is given in
Fig. 2.4.7. Despite the sparse data, it can be
seen that the Soya Current Water extends roughly
15 miles out from Cape Soya. In summer, consi-
derable temperature stratification is established.
The thermocline depth is shallower than the sill
depth (55 m) of Soya Strait. The stratification
seen in the inflowing Soya Current Water thus
probably results from that of the surface layer in
the Japan Sea.
In winter the densest water in Soya Strait
can reach 27.0 ae (Fig. 2.4.8). It therefore
appears that water dense enough to influence the
transitional layer in the Okhotsk Sea and the
North Pacific Intermediate Water can be
generated due to winter cooling in the area where
the saline subtropical water flows in. However,
Talley (1991) showed that water of this high
density probably does not survive without mixing
to much lower density before it is advected out of
the Soya Current and into the Okhotsk Sea
proper. Nevertheless, the Soya Current source
of saline water is apparently critical for the
production of the densest waters in the Okhotsk
Sea, which would probably be less dense were
there no Soya Current source (Talley, 1991).
Direct current measurements in Soya
Strait were made in 1933 (Nakamura et al.,
1984) on the Japanese Navy's ship Ohdomari and
showed southwestward velocities of order one
knot at almost all locations in this summer
period, when the Soya Current is expected to be
strongest (Fig. 2.4.9). Direct current measure-
ments off Cape Soya in June and August 1973
(Aota et al., 1988) showed mean current speeds
of 89 - 97 cm/s in the surface layer and 45 - 63
cm/s in the deep layer. In the period from
August 1987 to July 1988, they conducted 1 - 2
day current observations six times at 20 in at the
station 5 miles off Cape Soya. The diurnal
component predominates in Soya Strait and its
magnitude is usually larger than that of the mean
current. The horizontal distribution of surface
currents has been measured with a GEK in
August, 1958 (Fig. 2.4.10). Although tides have
not been removed, the velocity appears to be
largest near Soya Strait: the observed speed of
3.2 knots is the largest found in the literature.
By assuming that inflow occurs across the whole
section (2.1 km2), and that the mean velocity is
about 60 cm/s, Aota (1975) estimated a volume
transport through Soya Strait in summer of about
1.3 x 106 m3/s. More detailed information on
the inflowing current is required.
4.4 Water masses in the Soya Current
region
The most notable water masses in the
Soya Current Region in summer are the Soya
(Warm) Current Water and the dichothermal
38
water found just off the Soya Current (Figs.
2.4.5d, 2.4.5e, and 2.4.8). Aota (1970) classi-
fied the water types from the coast to 40 miles
offshore off Esashi and off Mombetsu in the
period from April 1968 to December 1969 as:
the Soya Current Water, the Dichothermal
Water, and the Surface Low Salinity Water. The
temperatures of the Soya Current Water and the
Surface Low Salinity Water are very variable and
exhibit large seasonal variation. Thus, identi-
fication of the water mass is usually made by its
salinity.
Other investigators have used other
terminology. For example, lida (1964) classified
the water types as the Soya Warm Water, the
Intermediate Water, the Proper Water, the
Offshore Warm Water, and the Low Chlorinity
Water. The Intermediate Water corresponds to
Aota's (1970) Dichothermal Water. In this water
is usually observed a very cold water core. This
indicates that the dichothermal water found in
this region is not the southern edge of the widely
distributed dichothermal layer in the Okhotsk
Sea, but that the water has been carried
southward along off the east coast of Sakhalin
(by the East Sakhalin Current). The boundary
between the Dichothermal Water and the
Offshore Warm Water has not been investigated
in detail. The Proper Water defined by Iida
corresponds to the transitional water below the
dichothermal layer.
In an investigation of the region off the
eastern Okhotsk coast of Hokkaido where the
water depth is much greater, Takizawa (1982)
defined the water masses a little differently (Fig.
2.4.11). He divided the Soya Current Water into
two water masses by their temperature ranges:
the Soya Warm Water and the Forerunner of the
Soya Warm Water. The Forerunner Water is
cold Soya Current Water which flows into the
Okhotsk Sea in spring. He also divided the
Surface Low Salinity Water into the Okhotsk
Surface Water which is generated locally by ice
melting and precipitation and the East Sakhalin
Current Water which is carried into this region
by the southward current off the east Sakhalin
coast. The water masses overlap in T-S, and
sometimes the separation of these two
waters is
difficult. However, it is important to remember
that the Surface Low Salinity Water has several
origins.
In the following, we shall use the
simplest terms: the Soya Current Water, the
Dichothermal Water, the Transitional Water, and
the Surface Low Salinity Water.
4.5 The Soya Current and its seasonal
variations off the western Okhotsk coast of
Hokkaido in the warm season
The oceanic conditions off Mombetsu on
the northern coast of Hokkaido have been
investigated by the Sea Ice Research Laboratory,
the Institute of Low Temperature Science,
Hokkaido University. This area is representative
of the Soya Current Region off the western
Okhotsk coast of Hokkaido. Many repeated sec-
tions off Monbetsu in 1968 - 1970 show the
seasonal progression in the Soya Current (Aota,
1975).
In late spring, just after the pack-ice
disappears, Soya Current Water intrudes into the
Okhotsk Sea along the bottom (Fig. 2.4.12). By
May - June, the strength of the Soya Current
increases, and the coastal area is occupied with
the Soya Current Water, though, for some sec-
tions such as in May 1970, the surface water is
influenced by river discharge and has relatively
low chlorinity and low temperature. There is a
sharp front between the Soya Current Water and
the Dichothermal Water. However, when the
bottom of the Dichothermal Layer is shallow and
the Transitional Layer is observed in the section
(e.g., March 1969, May 1969, and June 1970),
there is no conspicuous front between the Soya
Current Water and the Transitional Water. The
depth of the front between the Soya Current
Water and the Dichothermal Water increases
offshore, and the Soya Current Water tends to
intrude below the offshore Dichothermal Layer
as the former is saltier and denser. Sometimes
(early May 1968, late May 1968, and June 1970)
isolated cold water appears on the shoreward side
of the Dichothermal Layer. As discussed in
39
Section 4.8.3, frontal eddies are often generated
in spring and these isolated waters might
represent a large meander or the breaking of the
front.
The Soya Current is most developed in
August - September, and the sea surface tem-
perature near the shore sometimes increases up to
about 20°C. The depth of isotherms in the coas-
tal region decreases offshore, reflecting the
thermal stratification in the warm Soya Current
Water in summer. However, it should be noted
that the depth of isohalines generally increases
offshore. This indicates that the contribution of
salinity to the stratification is also important in
the deeper layers even in summer. The surface
cold water belt off the Soya Current Water is
recognized in some sections (July 1970 and
August 1969), but it is not very conspicuous.
In October - December, the highest tem-
perature and salinity portion of the Soya Current
Water usually begins to submerge. The surface
water is replaced by the low salinity water in
November. This replacement does not neces-
sarily proceed from northwest to southeast along
the coast, and sometimes the replacement occurs
at Monbetsu earlier than at Esashi. It should be
noted that the high salinity Soya Current Water
still exists near the bottom in December, though
the temperature at its center is considerably
colder and the position of its center moves
offshore along the bottom.
Though the oceanic structure off
Monbetsu exhibits considerable interannual vari-
ation (Aota, 1975), seasonal variation is also
clear. (The seasonal variation off Esashi is very
similar to that off Monbetsu and is not shown
here). Aota (1971) showed the seasonal vari-
ations of temperature and chlorinity off Monbetsu
for three years (Fig. 2.4.13). At the station
closest to the coast (5 miles), the surface
temperature is almost at freezing by the end of
March due to the effect of melting ice. The
influence of the fresh water discharge from land
is seen in the fresher surface layer to early June.
The Soya Current Water can be recognized in the
lower layers from the middle of March. The
strength of the Soya Current increases, and the
maximum temperature and maximum salinity is
observed at the end of August. In October, the
Surface Low Salinity Water appears, and the
Soya Current Water disappears from the surface.
The strength of the Soya Current Water recovers
at the end of November, but it disappears over
the whole depth range in December.
The vertical structure at the 15 mile
station in March suggests that winter convection
reaches down to about 50 m depth, and the
resulting dichothermal layer remains until June
though its temperature increases gradually.
Below the dichothermal layer, the Soya Current
Water exists from March to November. The
Soya Current Water dominates
in August -
September and extends to the surface.
From
October, the Soya Current Water submerges and
its thickness rapidly decreases. In December,
relatively high salinity water can be seen only
near the bottom.
At the 25 mile station, the Soya Current
Water exists only in the deeper layer if we define
it as the water of chlorinity higher than 18.4
o/oo. The thickness of the Soya Current Water
is largest in summer, and the iso-chlorinity line
of 18.2 o/oo outcrops. However the maximum
temperature and salinity appear on the bottom in
June and July, respectively.
This high tempera-
ture and high salinity water might be carried
offshore along the bottom.
Defining the Soya Current Water as
having chlorinity higher than 18.6 o/oo, Aota
(1971) investigated the seasonal variation of the
Soya Current Water off Monbetsu and off Esashi
(Fig. 2.4.14). The area has a maximum value of
about 4.5 km2 in August. It is interesting that
this Soya Current area is also observed in
November every year, and this reappearance is
much more conspicuous off Esashi than off
Monbetsu. The reason for this reappearance has
not been clarified. The mean current speed of
the Soya Current is about 30 cm/s off Monbetsu.
If we assume a cross-sectional area of 4.5 km2,
the volume transport of the Soya Current off
Monbetsu is 1.3 x 106 m3/s. This value agrees
40
with the inflow transport through Soya Strait in
the previous sub-section. The seasonal variation
of transport can be calculated by combining the
variation of the cross-sectional area in Fig.
2.4.14. and the current velocity distribution
calculated from sea level differences between
Wakkanai, Monbetsu and Abashiri (Section
2.4.2). The results are shown in Fig. 2.4.15.
4.6 Oceanic conditions off the northwestern
Okhotsk coast of Hokkaido in the pack-ice
season
In order to measure currents off
Monbetsu when the area is covered with pack-
ice, Aota and Kawamura (1978, 1979) set
moored current meters in the winters of 1976 -
1977, 1977 - 1978, and 1978 - 1979 (Fig. 2.4.
16). Winter 1976 - 1977 observations are shown
in Fig. 2.4.17. Judging from measured tem-
perature and salinity, Low Salinity Surface Water
occupied the surface 25 m at both the 4 and 8
mile stations from early December; temperature
and salinity began to increase from late February.
The Soya Current Water returned on about
March 15. The current velocity parallel to the
coast decreased gradually from December to
February, with some short period fluctuations
super-imposed. It should be noted that, even
after the Soya Current Water disappeared in
winter, strong southwestward currents were
observed.
More extensive observations were carried
out in winter 1977 - 1978 (Aota and Kawamura,
1978). Just after the current meters were set,
sections of temperature and salinity were
occupied off Monbetsu and in Soya Strait. Soya
Current Water appears to flow through Soya
Strait in late December and can be recognized in
the bottom layer also off Monbetsu. The upper
25 in consisted of Low Salinity Surface Water at
all observation points. Current meter obser-
vations during that period showed that
southwestward flow dominated even when the
surface water was the Low Salinity Surface
Water. The current variability was similar to
that in winter 1976 - 1977, although sporadic
salinity increases in mid-winter were seen only in
1977 - 1978.
Noisy fluctuations of temperature and
salinity were observed even in mid-winter at 60
m at the 8 mile station. The salinity increases
clearly show the influence of the Soya Current
Water, and the current component parallel to the
coast tends to increase along with salinity. In
winter 1978 - 1979, current meter observations
off Monbetsu and off Ohmu show similar
variation to winter 1977 - 1978. Velocity
increases were similarly often associated with
salinity increases. However, it should be noted
that the velocity increases are not always
accompanied by salinity increases, indicating that
the southeastward flow of the Low Salinity
Surface Water can be strengthened indepen-
dently. It is also noted that the correlation of the
temperature and salinity variations between the
Monbetsu and Ohmu sections is poor. This
would indicate that although the Soya Current
exists in winter, the flow is intermittent.
However, current observations have been located
only at the edge of the Soya Water (Fig. 2.4.18).
If the observation points were at the center of the
Soya Current Water domain, namely near the
bottom farther offshore, a less intermittent Soya
Current might be observed.
The above figures suggest that cold and
relatively fresh waters flow southeastward off
Hokkaido in winter, and this flow is independent
of the bottom-intensified Soya Current. Pack-ice
drifts based on sea ice radar indicate that
southeastward flow predominates at the surface in
winter. (Useful targets in radar images are small
polynyas and/or ice ridges, permitting . easy
observation of the pack ice drift.) The averaged
velocity component parallel to the coast for
February 1970, (Tabata, 1971), was 0.7 cm/s on
February 4, 5.8 cm/s on February 5, 8.1 cm/s on
February 6, 8.1 cm/s on February 19 and 10.5
cm/s on February 20. In early February 1977,
the flow was stronger than in February 1970, and
15.8 ± 2.1 cm/s if we translate Takizawa's
(1982) results into along shore velocity compo-
nents. The flow directions estimated above were
all southeastward. The movements of pack ice
41
should be affected by winds also, but the winds
were not favorable for southeastward ice
movement and moreover were very variable in
these observation times. Thus the ice drift
speeds appear to reflect the oceanic current
speeds.
Ocean currents in the pack-ice season
have not been clarified fully. However, it can be
concluded that southeastward flow occurs just off
the western portion of Hokkaido's Okhotsk coast,
and both the Soya Current Water and the Low
Salinity Surface Water are carried by this
current. The wind-driven circulation in the
Okhotsk Sea due to the strong winter monsoon
has not been investigated. The Soya Current
appears to be driven by the sea level difference
between the Japan Sea and the Okhotsk Sea in
summer. As the Soya Current in winter is
baroclinic, it may be generated by mechanisms
other than those of summer.
4.7 The Soya Current off the eastern
Okhotsk coast of Hokkaido
A schematic of the Soya Current
circulation from Bobkov (1993) (Fig. 2.4.19)
shows how it splits at Cape Shiretoko, continues
up to the center of Etorohu Island, and passes
through the first two Kuril Straits (Nemuro and
Kunashiri). Observations in this region however
are more limited in line length and station
spacing than off the western part of the coast.
Observations from different years (May 1955,
June 1978, August - September 1973, and Octo-
ber 1973) illustrate the structure of the Soya
Current in this region. The saline Soya Current
Water can be seen west of Cape Notoro but is
difficult to see in Abashiri Bay (Fig. 2.4.20).
Off Monbetsu (Fig. 2.4.20b), the Soya Current
Water appears at stas. 16 - 18; the coastal sur-
face layer has very low salinity due to river
discharge. The temperature of the Soya Current
Water is 2 - 5°C except near the surface.
Takizawa (1982) called Soya Current Water of
such low temperature the Forerunner of the Soya
Current Water (Fig. 2.4.11).
Off Cape Notoro, the surface layer
consists of Low Salinity Water (Fig. 2.4.20c).
The low temperature Soya Current Water is
submerged, being found along the sloping bottom
at depths of 100 to 300 m. The same situation
appears off Cape Shiretoko (Fig. 2.4.20d), but
the depth of the Soya Current Water is 200 - 400
m. The shelf along the coast to the east of Cape
Notoro is narrow, and the depth of Abashiri Bay
is large enough for appearance of the Transitional
Layer. The temperature and salinity contrasts
between the low temperature Soya Current Water
and the Transitional Layer Water are very weak.
However, Takizawa (1982) pointed out that the
Soya Current Water can be identified by its high
dissolved oxygen content (Fig. 2.4.20d).
In observations from June 1978, the Soya
Current Water passed Cape Notoro and intruded
into Abashiri Bay along the coast (Miyake et al.,
1989). The Soya Current Water at 50 m flowed
continuously along the coast of Abashiri Bay
from Cape Notoro to Cape Shiretoko. Off Cape
Notoro the Soya Current Water began to
submerge, and the high salinity core was found at
about 200 m depth. The high salinity core
appears to have left the bottom, shoaling
offshore. The only source of high salinity in this
region is the Soya Current Water. The high
salinity region found along the northern coast of
the Shiretoko Peninsula mentioned above can be
understood as shoaling and surfacing of the Soya
Current Water as it flows along the west coast of
the Shiretoko Peninsula.
In summer and early autumn, Takizawa
(1982)'s data from 1973 illustrate how high the
temperature of the Soya Current Water is,
reaching 20°C. The accompanying surface sali-
nity distribution appears to indicate that the Soya
Current was flowing along the whole Okhotsk
coast of Hokkaido from Soya Strait to Cape
Shiretoko. However, the core of highest salinity
was submerged although it was shallower than in
data from May and June. In mid-autumn of
1973, the Soya Current Water surfaced off Cape
Shiretoko, although it is normally submerged by
October. The limited data precludes under-
standing the seasonal variations of the high
42
salinity core of the Soya Current Water in
Abashiri Bay. However, it might be explained
by a time lag due to water mass advection: over
a few months the thick Soya Current Water found
off the western coast in summer can be carried to
the tip of Cape Shiretoko. This time lag appears
to coincide with Wakatsuchi and Martin's (1991)
argument that the Soya Current Water intrudes
into the Kuril Basin Region in November or so
(Section 2.3.5).
The behavior of the Soya Current Water
after passing the tip of Cape Shiretoko has not
been clarified, though many investigators have
discussed this subject (e.g., Nasukawa 1960, lida
1962, Fujii and Sato 1977, Takizawa and Aota
1978, Hori et at. 1981). Takizawa (1982) sum-
marizes their results in a schematic diagram of
the Soya Current (Fig. 2.4.21). Bobkov's (1991)
water mass analysis showed that the Soya
Current Water can be traced at least to Etorofu
Island and may pass partially through Kunashiri
Strait; it does reach the northern tip of Etorofu,
being transformed through vertical mixing at
Chirip peninsula on the north side of Etorofu.
Variability is high off the eastern
Okhotsk coast of Hokkaido (Fig. 2.4.22). The
5°C isotherm may be considered to mark the
offshore boundary of the Soya Current Water
although a relatively narrow zone of mixed water
exists between the Soya Current Water and the
Dichothermal Water. The lack of variability in
the position of the 5°C isotherm west of Cape
Notoro reflects the fact that the Soya Current
there reaches is bottom-controlled. The isotherm
is quite variable east of Cape Notoro after the
Soya Current leaves the wide, shallow shelf
region.
The submergence of the Soya Current
Water has not been fully documented and there
are complicated seasonal and interannual vari-
ations in the Abashiri Bay region where the Soya
Current leaves the coast. The fate of the saline
Soya Current Water in the Okhotsk Sea is one of
the keys to understanding water mass modifi-
cation in the Okhotsk Sea. Further investigations
in the Abashiri Bay region are recommended.
4.8 The structure and variation of the front
marking the offshore-side of the Soya Current
4.8.1 Cold water belt
A cold water belt is usually observed at
the surface just offshore of the Soya Current.
Iida (1962) modeled it using geostrophic balance
modified by frictional force. Maeda (1968)
argued that the cold belt is generated by winds
through a mechanism similar to coastal upwel-
ling. Miyake et at. (1989) proposed a more
delicate formation mechanism including cab-
beling. They suggest that relatively dense water
found in a domed structure in sigma-t in Abashiri
Bay can be produced by cabbeling during
horizontal mixing between the Soya Current
Water and the Dichothermal Water. They sug-
gest that this denser water downwells and the
resulting divergence near the surface pulls
relatively cold water up in the dome. However,
it is worth pointing out that the shoreward
density structure is determined by temperature,
while the offshore structure is determined rather
by salinity. Thus it seems difficult to connect
this dome with vertical advection. It should be
noted that the temperature and salinity contri-
butions to density are almost the same order in
this region.
The narrowness of the cold water belt
means that it can be missed in standard station
observations (Aota et al., 1991). A very narrow
cold water belt was observed in a NOAA IR
image from September 9, 1990 (Fig. 2.4.23).
However, it was difficult to see any signature of
the cold water belt in vertical sections made at
the same time, suggesting that much closer
station spacing than is common is required to
resolve it.
4.8.2 Structure of the Soya Current Front
The temperature and salinity gradients
across the offshore margin of the Soya Current
Water are large, and the front can be clearly seen
in the vertical sections described in previous sub-
sections. However, the density gradient is usu-
ally very weak, and mixed waters are usually
43
observed between the Soya Current Water and
the Dichothermal Water.
Detailed vertical sections of temperature
and salinity along a line extending northeast off
Monbetsu and along the line which runs parallel
and 20 miles southeast to it are shown in Figs.
2.4.24 and 2.4.25. In these sections, the Soya
Current Water is homogeneous both horizontally
and vertically from near the shore to about 15
miles offshore. However, its high salinity core
(> 34.0 o/oo) is seen a little offshore, below 60 -
70 in depth. Two temperature fronts appear:
one at about 20 - 23 miles and the second at 27
miles offshore in Fig. 2.4.24 and at about 18
miles and at 22 - 24 miles offshore in Fig.
2.4.25. The temperature front which lies farther
offshore corresponds to the salinity front on both
lines. The water between the two temperature
fronts might be considered a mixed water of the
Soya Current Water and the Dichothermal Water
in the middle layers, but it is not in the layers
deeper than 60 - 70 in because a high salinity
core is found between the two temperature fronts.
In addition, patches of low temperature and
salinity are found between the two temperature
fronts: at 100 m depth at 20.5 miles offshore, at
70 in at 23 miles offshore in Fig. 2.4.24 and at
75 in depth at 17.5 miles offshore in Fig. 2.4.25.
Judging from their salinities, the water inside
these patches originates in the offshore dicho-
thermal layer.
The Soya Current Water and Dicho-
thermal Layer Water off Mombetsu have the
same density from May to December. This
means that exchange can occur easily between the
two waters in these months.
It should be noted that the gross features
of the temperature and salinity sections in Figs.
2.4.24 and 2.4.25 are very similar to each other,
but their fine frontal structures are quite
different. The fine structure of the front was
observed over a 40-hour period in July 1988
(Aota et al., 1991) and was found to evolve
significantly.
The physical meaning of these compli-
cated structures in the Soya Current Front has
not been clarified. Apparently the spatial and
temporal scales of the fine structure are very
small: orders of a few tens of kilometers and of
a few days.
Large cold patches are sometimes seen in
the near-surface layer in the Soya Current Water
domain (Fig. 2.4.26 and also in Aota, 1982 and
Aota et al., 1991). These cold water patches
seem to be cut off from the offshore Dicho-
thermal Layer Water by instability of the Soya
Current Front. The frontal waves and their
breaking are discussed in the next sub-section.
4.8.3 Frontal waves and breaking
The wave-like patterns of the front and
the eddies are easily observable in spring when
the pack-ice is just leaving the Soya Current
Region, because the pack-ice is a good tracer of
the ocean current beneath. For example, a cyclo-
nic ice-ocean eddy was observed off the coast of
Esashi-Ohmu (Fig. 2.4.27). The eddy was about
20 km in diameter and was marked by ice belts
composed of homogeneous sized ice floes with a
diameter of about 10 in. The pack-ice condition
at the time that the photograph is taken was
favorable because the winds were weak and the
ice concentration was low. By this time, the
Soya Current had revived and generated an open
water area along the Hokkaido coast. Thus, the
ice edge represented roughly the offshore
boundary of the Soya Current Water.
Ohshima (1988) reported remarkable
backward-breaking wave-like patterns in the Soya
Current Front in spring and summer, using
satellite IR images. The evolution of backward-
breaking waves, using the sea ice radar network
for April 14-16, 1984, is shown in Fig. 2.4.28.
Three backward breaking waves can be seen.
The circular eddy shown in Fig. 2.4.27 would
have been generated by similar breaking.
The isolated cold, fresh patch near the
coast shown in Fig. 2.4.26 was observed just
after the ice eddy observation of Fig. 2.4.27.
44
Wakatsuchi and Ohshima (1990) concluded that
this patch was generated by the breaking of the
frontal wave. Similar cold patches have been
seen in May and July when there is no sea ice to
mark the surface eddy (Aota et al., 1982; Aota,
1991). This suggests that breaking may occur
also in the warm season.
The wavelengths of the frontal waves
observed from 1969 to 1988 were about 50 km
and were almost constant along the whole
Okhotsk coast of Hokkaido (Fig. 2.4.29). The
wavelength is unaffected by pack-ice. Ohshima
(1988) investigated differences of the frontal
waves between spring and summer: the wave-
length in spring is about 45 km, a little shorter
than the 50 km wavelength in summer. The
wave period and propagation speed in spring is 2
- 3 days and 20 cm/s, and in summer is 1 day
and 50 - 60 cm/s. This is related to the current
speed of the Soya Current which acts as a carrier
of the waves.
Ohshima (1987) suggested the possibility
of barotropic instability as a formation mecha-
nism of the frontal waves. Ohshima (1988) and
Ohshima and Wakatsuchi (1990) used a simple
barotropic model with a simple bottom configu-
ration for the western part of the Soya Current
Region. The driving force of the Soya Current
was assumed to be the sea level difference
between the Japan and Okhotsk Seas through
Soya Strait. As the flow passes through the
strait, a strong positive vorticity is produced by
the frictional torques in the strait and by vortex
stretching in the eastern mouth of the strait. This
strong vorticity induces barotropic instability,
forming a frontal wave. The role of these frontal
waves or of the eddies on the water mixing and
water mass modification in the frontal region has
not been investigated.
45
5.0 THE KURIL AND MIXED WATER REGIONS
5.1 Introduction
The circulation of the northern North
Pacific consists of a cyclonic gyre which encom-
passes the Gulf of Alaska and the northwestern
Pacific and which enters the Bering and Okhotsk
Seas (Figs. 2.3.6 and 2.5.1). There are two
centers of high upwelling induced by the wind
stress curl, one centered in the Gulf of Alaska
and the other an elongated region parallel to the
Kuril Islands. In a number of papers separation
between the western Subarctic gyre and the Gulf
of Alaska gyre near the dateline is indicated; this
appears to be time-dependent, but there is still
much work to be done in observing and
quantifying this.
The western boundary current of the
North Pacific's subpolar gyre is complicated by
the presence of the Kuril Islands. The subpolar
circulation driven by the cyclonic wind stress
curl would extend unimpeded into the Bering and
Okhotsk Seas but for the presence of the islands.
The marginal seas have major effects on the
waters which circulate through them because of
the narrow straits which enhance mixing and
because residence times might be longer than if
there were no islands. These two particular mar-
ginal seas also have major effects because of their
large shelf areas, sea ice formation, and river
discharge.
In the Kuril Island region, the western
boundary current partially enters the Okhotsk Sea
where its waters are transformed and joined by
Soya Current waters from the Japan Sea. The
water which exits from the Okhotsk Sea farther
south is considerably different from the water at
the northern end of the Kuril Islands. Therefore
different names are given to the southwestward-
flowing western boundary current in the north
(East Kamchatka Current) and in the south
(Oyashio). The source of waters in the East
Kamchatka Current is the Bering Sea and
northern subpolar gyre, and the source of waters
in the Oyashio is the Okhotsk Sea, East
Kamchatka Current and central subpolar gyre. In
Hirano's (1957) general classification of waters
in the western subarctic gyre (Fig. 2.5.2), these
regions of differing water properties are shown
clearly; the East Kamchatka Current is composed
of what he calls Central water, whereas the
Oyashio water is markedly different because of
the Okhotsk Sea influence.
There is some difference of opinion on
where to locate the name change from East
Kamchatka Current to Oyashio. Reid (1973)
defines it to be at 49°N, the location of
Kruzenshtern Strait, which is also the definition
of Dodimead et al. (1962) who showed the East
Kamchatka Current flowing into the Okhotsk Sea
just south of the Kamchatka Peninsula. Likewise
Kawai (1972) defined the Oyashio as the south-
ward flow along the Kuril Islands which does not
enter the Okhotsk Sea. Favorite et al. (1976)
defined as the Kamchatka Current (East/Deep and
Southwest) all southwestward flow along the
Kurils down to Bussol' Strait, which is the main
exit for waters flowing out of the Okhotsk Sea.
Ohtani's (1991) recent opinion is that the name
change should occur at Bussol' Strait because of
a shift in water mass properties there. We adopt
this convention.
A major feature of the Kuril Island and
Hokkaido region is the large eddies which appear
to originate as Kuroshio warm core rings and
which migrate slowly northeastward. They
appear to follow the deep trench, mixing with
surrounding waters of the Oyashio and East
Kamchatka Current, which cause them to become
progressively colder and fresher.
The Oyashio flows southward into the
Mixed Water Region (or Perturbed Area) south
of Hokkaido, and the water mass front associated
with it usually meanders, forming two "intru-
sions" (Kawai, 1972), or "branches" as they were
referred to in earlier literature. We follow
Kawai's nomenclature as it is apparent that the
Oyashio does not break into two separate
46
southward flows, as implied by the word branch.
Kawai's (1972) oft-cited schematic of conditions
in the Mixed Water Region is shown in Fig.
2.5.3. Intrusions of Oyashio water are often
found very far south in the Mixed Water Region,
sometimes reaching to the Kuroshio. Indices of
the southernmost extent of Oyashio Water are
used in descriptions of the climate of the region.
Within the Mixed Water Region, Oyashio Water
mixes with water from the Kuroshio and Japan
Sea. In the process the intermediate salinity
minimum of the subtropical North Pacific (North
Pacific Intermediate Water) is created.
The Oyashio Front forms the northern
boundary of the Mixed Water Region, extending
eastward from just south of Hokkaido. Most of
the Oyashio water remains in the subarctic gyre,
north of this front, which appears to continue
eastward as the Subarctic Front. It is important
to note that the Oyashio and Kuroshio do not
separate from the western boundary at the same
location and that their identifiable fronts extend
eastward from the western boundary at very
different latitudes.
Along the coast of Hokkaido and in the
Mixed Water Region, "Oyashio" has several
meanings. It can refer to the boundary current
flowing southwestward into the region or the
narrow coastal current carrying quite fresh water
along the coast of Hokkaido from the southern
Okhotsk Sea. It can be the water mass front
which extends eastward from Hokkaido which
separates waters of subpolar and mixed water
characteristics. It can refer to any waters which
originate in the Oyashio, commonly identified as
any station with water colder than 5°C at 100 m.
We therefore distinguish carefully between the
Oyashio, the coastal Oyashio, the Oyashio Front,
Oyashio Water, and Coastal Oyashio Water.
5.2 The East Kamchatka Current
The southward-flowing East Kamchatka
Current originates in flow out of the Bering Sea
through Kamchatka Strait, which at more than
4,000 m deep is the deepest passage through the
Aleutian Islands and is in fact deeper than the
Bering Sea itself. Useful discussions of the East
Kamchatka Current in the upper ocean by
Dodimead et al. (1962), Reid (1965, 1972), and
Favorite et al. (1976) are more complete than can
be included here.
Water below 3,500 - 4,000 m depth
cannot cycle through the Bering Sea. The
direction of flow deeper than this is probably in
the same direction as the surface flow, in a very
narrow boundary current (Warren and Owens,
1988; Talley and Joyce, 1991). Slightly offshore
and extending to the bottom of the Trench, flow
might be northward based on its characteristics
, (Talley and Joyce, 1991). The anticyclonic Kuril
eddies migrate slowly northeastward, following
the trench (Lobanov and Bulatov, 1993).
5.2.1 Water characteristics north of
Kruzenshtern Strait
The East Kamchatka Current, flowing
southward along the Kamchatka Peninsula, is the
source of Pacific water for the Okhotsk Sea (Part
2, Section 2). Ohtani (1989) shows the full
progression of water properties from the Bering
Sea down the East Kamchatka Current, into the
Okhotsk Sea and in the Oyashio (Fig. 2.5.4) and
schematic vertical profiles for properties in the
western subarctic domain (Fig. 2.5.5).
Waters in the western subarctic gyre and
East Kamchatka Current north of Kruzenshtern
Strait, just south of the tip of the Kamchatka
Peninsula, are characterized by a near-surface
dichothermal layer in summer (temperature mini-
mum) and a slightly deeper mesothermal layer
(temperature maximum). Salinity is lowest at the
sea surface and increases monotonically with
depth. There is a pronounced halocline and
thermocline at the base of the temperature
minimum. Oxygen content is close to full satura-
tion in the surface layer, decreases downward to
a minimum at about 800 m, and then increases to
the bottom.
Oxygen saturation just below the
surface is often much greater than 100% in
summer, but may be less than 100% in winter
due to rapid turnover (Reid, 1972).
47
Maps of surface temperature, salinity and
density in winter (January-April, 1966) show that
the coastal waters in the East Kamchatka Current
are relatively fresh, very cold, and less dense
than the offshore waters (Fig. 2.5.6 from Reid,
1972). The highest surface salinities and densi-
ties of the subpolar gyre lie in the center of the
cyclonic circulation, which is elongated parallel
to the Kuril Islands.
In winter the temperature minimum often
occurs at the surface; in the 1966 winter data,
this region is roughly the same as that occupied
by geopotential anomalies north and west of the
offshore contour of 1.05 (Fig. 2.5.6a). Thus the
near-surface vertical temperature minimum
reflects the winter surface temperature; the mini-
mum occurs just above the base of the winter
mixed layer. Winter and summer sections off
Kamchatka from Reid (1973) (Fig. 2.5.7) show
this seasonal contrast.
The thermocline and halocline are
essentially coincident in this "western subarctic
domain", using Dodimead et al.'s (1962) termi-
nology, or "central water" using Hirano's (1957)
term. Just below the thermocline is found the
temperature maximum. Depth, temperature, and
thermosteric anomaly at the temperature maxi-
mum outside the Okhotsk Sea are discussed
thoroughly by Reid. The coldest, deepest tem-
perature maximum occurs in the Okhotsk Sea.
The continuity of the East Kamchatka Current
waters from inside the Bering Sea to the southern
tip of Kamchatka are apparent. Equally apparent
is the influence of the Okhotsk Sea on properties
farther south along the Kuril Islands.
Salinity, potential temperature and
oxygen at a thermosteric anomaly of 100 cl/ton
(co of 27.07), discussed also by Reid (1973),
likewise show the Bering Sea origin of the East
Kamchatka Current water and the gradients
encountered along the Kuril Islands south of
Kruzenshtern Strait.
The oxygen distribution in the western
subarctic gyre is of interest: in winter, the sur-
face layer is not fully saturated (Reid, 1972).
However, summertime measurements
often show
extremely supersaturated water associated with
the temperature minimum (Talley, Joyce and
deSzoeke, 1991), probably due to the summer
warming (Moroshkin, 1962). Reid (1982)
showed that oxygen saturation is a useful indica-
tor of the previous winter's mixed layer depth
and density (Fig. 2.5.8);
saturation is a better
indicator than a fixed density change and a much
better indicator than a fixed temperature change
from the sea surface. Oxygen is
also useful as an
indicator of winter ventilation on isopycnals.
However, since the oxycline, halocline and
thermocline are very intense in the subarctic
gyre, it is difficult to map precisely the high
oxygen regions of near-surface isopycnals. The
use of the continuously-profiling CTD with a
functioning oxygen probe which can be calibrated
is necessary for improvement in this indicator of
winter ventilation.
5.2.2 Circulation north of Kruzenshtern
Strait
Geopotential anomaly at the sea surface
relative to 1,000 dbar (Fig. 2.5.6a) shown by
Reid (1973) is representative of other displays of
the same, and is based on a more detailed and
synoptic data set than most other presentations
(e.g., Dodimead et al., 1962; Favorite et al.,
1976). Reid observed at 55°N a swift, narrow
western boundary current, of 20 - 30 nm width,
with geostrophic velocity at the surface relative
to 1,500 dbar of 87 cm/s, and transport of 23 Sv
relative to 1,500 dbar. His extensive discussion
indicates that this was much swifter and narrower
than estimated by Allen (1964) with summer data
whose contrasting transport was 8 Sv. Fig. 2.5.7
from Reid shows the difference in thermocline
depth in these winter and summer sections which
results in the large difference in transports.
Additional estimates of transport appear
to be few (see Table). Miyake et al. (1991) used
the Akademik Korolev CTD section of May-
June, 1987, extending southeastward from just
south of the tip of Kamchatka (Talley et al.,
1991) and obtained a transport of 50 Sv relative
to the bottom. On the other hand, we obtain a
48
smaller estimate of 24 Sv using the same data and
also referencing to the bottom, using the
maximum cumulative southward transport as our
choice. Transport relative to 2,000 dbar from
this section is 19 Sv, with a maximum velocity of
40 cm/sec and reaching maximum transport 65
nm from the 300 m isobath.
Rogachev et al. (1993) report a small
transport of 9-10 Sv for the East Kamchatka
Current in fall, 1990, and moreover also give
transports for sections in the northern Kurils;
these latter transports are about half of this (4 - 5
Sv), possibly reflecting flow into the Okhotsk
Sea. Their synoptic survey clearly shows the
importance of eddies (Fig. 2.5.12 below).
Several other CTD sections crossing the
East Kamchatka Current were available so
transports were computed from them as well;
these CTD casts extended only to 2,000 dbar,
dictating our choice of reference level.
The
sections were collected as part of a joint program
between Russia, Canada and the U.S.A. (INPOC)
on FERHRI's vessel Priliv. The Octo-ber, 1992,
section along 155°E was dominated by a large
offshore eddy, as discussed below in 5.2.3, and
so the transport calculation is difficult to
interpret. The section eastward along 50°N,
with no eddy, yields a transport of 15 Sv. The
fall, 1992, WOCE cruise on the R/V Vickers
(Taft and Johnson, personal communication) also
had an eddy offshore and a relatively small
transport; the maximum southward transport
including the eddy was 19 Sv relative to the
bottom.
It must be emphasized that there is no
knowledge of the strength of barotropic transport
for the East Kamchatka Current and that the
actual transport could be larger than indicated in
the table.
East Kamchatka Current Transport off southern Kamchatka
Ship Date Transport (Sv)
(/reference level)
Max surface
speed cm/sec
Notes
(Allen, 1964) Summer 1963 8 (11,500 m
R/V Argo (Kamchatka Strait) February 1966 23 (11,500 m) 87
Akademik Korolev June 1987 19 (/2,000 m)
40 weak eddy
Akademik Korolev 24 /bottom 40
(INPOC) at 51°N Fall 1990 9 (/1,000 m
Priliv (INPOC) along 50°N October 1992 15 (/2,000 m) 20 counter-
current
Priliv (INPOC) along 155°E 11 (/2,000 in)
11 eddy
Priliv NPOC along 50°N April 1993 11 (/2,000 m) 27
Priliv (INPOC) along 155°E 15 (/2,000 m)
18 shifted offshore
R/V Vickers (WOCE) August, 1992 13 /bottom 15 eddy
Favorite et al. (1976) calculated the
expected western boundary current transport due
to interior Sverdrup transport for each month.
Fig. 2.5.9 shows their estimated January and
June transports, which are representative of all of
their monthly maps for these seasons. The
Sverdrup transport for the East Kamchatka
Current should be greater than 20 Sv in January
and 5 - 9 Sv in June, in rather amazing agree-
ment with the two geostrophic estimates given by
Reid (1973), but not in accord with the new
estimates relative to 2,000 dbar shown in the
Table.
Sekine (1988) computed the annual
variation in Sverdrup transport (Fig. 2.5.10) in a
study of the causes of an anomalous southward
intrusion of the Oyashio (Ishikawa, 1984, 1988)
(see Section 5.3.4 below). Along the northern
line, which should characterize the Sverdrup
forcing for the Oyashio/East Kamchatka Current,
he found a large annual cycle. In winter and
49
spring, the Sverdrup transport is northward
(southward western boundary current) and the
Sverdrup transport peaks at 40 - 60 Sv. In
summer and fall, the sign is reversed and the
transport is much smaller (less than 10 Sv).
During years of anomalous southward intrusion
of the Oyashio, which implies a strengthened
Oyashio, he shows stronger northward Sverdrup
transport. It is not clear what the relation bet-
ween the Sverdrup transport and the Oyashio
transport should be, either in magnitude (because
of the possibility of recirculation) or in phase.
The relative transports listed above for the East
Kamchatka Current are much smaller than
Sekine's maximum transports. They also do not
show the sort of seasonal cycle implied by the
Sverdrup transport, although the number of
direct transport estimates in the table is
admittedly small. The discrepancy might result
from either underestimation of the actual trans-
port due to lack of direct current measurements,
or that the western boundary current transport
reflects some average of the annual cycle, which
would be close to 15 - 20 Sv.
Transport into the Okhotsk Sea from the
East Kamchatka Current through Kruzenshtern
Strait has not been estimated to our knowledge,
noting that our coverage of the Russian literature
is extremely limited. Moroshkin (1962) suggests
that most of the inflow into the Okhotsk Sea
occurs through Kruzenshtern Strait. D. Swift
and Riser (personal communication) calculate a
net outflow of about 4 Sv, which might have a
large seasonal variability (up to 12 Sv is hypo-
thesized). If the Soya Current transports 0.5 -
1.0 Sv into the Okhotsk Sea, then the net inflow
from the Pacific to the Okhotsk could be 3 - 9
Sv, with the larger transport occurring in winter.
If there is any accuracy to the 2,000 dbar
reference level, it would appear that little more
than half of the transport (5/8 in summer and
11/20 in winter) of the East Kamchatka Current
actually flows into the Okhotsk Sea. If the actual
reference level should be deeper, and the trans-
port higher, than an even smaller fraction enters
the Okhotsk Sea. The remaining transport must
remain in the subpolar gyre, perhaps in the
subarctic current suggested by Favorite et al.
(1976).
5.2.3 Circulation between Kruzenshtern
Strait and Bussol' Strait: large eddies
While some of the East Kamchatka
Current flows into the Sea of Okhotsk through
Kruzenshtern Strait, some of the remainder may
continue southward with some entering through
Bussol' Strait (Moroshkin, 1962). Approxi-
mately half might not circulate through the
Okhotsk Sea, assuming the validity of the
Swift/Riser exchange estimates and the conser-
vative estimates of East Kamchatka Current
transport given in the previous sub-section.
Favorite et al. (1976) show schema-tically a
"Southeast Kamchatka Current" veering offshore
from the Kuril Islands south of Kruzenshtern
Strait, and a "Southwest Kamchatka Current"
which is the deeper part of the East Kamchatka
Current which cannot enter Kruzenshtern Strait
because of its depth.
The flow along the northern Kurils has
not been well observed. Drift bottle releases
from 1893 to 1913 showed southwestward flow
all along the Kurils (Kajiyama, 1936). The
region is dominated by large eddies, as apparent
in satellite photographs from 1980 (Fig. 2.5.11,
from Bulatov and Lobanov, 1983). The October,
1992, INPOC section referred to in Section 5.2.2
had current reversals suggestive of such large
eddies, and papers in progress using extensive
new synoptic CTD surveys of the Kuril Island
area (both INPOC and JFA) show such large
eddies there (Fig. 2.5.12 from Rogachev et al.,
1993). These eddies are a ubiquitous feature of
the region, being present on four separate INPOC
surveys in different years, all with excellent
station coverage. The eddies appear to have a
long lifetime but there is disagreement about
whether subsequent surveys were observing the
same eddies each time. Lobanov et al. (1991)
and Lobanov and Bulatov (1993) tracked such
eddies using satellite images, suggesting general
northeastward drift and origin as Kuroshio warm
core rings (Fig. 2.5.13); remnants of the warm
core remain in some of the eddies observed off of
50
the southern Kurils, but the suggestion is that
warm cores are replaced by cold cores north of
Bussol' Strait due to entrainment of the Okhotsk
and East Kamchatka Current waters which have a
dichothermal layer.
5.3 The Oyashio
The Oyashio forms south of Bussol'
Strait from waters exiting the Okhotsk Sea which
join subarctic waters, possibly of East Kamchatka
Current origin. In the previous subsection it was
suggested that more than half of the subarctic
circulation does not pass through the Okhotsk
Sea. Since the Okhotsk Sea water is consi-
derably modified from the subarctic water, and
because there is intense vertical mixing around
the Kuril Islands (reviewed below), the Okhotsk
Sea water and subarctic gyre water are very
different (reviewed below).
The basic features of the Oyashio as it
enters the Mixed Water Region are depicted by
Kawai (1972) (Fig. 2.5.3): southwestward flow
along the southern Kuril Islands, two branches or
intrusions as the Oyashio passes Cape Erimo
(southern end of the east coast of Hokkaido),
northeastward flow out of the region, and intru-
sion of cold water of Oyashio origin southward
along the Honshu coast. The Kuroshio warm
core rings and the inflowing Tsugaru water in
this figure point to the importance of mixing and
complicated, variable dynamics in this region.
The Oyashio has several definitions in
the Mixed Water Region. One definition of
Oyashio Water is the water found off the
southern Kuril Islands and Hokkaido in which
salinity increases monotonically to the bottom.
Its southern boundary can be called the Oyashio
Front, which is also the western part of the
Subarctic Front if the Oyashio Front is defined as
the water mass boundary. Next to the Hokkaido
coast, the Oyashio (current) is defined as a
boundary current with recognizable baroclinic
shear, which may be reduced as the Oyashio
separates and turns eastward in the Oyashio
Front. Oyashio influence in the Mixed Water
Region is often defined by the location of the
5°C isotherm at 100 m; this location might be
farther south than the Oyashio Front defined as
the main water mass boundary.
As described in the following sub-
sections, several principal issues for study for the
Oyashio are: (1) rate of formation of Oyashio
Water and relative importance of Okhotsk Sea
Water, mixed water in the Kuril Straits, and East
Kamchatka Current water, (2) the average picture
of transports all along the western boundary from
Kamchatka to southern Hokkaido, (3) the relation
of Oyashio transport to the southernmost
intrusions of Oyashio influence into the Mixed
Water Region, (4) the effect of large offshore
eddies on Oyashio transport and the properties of
Oyashio water, and (5) the vertical structure of
the Oyashio.
5.3.1 Water characteristics between Bussol'
Strait and southern Hokkaido: origin of the
Oyashio Water
The Okhotsk Sea waters exiting Bussol'
Strait join the subarctic waters and form the
Oyashio (Fig. 2.3.16). The "Oyashio Water"
thus formed is a mixture of Okhotsk Sea waters
which are modified by mixing in the Kuril straits
and East Kamchatka Current water. The
Okhotsk Sea Water can often be found inshore of
the East Kamchatka Current water as the Oyashio
flows southward along the Kurils (Fig. 2.5.14
from Kawasaki et al., 1991).
The water which is found in Bussol'
Strait and which may be the primary Okhotsk Sea
Water found in the Oyashio is actually a "mixed"
water in comparison with that inside the Okhotsk
Sea (Moroshkin, 1962). Kawasaki and Kono
(1990, 1993b) show how the vertical profiles of
temperature vary around the central and southern
Kuril Islands (Fig. 2.5.15). The dichothermal
layer in the Okhotsk Sea is denser and a little
colder than in the East Kamchatka Current water
(classified by Hirano as central water; Fig.
2.5.2). The mesothermal layer which is apparent
in the East Kamchatka Current water is much
colder in the Okhotsk Sea. For stations along the
Kuril Islands, vertical mixing is apparent (Fig.
51
2.5.15b). This mixed water is carried out of the
Kuril straits and becomes the Okhotsk Sea por-
tion of the Oyashio water. This Oyashio water is
midway in properties between East Kamchatka
Current water and southern Okhotsk Sea water
(Fig. 2.5.4 from Ohtani).
The Oyashio water, with a large
proportion of Okhotsk Sea water in it, is
markedly fresher and more oxygenated than East
Kamchatka Current water. Ishikawa (1988)
shows that normally the Oyashio carries Okhotsk
Sea water to the 41 °30'N line (Fig. 2.5.16), but
that East Kamchatka Current water is found in
the Oyashio intrusions at 41 °30'N during years
when anomalously large amounts of Oyashio
water are found in the Mixed Water Region
(Section 5.3.4 below).
Along the eastern coast of Hokkaido is
often found a layer of cold, fresh water which is
only about 100 m thick and extends a few tens of
kilometers offshore. Its origin is ice melt in the
southern Okhotsk Sea, which presumably exits
through the southern Kuril straits, including
Nemuro, Kunashiri and Etorohu. This Coastal
Oyashio Water is usually defined to have
temperature less than 2°C and salinity less than
33.0 psu (Hanawa and Mitsudera, 1986; Fig.
2.5.23).
5.3.2 Circulation between Bussol' Strait and
Hokkaido
A traditional view of the circulation
south of Bussol' Strait is that the Oyashio flows
along the western boundary until it meanders
eastward off the southern coast of Hokkaido
(schematic from Favorite et al., 1976, shown in
Fig. 2.3.6). Then it is assumed to return north-
eastward into the subarctic gyre and then
eastward across the Pacific. The Oyashio south
of Bussol' Strait actually is much more
complicated than this because of the presence of
large anticyclonic eddies. Figs. 2.3.16 shows
four recent synoptic surveys from the JFA
Hokkaido (Kawasaki et al., 1991; Kawasaki and
Kono, 1990, 1993). All show many eddies of
100 - 200 km diameter lying between the
predominantly southwestward coastal flow and
northwestward flow offshore. From these sur-
veys, typical transports for the eddies are 3 - 10
Sv and transport for the Oyashio is 7 - 12 Sv, all
relative to 1,500 dbar. These quasi-permanent
eddies may result in a large portion of flow
through Bussol' Strait being pulled offshore to
feed an offshore branch of the Oyashio
(Gladyshev, 1993). The variable location and
intensity of the eddies may control the position
and distribution of volume transport between the
Oyashio branches (Bulatov and Lobanov, 1992).
That the eddies can shift a significant part
of the Oyashio transport well offshore is
demonstrated with the southern eddy in 1991
(Fig. 2.3.16c) and in 1989 (Fig. 2.5.14). The
latter ring, labeled WCR-86B by Yasuda et al.
(1992) and which was also the ring tracked by
Lobanov et al. (1991) (Fig. 2.5.15a), had a core
of slightly saline water and was pulling fresher
water from the Okhotsk Sea around and into it.
The Oyashio transport apparently was diverted
around the ring, with only 3 Sv remaining
inshore.
There are few published measurements,
either direct or indirect, relevant to estimating
the flow through the southernmost straits of the
Okhotsk Sea. Based on drift bottle recoveries,
Kajiyama (1920) stated that in summer, when the
Soya Current is stronger, much of its water flows
out through Kunashiri and Etorohu Straits, with a
much smaller portion through Nemuro Strait
(Fig. 2.5.17 from Kajiyama, 1936; Uda, 1936,
1938). Current thinking is that Soya Current
water does not flow through these shallow straits,
but that cold, fresh water originating from ice
melt in the southern Okhotsk Sea creates this
shallow coastal layer. Making modern measure-
ments in the southern straits could be formidable,
since the tidal flows through these straits are
apparently quite large (see Section 3.4).
Bogdanov (private communication) has suggested
that tidal currents in the vicinity of Etorohu
Strait, for example, might be considerably
greater than two knots (100 cm/sec). (This
estimate is based on a number of unpublished
current meter records of a few days duration
52
each.) Preliminary analysis of POI surveys of
Bussol' and Friza straits showed that the flow is
strongly baroclinic (Gladyshev, 1993), with
seasonal variation in volume transport and
thermohaline structure.
Since the southern straits are generally
quite shallow (e.g. Favorite et al., 1976), the net,
long-term mass transport through the straits is
likely to be considerably smaller than through the
deeper straits. Whether the stronger tides in the
southern straits lead to significant long-term
transports via rectification is unknown and seems
to be a worthy problem for investigation.
5.3.3 Oyashio circulation off Hokkaido
Off the southeastern coast of Hokkaido,
the Oyashio usually flows southwestward ("first
intrusion"). Offshore of this there is often a
warm core ring (Kawai, 1972) which originates
as a Kuroshio warm core ring, is cooled by
wintertime air-sea interaction, and may move
impulsively northward to the location separating
the Oyashio intrusions (Yasuda et al., 1992).
The 1989 data clearly show this typical situation
(Fig. 2.5.14). Numerous other descriptions of
the region based on data from other years and
seasons also show this configuration, although
the currents are highly variable.
Transport estimates for the Oyashio in
this region are based mainly on velocity relative
to 1,500 dbar. Three routinely-repeated sections
have been used to compute time series of
transports: the section extending southeastward
from Kushiro, Hokkaido (the Akkeshi line), the
zonal section at 41°30'N, and the meridional
section at 144°E. Kawai (1972) presented a
section of velocity relative to 1,000 dbar along
144°E (Fig. 2.5.18), in which are apparent the
Oyashio as it flows southwestward close to
Hokkaido and eastward at about 41 °N after
separating at the southern tip of Hokkaido. The
contrast in the Oyashio's relative surface velo-
city, about 20 cm/sec, with that of the Kuroshio,
50 - 60 cm/sec, is typical, although this Kuroshio
velocity is on the low side: typically it is 100
cm/sec and it can reach 250 cm/sec. The
Oyashio is much more density-compensated than
the Kuroshio, and its vertical structure is still not
fully explored; only a few moorings have been
deployed to study it at depth.
Current meter deployments in the surface
layer of Oyashio were reported by Kashiwai and
Kono (1990). In 1987 - 1989, a current meter
was deployed at about 500 m depth in 1,700 m of
water along the Akkeshi-line, at 42°30'N,
145°0'E (Kawasaki and Kono, 1990). During
most of the two-year deployment (Fig. 2.5.19),
flow was southwestward along the isobaths, but
in early 1988, a warm core ring passed over and
reversed the flow, suggesting that the currents
have a barotropic component here.
One result
from the 1980's deployment is that the measured
surface current is usually stronger than the
geostrophic current relative to depth: for
instance 60 - 70 cm/sec as opposed to 40 cm/sec.
Deep current meters have been deployed
along the Akkeshi-line since 1991 at two loca-
tions with near-bottom current meters in water
depths of about 1,100 and 3,500 m (Fig. 2.5.20);
shallower current meters are also mounted on the
deeper mooring (Kawasaki and Kono, 1993c).
These moored measurements should continue for
the foreseeable future. The first two years of
data show a fairly steady flow directed south-
westward along isobaths near the bottom on the
1,100 m deep mooring.
During the first year,
there was little coherence between the mid-depth
and bottom current meters on the 3,500 m deep
mooring. However, during the second year of
deployment, there was strong coherence between
the near-surface and mid-depth current meters
and somewhat weaker coherence with the bottom
current meter; current speeds drop towards the
bottom. Again this suggests a barotropic com-
ponent for the Oyashio, but its
importance is
time-dependent.
The only available top-to-bottom, highly-
resolved hydrographic section along the Akkeshi-
line was made in summer, 1985 (Talley et al.,
1991). The section was dominated by a warm
core ring, such that it is difficult to even
determine what to call the Oyashio (Fig. 2.5.21).
53
There was a very shallow southward coastal
current of fresh water, which could be termed the
coastal Oyashio. There is little hint of the first
Oyashio branch. The warm core ring extended
out to station 18 and its vertical shear was in the
same sense to 6,000 m; suggesting a barotropic
component to flow in this area and that the Kuril
Trench may be important in guiding the flow.
The ring's transport was 25 - 29 Sv relative to
the bottom. Southward transport offshore of the
ring, which might be considered thus to be the
Oyashio transport, was 12 Sv relative to the
bottom.
Additional deep sections are being made
near this location as part of the WOCE current
meter array deployed here; the new data along
with the continued data return from the Akkeshi-
line current meters should yield much infor-
mation about the true magnitude of the transport
of the Oyashio and its depth dependence.
Routine hydrographic measurements have
been made for many years along the 41°30'N
line (Fig. 2.5.22). Recently current meters have
been deployed along this line at two sites where
the first intrusion of the Oyashio is normally
found. The hydrographic structure normally
shows the strong front between the Tsugaru
warm water and the Oyashio water (at 143 °E in
Fig. 2.5.22b) and the two intrusions of the
Oyashio (e.g., Uehara and Miyake, 1993). Com-
parison of geostrophic velocities for the first
Oyashio intrusion, computed relative to 2,000
dbar or the deepest common level, with current
meter measurements at 500 m shows that the
geostrophic estimate is significantly lower than
the current meter measurement if the station
separation is 1 °; the difference is reduced if the
station separation is reduced to 20', presumably
because of problems computing geostrophic
velocities over the steep bottom slope (Uehara
and Miyake, 1993). At the offshore mooring,
deeper current meters, at 1,000 and 3,000 m,
showed marked coherence with the Oyashio when
it passed directly over the mooring (Fig.
2.5.22c); the direction of the 3,000 in flow
appears to be mostly parallel to isobaths (Miyake
et al., 1993).
5.3.4 Oyashio Water in the Mixed Water
Region
The Mixed Water Region, or Perturbed
Region in some literature, is the region of
confluence of Kuroshio, Oyashio and Tsugaru
Waters. Kawai's (1972) schematic (Fig. 2.5.3)
shows the two intrusions of the Oyashio (loops
east of Hokkaido), the meandering Kuroshio and
its warm core rings, and the relatively saline
Tsugaru Water in the northwestern part. The
southern boundary of the region is the northern
Kuroshio front and the northern boundary is the
Oyashio front. The eastern boundary is not well-
defined, but could be taken to be Shatsky Rise.
As stated above, the Oyashio Water in
this region can be defined either as that water
found north of the Oyashio Front (salinity
increasing monotonically to the bottom), or that
with temperature lower than 5°C at 100 m. In
the latter case, there can often be complicated
vertical structure in temperature and salinity, and
this kind of Oyashio Water can be found as far
south as the Boso Peninsula (e.g., Ogawa et al.,
1987; Ogawa, 1989; Okuda, 1986; Yang et al.,
1993a,b).
Water properties in general in the Mixed
Water Region are complex. The principal
sources are the Oyashio, the Tsugaru Warm
Current and the Kuroshio. The Oyashio carries
both Okhotsk Sea and East Kamchatka Current
(Central) water, and also has a relatively fresh
shallow coastal layer originating from ice melt.
Water from the Oyashio is called Oyashio,
Subarctic or Subpolar Water. Water from the
Kuroshio is called both Kuroshio and Subtropical
Water. Air-sea interaction within the region in
winter creates new upper waters, as does mixing
between the incoming waters.
Hanawa and Mitsudera (1986) presented
six classes for the Mixed Water Region waters
(Fig. 2.5.23), differentiating between the various
sources of surface layer waters. They showed
the relative freshness of Oyashio water relative to
Tsugaru and Kuroshio water, and the very fresh,
cold coastal waters. Hasunuma (1978) showed
54
that a particular type of water is found in the
region, which he called the Transition Water, and
which is formed by vertical mixing between the
Subtropical Water which overruns the Subarctic
Water, creating the intermediate salinity mini-
mum which is usually referred to as North
Pacific Intermediate Water. He showed that ano-
ther salinity minimum is created when water
from Tsugaru Strait overruns denser water in the
Mixed Water Region. Talley (1991) and Talley
et al. (1994) suggest that stations be classed as
subarctic, subtropical, Tsugaru and transitional
(Fig. 2.5.24); the last is a mixture of the first
three, with much of the mixing occurring in the
overrun process described by Hasunuma.
Yasuda et al. (1994) have a very similar
classification.
The southernmost extent of Oyashio
water in the Mixed Water Region has been used
to great advantage as an indicator of climate in
Japan (Uda, 1949, 1964). Oyashio water has
been found as far south as the Izu Islands just
south of Honshu, lying between the Kuroshio and
Honshu coast (Masuzawa, 1972). The southward
intrusion has been discussed more recently by
lida and Katai (1974), Okuda (1986), Okuda and
Mutoh (1986), Ogawa et al. (1987), and Yang et
al. (1993a,b). Kawai (1955, 1972) showed that
the area occupied by Oyashio water, as defined
by the 5°C isotherm at 100 m, does not neces-
sarily vary in relation to the area of Kuroshio
water. Ishikawa (1988) showed the area of what
he defined as the Oyashio region in the Tohoku
area since 1972; the area was especially large in
1974, 1981 and 1984 (Fig. 2.5.25). During
those years, oxygen at 100 cl/ton along the
repeated section at 41 °30'N was markedly lower
than in other years, indicating a larger proportion
of East Kamchatka Current water in the Oyashio,
relative to the amount of Okhotsk water. Sekine
(1988) examined the North Pacific winds and
concluded that the Aleutian low was more
strongly developed and shifted southward during
years of abnormal southward intrusion of the
Oyashio (Fig. 2.5.10). Ekman transport was also
intensified off Japan. However, he also
concluded that Tsugaru water and the Kuroshio
warm core ring could block the southward
intrusion of Oyashio water, as apparently
occurred in other years of the strong Aleutian
low (1968, 1980, 1982, 1983).
5.4
Formation of North Pacific Interme-
diate Water: the role of the Okhotsk Sea and
Oyashio
A problem that is receiving attention
again of late is the formation of the salinity
minimum of the subtropical gyre. The basin-
wide patterns of this well-known feature were
discussed in Sverdrup et al. (1942) and in more
detail by Reid (1965).
Reid attributed the sali-
nity minimum to downward diffusion of low
salinity in the subpolar gyre and lateral exchange
along the boundary between the subtropical and
subpolar gyres.
Hasunuma (1978) showed that
an intermediate salinity minimum
arises in the
Mixed Water Region where Kuroshio water
overruns Oyashio water.
Talley (1993) mapped
the property distributions at the salinity minimum
(Fig. 2.5.26), showing that its salinity is lowest
and oxygen highest in the Mixed Water Region,
and hypothesizing that the
salinity minimum
forms only in this region based on the high levels
of finestructure through the minimum in this
region compared with other regions.
None of
these discussions included transport calculations,
nor did they indicate a mechanism for deter-
mining density of the salinity minimum water,
which lies within a remarkably small range of
26.7 - 26.8 ae through most of the subtropical
gyre except in the western boundary current
region.
The current context of the discussion of
NPIW formation is North Pacific ventilation:
where it is ventilated, how dense and deep the
ventilated waters extend, the rate of ventilation,
and the distribution of the ventilated water.
It
should be clear from the preceding subsections
that the Okhotsk Sea significantly modifies the
Pacific water which flows through
it. It is
believed at this time that the Okhotsk Sea
produces the densest water in the North Pacific
and that the Okhotsk Sea ventilation and vertical
mixing in the Kuril Straits reduce the salinity and
increase the oxygen on isopycnals down to about
55
2,000 in (Kitani, 1973; Alfultis and Martin,
1987; Talley, 1991, Wakatsuchi and Martin,
1991). Upon flowing out of the Okhotsk Sea,
this water is advected by the Oyashio where it
joins East Kamchatka Current Water which is
warmer, more saline, and has lower oxygen;
together the two waters are called Oyashio
Water. Where the Oyashio reaches the Mixed
Water Region, a portion of the Oyashio Water
intrudes southward, often as far as the Kuroshio
front. The main part of the Oyashio Water turns
eastward north of the Oyashio Front and remains
in the subpolar gyre. Thus most of the newly
ventilated water remains in the subpolar gyre, but
some escapes to the subtropical gyre via the
Mixed Water Region.
Alteration of Oyashio Water in the Mixed
Water Region occurs through mixing with these
other two sources of water and through air-sea
interaction. East of the northern part of Honshu,
where the Tsugaru Warm Water often forms a
coastal eddy (Fig. 2.5.3), wintertime densities as
great as the main salinity minimum density are
normally found in late winter (Fig. 2.5.27)
(Nagata et al., 1993). In another, small, region
on the south coast of Hokkaido (Funka Bay),
water of the salinity minimum density is also
found most winters; however the very small size
of the bay suggests that its waters are not very
important for the salinity minimum formation.
The earliest Japanese discussions
assumed that the North Pacific Intermediate
Water salinity minimum is formed in the Mixed
Water Region and that its density is set by the
winter mixed layer density. Uda (1935a) hypo-
thesized an Oyashio undercurrent to explain the
disappearance of Oyashio Water in the Mixed
Water Region. However, no evidence has been
found for such an undercurrent and the idea is
now generally disregarded. It appears that the
Oyashio Water in the Mixed Water Region is
mixed into the warm core rings (Fig. 2.5.28;
many examples in Mutoh et al., 1975 and Mutoh,
1977; Talley et al., 1994; Gladyshev, 1992) and
into the Kuroshio (Fig. 2.5.29 from Yasuda et
al., 1993) and undergoes a major displacement
downward, with an increase in density as well.
Just south of Hokkaido it also is overrun by the
Tsugaru Water, creating a local salinity minimum
and sometimes a temperature minimum
(Hasunuma, 1978). The relative importance of
these different sites for overrun of the Oyashio
water by the Kuroshio water is not yet
determined.
The principal mechanism setting the
density of the salinity minimum has not been
identified although candidate processes have been
hypothesized. Talley et al (1994) map the
nominal winter mixed layer density in the Mixed
Water Region (Fig. 2.5.30) and show that it is
indeed slightly lower than that of the salinity
minimum. Hasunuma (1978) argued that the
older Japanese idea, that the surface mixed layer
density sets the salinity minimum density, is
inaccurate but Talley (1993) hypothesized that
the winter mixed layer density of the Oyashio
Water in the Mixed Water Region actually does
set the initial salinity minimum density, and that
vertical mixing results in an increase of the
salinity minimum's density soon after formation,
thus producing the required density slightly
greater than 26.7 ae. Kozlov and Kuzmin (1984)
and Kuzmin (1989) argue that cabbeling would
be effective in increasing the density of the
winter surface water in the Oyashio front area,
and that intense downward motion would result,
forming the low salinity intermediate layer
(Kilmatov and Kuzmin, 1991). Nagata et. al.
(1993) argue that the winter surface density in
the Tsugaru warm eddy region, which can reach
26.7 ae very locally may be an important factor.
This is still an active area of research.
Vertical mixing is likely to be an
important process in the Mixed Water Region,
and may affect the density of the salinity
minimum which exits the MWR to the east.
Interfacial layers between overlying saline
Kuroshio water and underlying fresher Oyashio
water are often very well defined. Shonai and
Miyake (1993) showed that double diffusive
processes might be important in the Mixed Water
Region and decreasingly important towards the
east crossing the Pacific (Fig. 2.5.31). Salt
56
fingering occurs where warm salty water overlies
colder fresher water and results in an increase in
density of the colder fresher water (the salinity
minimum) as it acquires salt.
"New" NPIW which exits the Mixed
Water Region to the east is a mixture of
Kuroshio and Oyashio water, containing appro-
ximately 40% Oyashio water and 60% Kuroshio
water which carries old NPIW (Talley et al.,
1993). The renewal rate of NPIW then must be
associated with the amount of Oyashio water
which enters the mixed water region and exits
into the subtropical gyre. Talley et al. estimate a
net transport of 6 Sv of new NPIW (between
26.65 and 27.4 ae) eastward across 152 °E; thus
the transport of Oyashio Water into the sub-
tropical gyre is estimated to be something less
than 3 Sv. Thus the bulk of Oyashio Water
remains in the subpolar gyre north of the
Subarctic Front. Exchange rates across the front
east of the Mixed Water Region have not been
estimated.
Some principal remaining questions for
NPIW formation are: (1) quantifying the relative
importance of various hypothesized processes for
formation of the salinity minimum itself, (2)
detailed observation of the process, and (3) more
robust formation rate and transport estimates
based on time series rather than single synoptic
sections.
57
Non-USSR before 1960 with salinity (5609)
60
V
X
?
x
x
x
x
x
c
x
x
X
X
xx
W
x
x
X x )oi U 35 N
x
x xx x' 000c xc x
x x x XX x x
x x
x x
x x
)OC
x
'Sc
x
xxXX X(
x
x x
X X
x x x
X x x xx)S *
x x
x
5
x
X x
x
x
x
x x) XX'S xx
3
x
x
X
x x x x
x x
x x
x
x x )ax
xx
x
X X
X
X X
X-*
&
x
xc
x
x
x
x
%
x
%xXX
x xX x7kx(x7
x
X
x .X )X x( X Xx
x
X
xx x
x x
k
x x x
X x x x
x x x
x
x
x x x X X
YAX
x
X x x
X X xc
[
%
X
X
x,f % x x xx x xx
x X
xx % x it
x
x x
XX
xxx
x
x y cx x x x
Xx
#
X X
x
X X
XSdc
x
x x
x
x
xX x X
xx
x
X xx
X
X X
X
X xX
% X MW )(.%
X X %
X x
x x
% x
x
x x x x x
x )Sc
x x
x
x x x aQ
% % x x Sk 3E x x
xx X X x c x
%
x x
x x x x x
X x
5
x x
X
x
Xx
X
W _
x x { c
9
X
x
XX * X Xc x)C
x
x RJ( x X )OC xx
% X k( x x
x X x xxx x
x
x x xx 14
A
X X
xx x x x
xx
X
X #
X * : XxX xX
x
x x
XX
x
x XXxx
x
x x
x
xxx
XxX
x x x X
X
x x
x
x
x
x
%X xX XX
X
xX
xX
XXX
x x
X
X W x
X
X
kc x x xCx x
x
x
XcXc X xx iff x
x
XX X XXX
xx
x x
X_x % X
x
x
X )OK
xx x
xc x
x
X
x
x x x
xx
x
X xcX X X x X x X* x x ' X X x
4K
XX X X X% X
x xxX
*** 3
x )Zc"
) Xz X x XXXX
x
c
x xx x
XX
X
)a x
Si
xX
Xx
% **
Xx2
X)( ,t(,
*
x l(k x
x c x
x`
it x #
X ... . f F; .
xxix
?`
x x x)K x X« x x
x x
x x
x x x
xr x X
x x
x
X
x
x x
x x x x
X x x x
x
xx
X
xxX X
x
4
x
)
x
)
x x
X X X x
x X )
x
x x
" 3'j
W% X*
X
x
x x
x
x x
X X
x
X x x x
7P
X X
X# X X OK X
)x
.
X *
4
x
x
x x )
x
)47
x Xx
x
x
> xxx ,fix x 7C
x
Xx
xxXA
Ik
{
xx x X
kc
dRc f iS
$
X Xx* )ftc x XX
X
x x i
x
cx x % fc M x xx x x x x x
4
140 145 150 155 160 165 170
Fig. 1.1.1. WDCA bottle data stations with temperature and salinity for the northwestern Pacific:
(a) prior to 1959
58
77(c
Non-USSR 1960-1971 with salinity (2477)
60
5
5
4
4
X
X X
x
x
x
X X X
xx px
X
x
x
X
x x%xx
x
x
'A
x x
X
x
X
x
X
x X X
x
X gyp(
x x
x
X xx
X
x
x
X
X
*
X
X X X
X
JX x X X X
x
x7{
x x X xx x
x )o 7R XX W
x
X
x
X
x x %x
K X X X X
%
O x
X
xX
x KKX
X X
Xx * X X x x X xx X x
x
x)
XX
#
xx
x
X
"X x x%
x
xAK
X
xf(xIf( x x xxX xx
x
x X( x x
x
xX x x
x
x x x
x
X
X
P
X
x %xx x
x
x
X
Xx,
xx
x x x
x
.
x 3E
x
xx
X xtX
([
x x x
x x x
x Xx
x
x X x
X
%
x
xxx
X
X yyxx
x W ( % X
-X
Ak x
* x
x
X
X X
X X
X
x ]f( x
X
xl(X(x Xx`
Xx
x
x XI% x
X
X %
x
X
X
% xx
X
X
X
x x
)k Xx
x
x
x x x
xx
'{( x
X
x x
X%
f
x x x x
xx
X
XxX
X x x x
XX
p
%
xxX
xx X
x
X
x
x
x
X
x x
X
Xx
x X
x
xxx
x
x(X
xf(
xx
x
x x
x #
X X X
x
x x x
X
x x
Xx X
lR
x x xx %x x< <
X xX X
%
,, (
x MF
x )(._ X
x
X
xx
x
X
XA
(xX
X ,'xp',
xxx
x
%
X
X
x
X
x
X
),x X
x
x
xxx%
x
X
x xh x x
N xx
X
X xxx
x x
x x
x gyp( X
F X x
x
x
x x
X
x x
x
k
xf(
XX X
x x x (x q x x
X xx X X
)i *X vxS00( K..
X
x x x
X X x, X
X
O X'."
xxx
* x
X %
X X x
x
k x
X
X*(Xx
X
XX i*XK(x
''(., .k
xX
%
x x "' X X xx XXX
x x
(
agMM[
x
x X
x
X X x x x
X%%
]2(
x X
x{e 11xX
xx
7C
xlFx
xxx,
x
x *1C Xxp(x X X
X'7C x%.7P(X
x x x
xq( X
X X X
x(
X
xx
xx>o(x>* x
Xx X
,71g,r=o .
,...
X&
Xx
%
xx
-x h -Y,i t.
x
x
x
x
pc
x
x
x( x
f' x X
(
xX
xx
x X 7!
x
xx
X X
x
xX x xll)$A x x
x x
x
xk
140 145
Fig. 1.1.1 (b) 1960-1971
150 155 1 60 1 65 170
59
x
Non-USSR 1972-present with salinity (1325)
60
5
5
4
401
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
4
hoc
x
x x
x x x xx x xx
x
x
z xx X
VX, x
xx x x
x xx xx
x x x xxk
x x x
x x x x
x x x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x O
x
x
x
xx
x
x x
1A
x
x
x x l
x x
x
x x x
x
x x
x
x x
x
% x x x
x
x x
x x
x
xx x x x x x % x x
)VX
x
x x
x
x x x
x
x %x
x
xx
x x
x
x x x x x x x x AK x
x
x
' x x x
x x
76
xKx xx
x
x x x x
x
x
x xx x Ox x
Y
xx *
x
f
x
xx
x *?g x
x
x
Xx xx 7(x x x
K Xt
x 7Fjk
X
x
x x
XSc
x
x x x x x x
K x
x<
x x
xc
xx x
X x x '2k
x
Mc x
x
xxx
x x x
140 145
Fig. 1.1.1 (c) 1972-present
150 155 1 60 165 170
60
All Russian stations (7287)
7
4n
-I L
J.
1 40 1 50 1 60 1 70 1 80 -J 70 -J 60 - 50 - 40 - 30 - 20 - 10
Fig. 1.1.1 (d) all Russian bottle stations for the North Pacific which are at WDCA.
Fig. 1.1.2. Permanent coastal stations and standard hydrographic sections maintained by the Russian
Committee on Hydrometeorology (Sakhalin, Kamchatka, Kolyma RHAs and FERHRI).
Filled black circles have sea level measurements.
62

130°
60°
135° 140° 145
°
150
a
MAGADAN
155°
OK HOTS K. *:.
i.'.. j"'
55°
QSt long
Island
$hOnlO rskiy
I
Island
Shantorakiy
Bay .J\
Derugtno
Basin ,
Institute of I,-
eonolo Qy Rise
50°
Kruzenshterna
v Terpe nio aooo
NOit
+^\
Boy
ussot' JJos
,- Strait
K-0
Basin
45°
Soya Strait
Fig. 2.1.1. Bathymetry of the Okhotsk Sea (Alfultis and Martin, 1987).
160° 165° 170°
64
11-4'
150'
156'
144'
150'
Fig. 2.1.2.
Principal features of the Okhotsk Sea and Kuril Islands. Letters
refer to the Russian and
Japanese names in Table 1.
65
173
SIBERIA
140 ISO
THE OKHOTSK SEA
yrSnorek I
PoQobl
0
143
Okhotsk
V: m or.
SI°rodovsk
'C.Sv°bodnyJ
Korsokov
V
C.KrIlon V C.Anlvo
akkonot
Esoshl
Omu
Monbst
( Abosntri
HOKKAIDO
Ku iIro
/y LKunashlrl
LSAIkotcn
I.Shlb atev
Nsmlo
Ins& Boy
THE NORTH PACIFIC
I
Fig. 2.2.1. Japanese coastal sea ice observing stations (Akagawa, 1969). Duration of the obser-
vations differs from station to station; only one or two years of data are available for
some stations.
(1) From the island off 55°N off Siberia, clockwise: I. Santar, Ajan, Okhotsk,
Nagaeva, Penjnal Bay (Shelskhova), KAMCHATKA P., Khirusova, Isa, Vorovskja,
Kikfikl, Ust-Boltsereck, Ozernoja
(2) Kuril Islands from north to south: I. Paramushire, I. Shimushiru, I. Uruppe,
Shana, I. Etorofu, I. Kunashiri, I. Shikotan, I. Shibotsu
(3) Sakhalin, from north to south: C. Elizavety, Ryvnovsk, Pogobl, Nogiik,
Aleksandrovsk, Nyivo, Pogrankomblnat, Pllvo, SAKHALIN, Poronaisk, Uglegorsk, C.
Terpenlje, Iginskii, Vzmore, Starodovsk, Holmsk, C. Svobodnyl, Korsakov, Nevelsk,
C. Anlve, C. Krllon
(4) Japan Sea, along Russia from north to south: Grossevisl, C. Zelotol, C. Sosunove
(5) around Hokkaido, clockwise: Wakkanai, Esashi, Omu, Monbetsu, Abashiri,
Nemuro, Kushiro
66
Uglegork
I
Ate ksondtovsk
Nop11k1
Nylel
1
I
Pllvo
Poflronkombinat
.
uowe Nsveisk
C So$ A
Gros06v11:1 Iglnikll
C.ZolotoJ/I (
Holmsk
50
100
150
200
(m)I
250L-
25 26 27 (Pt)
Fig. 2.2.2.
Vertical profiles of temperature, salinity and
sigma-t just off the east coast of Sakhalin
(46°56'N, 145°01'E) on November 3, 1978
(Nakamura et al., 1985; Aota and Uematsu,
1989).
Fig. 2.2.3.
Schematic view of the current systems in the
Okhotsk Sea in the warmer season (Watanabe,
1963b). The shaded area represents the region
where occurrence of surface water having
chlorinity less than 18.00 per mil is larger than
50%.
rc) 0 5 10
32 33 34(+..)
0
I I S
Gt
67
Fig. 2.2.4. Distributions of the mean surface pressure (mb) and mean surface temperature (°C) in
January (Watanabe, 1959).
68
(a)
(d)
(g)
Oct. 6-10
1 1
Dec 6-10
I -L
(b)
(e)
(h)
O c.t.26 - 31
Dec.26-31
Fig. 2.2.5.
Sea surface temperature distributions in the cooling season (October to
December)
averaged for 11 years from 1960 to 1970 (Akagawa, 1972).
( C )
( f )
69
DEC . 1 0
MAR.10
MIN
JAN. 10
AP R. 10
MEAN ---- MAX
FEB.10
MAY
1 0
Fig. 2.2.6. Mean, maximum and minimum ice extents in the Okhotsk Sea for the first 10 days from
December to May for the period from 1971 to 1990 (JMA, 1990).
70
:I.N.NNe..NW 811
888.88
.87 .. ai
W...Y..N./11 /. N7910rY
w Ai..Y.
Y. Ir --i :O1
I...I . me"
,WON INNS
I /omen f\S
INN ,7!
'. .NN.88171
1 .NN....2-
iu7f. I .Otr _.L
111
.IIWY if
NOWN
eN IaB
1
]....w
I `1.7. ii
IONVU1.
11-1 7777777PP7PPTTTTTT
'Al ....1181r Tr rl r-rr1MU11
fit
+u=V
888:YN:- ---- PT.
7.18121ffYt11
- lSlTT T:r 111
ff" I
(1T
-4 M. '
EL
below
10°/°
Fig. 2.2.7.
10°/°
-30°/°
MAR. 1 0
30°/°
-70°I°
70°1°
- 90°l°
above
90°/°
Distribution of existence probability of open water in the first
10 days of March for the period from 1971 to 1990 (JMA,
1990). Existence probability is divided into 5 ranks as shown
below the figure.
1-3/10
Fig. 2.2.8.
..
mow,
rSi I.
n1YY
pa uY N
-i. u oNr
./.N.1lIN\/On
81178888
T-'-
MAR. 1 0
4-6/10 7-8/10 9-10/10
Distribution of mean sea ice concentration in the first 10 days
of March for the period from 1978 to 1990 (JMA, 1990).
Concentration is divided into 4 ranks as shown below the
figure.
150
100
V
50
AYAN(168)
NAGAEVA (913)_- - -
RYVNOVSK(014)
I.SHANTAR(174)
;i
1..r
1969 - 70
I
NOV DEC
ALEKSANDROVSK(045)
JAN FES MAR APR
Fig. 2.2.9. Evolution of sea ice thickness at several coastal observation points in the northern
Okhotsk Sea in winter 1969-1970 (Tabata et al., 1980).
0
Fig. 2.2.10.
AVHRR observations of the Okhotsk Sea on
March 3, 1982 (left) and on March 10, 1982
(Alfultis and Martin, 1987).
0
72
11
I::
*W
i NE
86
E
N
-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3
Temper ature(°C)
Fig. 2.2.11. Correlation between the area of sea ice cover in the Okhotsk Sea south of 46°N at the
end of February and the surface air temperature averaged for January-February of the
same year at Abashiri (Sato et al., 1989). When the average wind in January-February
is
strong, the prevailing wind direction is indicated with capital letters.
cm
AH
F F M U L L F F U M L
1 1 f I f I f I f I I
Oct. Nov. Dec.
Fig. 2.2.13. Variations of the 5-day mean sea level at Wakkanai
and Abashiri during October through
December, and difference between two stations. Mean values
for the period 1956-1970
are shown (Akagawa, 1977).
(Fig. 2.2.12 on next page)
73
25.00
24.
23.
25.00
23.
25.00
24.
23.
25.00
24.
23.
25.00
24.
23.
Oat. Nov. -- Dec. Jan. - "--'
10
20 10 20 10 20 10 20
1956
1957
t
1959
1954
1960
1959
t 4 f
1961
1960
1962
1961
1963
1962
t
Fig. 2.2.12. Variations of daily salinity at Monbetsu during October through December for 1958-
1963 (Watanabe, 1963b). Salinity has been converted to sigma-t at 15°C. The wide
shaded arrow indicates the sudden drop of salinity, the white arrow the first local ice
formation, and the black arrow the first appearance of drift-ice.
(Fig. 2.2.13 on previous page)
74
ESA SHI
ESASH I MOMBETSU ABASHIRI ABASHIRI
100%
1969
0
70
71
72
73
74
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
4#si
C
87
88EJ
89
FI
90
911 A k -I
E*Ok
RMP
92
r, -rr r ^^T
1
Aw"
JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JAN FEB MAR APR MAY
Fig. 2.2.14.
Variations of sea ice concentration for each radar image (Esashi,
Monbetsu, and
Abashiri) and all observation areas of the sea ice radar network of the Sea Ice
Research
Laboratory, Hokkaido University, for 1969-1992 (courtesy of Aota).
75
75
76
STPN .I H
ICE CONDITION
CHART
8 FEB 1991
NO. 20
ICE CONCENTRATION
(UNIT I/10)
9-10 7-8
I-3 l"'. <I
4-8
-2- S E A S U R F A C E T E II P E R A T U R 9 ( -C)
SEA ICE INFORMATION:
SEA ICE EXTENT HAS STILL BEEN MUCH BELOW TIIE
NORMAL IN THE
NORTH AND THE MIDDLE OF THE OKIIOTSK SEA.
SEA ICE AROUND THE
COAST OF HOKKAIDO HAS REACHED SIIIRETOKO PENINSULA.
SEA ICE
HAS ENTERED INTO SAROKA WE.
FOR THE NEXT WEEK DRIFT ICE WILL BE ON THE
SHORE OF HOKKAIDO
AND FLOW INTO NEMURO STRAIT. SHIPS BE CAREFUL.
;p q 9}cIlTt #1O
t-/ iAiltW 4'BHC 3kso O1Z ' 1±. AAE iO LT riRF 1S
fl +i 7 R ICbdA'R)Tc T a. 4tild;n11;d0)MI
li ItA kP U T.q L T
D ` cI v A.N'P I3 I,1( )K C) ASl T fi(Jy
f, .
' It l
lld. AtifdX C D A U H -0 133hjk07t /iR-A
Hrflc <
If{R2N 1:1%
)TI3At3hD<BfIJ#3RZat.
YAh13fA1SL,.
STPN JMH
ICE CONDITION
CHART
8 FEB 1991
Fig. 2.2.15. Example of sea ice information published by the Japan Meteorological Agency twice a
week (Kamihira et al., 1991).
i e
' ' if$ 3}c 1A) *Q W 11 3 $ 2 A 8 B 1645OR
__/
F is AR N a $ AR 0
Ck %-.
'! '. :
j
N
'
116cSA;6kJ48i6taStr£oY,r, tYJkobti'iC<
I
?yi
1i =/'. II'1. yo$noXy'b$rit'b U*7.
Cs N
*
. /
s
\ / e H ptalonL Isxa. at--. xaf Easxu%
' c / A4!oR[C2bt, Yf-JCWv YkGRi[91r5fa M) frh
y"j .. ! Bh
.
to m,p1 M Its K. All x' **'N--9LitM(l T)'*i. --: ,
"
Fb X * (aa.s-m)
f Xic-J4Xioi3ko-iIAB I`.IEIl. $lHIYJROxmKi17.L
Fe a (aalw-coo.)
(
/
F. T * r (aaa-aa) T
F
*Cl=.
s
Ck * (nan..i71!
may,
(` \
- . ., f ,
4RKS5M7131: i7iti.6LNO575o KL';mari, i3JcGlflMdoMi
C s m tt * a"01 a . ., a Ca t Ctfld l.. 4l iuksA61:J1o t3lMcL Ho < U IpFYaRb2Y.
Br-H*(%
- s * laaw_mc.) / B' m'
Rye
W
tool 1 actiKRte i'i6Y1. ¢FA 5.LN1 WS 1ii&t:3is L. AS-)
P 'ita*lea>e-)Nc. AtNla.)
o}RitFtfII2hb/-h. AiM 1[t LiR3MOliFlR l.C4'J a<.W'-/
m
4&M)/OTtt;M+Y bAt A'$<46AEO t. *1to0E fdAEOli
,m sa .o oo )n 9 >s o en
' i n Y. $Jk OJtluv$n0)ijA 9'1,1'S Rl htno, aZ A in N n'*K*Y. W
., M.M
)e
RAOtt etNcoptl:t5)#$LTF v'.
Q ./
* 6R A
M i 1.^"
y
a
fIN ' F.. /
ib u
Fig. 2.2.16. Example of sea ice information published by the Sapporo Meteorological Observatory
and the Hakodate Marine Observatory every day (Kamihira et al., 1991).
76
4L0
Ck
Teltially given distribution
January 22, 1.990
Forecasted distribution
January 29, 1990
-
0 0 0 0
0 0 O
0 0 O O
Classification of
sea Ice concentration
Observed distribution
January 29, 1990
Fig. 2.2.17. Example of the JMA one week forecast for increasing sea ice (Kamihira et al., 1991).
77
Initially given distribution
January 20, 1991
Forecast distribution
February 20, 1991
Observed distribution
February 20, 1991
Fig. 2.2.18. Examples of the JMA one month forecast for increasing sea ice (Sato and Kano, 1992).
The dotted line in the figure indicates the climatological mean position of ice edge.
SEA ICE FORECAST FOR BOHAI SEA
DATE:1990-01-24.0 -HOUR FORECAST
112 119 120 121 122 123 124
(a)
SEA ICE FORECAST FOR BOHAI SEA
DATE:1990-01-24.48-HOUR FORECAST
Its 119 120 121 122 123 124
40
39
09
37
YAX ICE SPCC W.
ICE Tlil')(4CSS
w .1
2
1 1. AV
11e 119 120 121
(c)
122 120 124
SEA ICE FORECAST FOR BOFHAI SEA
DATE:1990-01-24.24-HOUR FORECAST
IIe Its 120 121 122 123 124
(b)
SEA ICE FORECAST FOR BOHAI SEA
DATE:1990-01--24.72-HOUR FORECAST
lie 119 120 121 122 123 124
147(
ICC 1
ICC SPEE
THI:XCSS __
d
fro
n
11
1 1
4
w
09
3e
3'
lie Its 120 -121
(d)
22 120 124
40
39
0e
3'
Fig. 2.2.19. A 3-day forecast for the Bohai Sea for the same period as the observations
of Fig.
2.2.20.
(a) synthetic analysis of initial ice thickness on January 20, 1990
(b) 24 hour forecast for ice drift (arrow) and thickness (isoline), valid on Jan. 21
(c) 48 hr forecast, valid on Jan. 22
(d) 72 hr forecast, valid on Jan. 23 (National Research Center for Marine
Environmental
Forecasts, Beijing, China).
79
120 121 122 124 120 '121 122 123 124
1191120'
121' 122'
41 = < 10 cm 1230 km+
10-20 cm 7820 km'
> 20 cm 330 km1
Fast ice 430 km-
open sea
(a) Jan. 20, 1990
119' 120' 121 122'
(b) Jan. 22, 1990
119' 120' 121' 122'
Fig. 2.2.20. Ice thickness analyzed on the basis of satellite imagery in the Bohai Sea (Huang et al.,
1990, 1992).
80
119' 120' 121'
41'H < 10 c 2530 km'
10-20 cm 12705 km'
> 20 CM 410 km'
Fast ice 520 km'
open sea
cloud
122'
41'
40'
(c) Jan. 23, 1990
(d) Jan. 25, 1990
Fig. 2.2.20. (c) (d)
81
Fig. 2.3.1. Seasonal variation of the margin of the area where ice accretion on ships occurs (Sawada,
1969).
142 143 144 145E
Fig. 2.3.3.
Observation lines occupied by the Hydrographic Department twice a year (Ishii, 1991).
(Fig. 2.3.2. on next page)
82
Non-USSR all years Jan-Mar with salinity (767)
V
x
x
x
x x x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x x
x
x
x
9
9
x
x
x
x
x
x x
x
x
x x
x
x x
O
x
x
x x
x OW
x
x
x
xx x x
x
x
x x
x xx
x
x x
x
x xx °
x
x x
XX x fxx
x
x x
XXX x
x x
x x
xx
x
x36
fit'
x x x x
x
x
z
x1xx
x
x x
x
x x x x
x x x x xxxx Cx
xxxx
x
X
X
x
x xx
x
x x
x
x
x x x
x xx x x x x
R
* x
x
x
x
x 10 x n6p,
x x x
Fig. 2.3.2. WDCA observations for January-March of all years.
(Fig. 2.3.3 on previous page)
83
(i)
May
It* 9
46'
42'
Fig. 2.3.4. Observation lines occupied by Japan Fisheries Agency and the Prefectural Fisheries
Experimental Stations adjacent to Hokkaido for each month of 1985 (JFA, 1989).
84
February
June
{IF,y
*LI'
"l
[I
rJF
fJf
,
JJ
July
r7kill
u rAj * i i
17
f;k
f11
,J<,
kA
I
I
140
150'
September
Sill
p
Fig. 2.3.4 (ii)
46'
44'
42
40*
38'
44' N
42'
40'
38'
85
ail
138 140' 142' 144' 146'
October
r,
42'
41'
40'
39'
38'
37'
86
140'
150
November
December
O 0-
Fig.2.3.4 (iii)
142' 143' 144' 145' 146' 147'
November
141' 142' 143' 144' 145'
42'
41
40
39'
38'
37
36'
111
G
Iw
s A
ss7
1
II
" \v
0
t Ullut.Y.. t U'1 uj}a..\J`C`-;;%ili'!1U
\/
^
rr
1ija
Ii
1
I IlY
---ta
r" 11
Fig. 2.3.5.
Circulation pattern in the Okhotsk Sea given by various investigators.
A through C are
the dynamic topography at the sea surface referred to the 400
db surface
A and B: in August-September, 1916 and 1917, respectively,
by Shigematu [1933]
C: in July-August by Akiba et al. [1959]
D: is the dynamic topography at 100 m referred to 400 db surface
(in July-August, 1942
by Kajiura [1949])
87
i4____
140
60
5
150 160E
rf-i
Q
(ti
r
4
0 6'
n ev
L 1$(
(0.1
f 06-4.
k).)
0
140 150
60
I
l iF'I
f
S
QeP j ® -- 4
ty
140
Fig. 2.3.5
150
160
160 E
N
60
55
50
45
E: is based on GEK measurements (lida, 1969)
F: (Leonov, 1960)
G: (Moroshkin, 1962) are schematic circulations based on synthesis of the available
knowledge.
Fig. 2.2.4 in the previous chapter presented an additional view.
88
150E 140E 150-E 160-E 170'E 160' 1/0 leu-r a-.. + .. -
60N
50N
40N
FlougE 42.
Location of recognized currents in the Subarctic Pacific Region (1-Southeast Kamchatka;
2-Southwest
Kamchatka; 3-East Kamchatka Deep; 4-West Kamchatka; 5-Penzhinsk; 6-North
Okhotsk; 7-Udsk; 8-
Tugurk; 9-UI'ltansk; IO-Amur; I1-West Sakhalin; 12-East Sakhalin; 13-Soya;
14-Kuril; 15-Oyashio;
16--Tsugaru: 17-Subarctic; 18-Western Subarctic; ]!)--California; 20-California
Undercurrent; 21-Alaska;
22-Alaskan Stream; 23-Aleutian; 24-Amukta; 25-Amchitka; 26-Buildir; 27-Near;
28-Alaskan Stream
Undercurrent; 29-Commander; 30-"Transverse; 31--West Alaska; 32--Kvichak;
33-Nushagak; 34-Kuskokwim;
35-Pribilof; 36-Yukon; 37---St. Lawrence; 38-Na varin; 39-Anadyr; 40-Olyutorskiy;
41-Last Katchatka;
42-Copper).
Fig. 2.3.6.
Currents in the Subarctic Pacific. Figure 42 from Favorite et at. (1976).
60-N
50°N
40°N
89
1 1i 15Z 15.6-
A
v''1 r." = sE
t
'ply
n
f/ S
Fig. 2.3.7. A: Temperature (°C) at the temperature minimum (dichothermal layer) in August, 1969
(Kitani, 1973a). B: The same in July-August, 1942 (Kajiura, 1949).
Fig. 2.3.8. A: ice limit and surface temperature (°C) in February, 1938 (Kurashina et at., 1967).
B: temperature at 50m in August, 1941 (Tabata, 1952).
90
Drifter #7162 - PMEL/NOAA
55
53
51
0
47
0
Fig. 2.3.9.
Surface drifter track in early 1991
(NOAA/PMEL drifter #7162; courtesy
LONGITUDE
Fig. 2.3.10.
Dynamic topography
(in 10-2 dyn m) of the
surface relative to 100
db in September, 1970
(Kitani and Shimazaki,
1971).
45
of P. Stabeno).
C) LO C) Ln
L() Lc) CD CD
91
I e ea',,
I
July 1973
rr r r.:;: ;rsr.
Fig. 2.3.11. Sea surface temperature (°C) off the east coast of Sakhalin in summer from 1965 to 1974
(Fujii and Abe, 1976).
1\.
July 1970
Fig. 2.3.12. Sea surface salinity off the east coast of Sakhalin in summer from 1965 to 1974 (Fujii
and Abe, 1976).
July 1973
CH
^z (
C-2-
July 1970
July 1973
Fig. 2.3.13. Temperature (°C) and salinity at 100 m off the east coast of Sakhalin in summer from
1965 to 1974 (Fujii and Abe, 1976).
Fig. 2.3.14. (a) Salinity at 27.0 ae and (b) oxygen at 27.4 ae (Talley, 1991).
(a)
(b)
95
34
140 1500
0.4
160° 170°
27 .48
1.0
0.8
130°E 140° 150° 160°
60°N
170° 180°
SON
45
50N
45
145 ISO
SON
45
SON
45
Fig. 2.3.15. Dynamic topography (0/1000 db) in the Kuril Basin for (a) June-July, 1977, (b) October,
1977, (c) July, 1978 and (d) November, 1978. The contour lines are in dynamic meters
(Wakatsuchi and Martin, 1991).
96
145 150 155E

130°
60°
55°
50°
135° 140° 145°
Snonlorsh.y _
Island (V-
Snonlortki,
, Bay .A
150°
Acod
Scien
utlnsnlerna
Ter pe nia
oy--4ft
Kuril
Basin
45*
Soya Strait
155° 160°
SUELIK OF
/'7 BAY
q
165° 170°
Fig. 2.3.17. Locations of the temperature and salinity sections shown in Fig. 2.3.18 and profiles
shown in Fig. 2.3.21. (Kitani and Shimazaki, 1971).
98
tw i, ".\^12 11 10 20
.9
32.70
".
OX
100
?00
300
400
500
B
Fig. 2.3.18. Temperature (°C) and salinity sections along the lines shown in
Fig. 2.3.17. (Note that
observations deeper than 1000 m are shown only in A):
A: Temperature distribution along the meridional
line A-A roughly along 150°E in
June, 1967 (Kitani, 1973a)
B: Temperature and salinity roughly along 55°N in July-August, 1958 (Akiba et al.,
1959)
C: Temperature and salinity roughly along 51°N in July-August, 1942 (Kajiura, 1949)
D: Temperature and salinity roughly along 49°N in August, 1941 (Tabata, 1952)
E: Temperature and salinity roughly along 47°N in July-August, 1952 (Kajiura, 1949). 99
Vertical dotted and dashed line indicates the position of the Kuril Islands.
57 58 59 60
Station
61 62 63 64. 65 47 464544
D
50°
45°
40°
14 0°
i
POT-T on 150c1/ton surface
in Sept. 1992
10.
145° 150°
11
I
155° 160°
Fig. 2.3.19.
Potential temperature at 26.65 co in September, 1992. (Kawasaki and Kono, 1993).
I0
20-50M
-
ti
S, =2C0
8
.j 2000-3000m
800.1200m%.
325 330 33.5 340 34.5 35.0
Salinity(%.1
O
Fig. 2.3.20. T-S relations (upper figure) and 02-S relations (lower figure) of the water in the deep
southern Okhotsk Sea in summer.
Salinity decreases monotonically from surface to
bottom. (Kitani, 1973).
Temperature ( C)
-2 0 2 4
1-1215
320
33.0
020
0---0 June 16 1967 153.29 E
020
020
'.4120
56.36N
1967 (D----.o June !7 ,,050
153.29 E
5.59N
p0 0-- July 2 1967 461. 122 E
Q50
Q90
Q5a
34.01
120,
2.00t
00
20
x 2.30
3501
Q00 K.
X260\ \
0,00 K.
(1 0
)F000 K.
Q 405
f Q 003
47. 28 N
QIQ, )4--x June13 1967 150.22 E
OIO
26.5
41 `'ti010
53' O7 N
Depth (Km)
27.0
Fig. 2.3.21. T-S relations at various locations in the Okhotsk Sea (Yasuoka, 1968). The positions are
shown in Fig. 2.3.17 labeled c through f.
101
100
146E
59N
54;N
54 N
145'E 150E
56N
56N
547N
Fig. 2.3.22. Temperature (°C: left) and salinity (right) at the sea surface in September, 1970 (Kitani
and Shimazaki, 1971).
140E 145E
5!!N
59N
54 N
150'E
Fig. 2.3.23. Temperature (°C: solid) and salinity (dotted) at 100 m in September, 1970 (Kitani and
Shimazaki, 1971).
102
STATION NO.
100
200
300
400
117 106 ISA
STATION NO,
136 130 Ni 169 171
Fig. 2.3.24. Temperature (°C: solid) and salinity (dotted) (left figure) and dissolved oxygen content
(ml/l: solid) and saturation (dotted) (right figure) for section C in Fig. 2.3.17 (Kitani and
Shimazaki, 1971).
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
St.120
32,5 33.0
SALINITY (%6)
33.5 34.0
Fig. 2.3.25. Typical T-S curves observed in the northern part of the
Okhotsk Sea (Kitani and
Shimazaki, 1971). Station locations are shown in Fig. 2.3.17.
103
145* 150* 155E
I
o
J
I!
O
1.1
0
1
6
.
1.0
o
o
o
_Jo
\ i
u
o.
-OS
0
o
al
0
V e j o 0
0
50' N
45'
Fig. 2.3.26. Distribution of dissolved oxygen at 1,000 m in summer, 1965 (Yasuoka, 1968).
Temperature (°C)
328 33.0
nity (%°)
33.2 33.4 33.6
-2.0 -1.0 0 1.0 2.0
0
E 50
n
m
0
100
- Temperature
.......... Salinity
Sept. 1970
Oyashio Maru
150
140 E 145 E 15 E 55 E
0 51.106 51.10, 511..10 51.121
58 N 51.107
54106
5 1 1 1 6 . {
56N
51110/...
54N
Soklwlin
zoom
Kameholka
Fig. 2.3.27. Vertical profiles of temperature and salinity in the shelf region of the northern Okhotsk
Sea. The symbols shown at data points indicate the observed positions shown in the
lower map. (Kitani, 1973a).
104
Fig. 2.3.28.
Horizontal distribution of water mass types defined in Kitani
(1973a).
A': shelf water which is saline and dense near the bottom
A: water with a clear temperature minimum layer of tens of
meters thickness, in which temperature and salinity are
uniform
B: water with a fairly clear temperature minimum, but in
which a homogeneous temperature and salinity layer is not
apparent
C: vertically mixed water with weak vertical gradients both
in temperature and salinity profiles
D: water with two temperature minima.
Vertically mixed
water appears over the Kashevarov Bank, over the eastern
shelf region and off the Kamchatka Peninsula, and in the
vicinity of the Kuril Islands
3.0
-1.0
-2.0
9,=150
0
0
0
0
0
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
9, ' 100
ef.OO. °.4. ".
_0%0. D- soft 9. ".m. e.... ............
Freezing
Point
32.8 33.0 33.2 33.4
33.6
Salinity (°/CC )
Fig. 2.3.29.
Distribution of water types at the temperature minimum for each water mass type
(Kitani, 1973a).
Since the symbols used for Type A' and Type A are difficult to
identify
in the figure,
the vertical bar at 33.1 indicates the boundary between these two types.
Type A
ID Type B
o Type C
o Type D
Type A'
011
(D
m
m m;:
m
m am
m
0
MDIDp
m
m
m
m
CD
a?'
mm
m
m mw
m
0
m
mm
105
2.0
E
1.0
0
0
0
(rll'
+ .,. 2S
3
(a)
1.0
(b) (c)
Fig. 2.3.30. Temperature (a: °C) and dissolved oxygen (b: ml/1) at thermosteric anomaly of 105 cl/t,
and the depth (c: m) of the surface (Kitani, 1973a).
31.5 92,0 32.5
Salinity
33.0 33.5
Fig. 2.3.31. Schematic representation of the seasonal variation of T-S relation of the surface water in
the Okhotsk Sea (Kitani, 1973b).
0
(m)
100
n
d
0
200
300
1964
Feb. May Aug. Nov.
Fig. 2.3.32. Seasonal variation of the vertical temperature profile in the southern
Okhotsk Sea in
1964 (Kitani, 1973b).
107
50N
45
145
50N
45
145
150
150
155E
155E
SON
45
50N
45
145
145
150
150
155E
155E
Fig. 2.3.33. (a) Depth (m), (b) temperature (°C), (c) salinity and (d) dissolved oxygen content (ml/1)
at ae of 27.02 (thermosteric anomaly of 105 cl/t) in November, 1978 (Wakatsuchi and
Martin, 1991).
108
50N
45
145
50N
45
150
155E
Fig. 2.3.34. Sea surface temperature (a: °C) and surface
salinity (b) in the Kuril Basin Region in
November 1978 (Wakatsuchi and Martin, 1991).
109
B
OK-89
4 ST.
47 46 45 OK-44
0 M
Fig. 2.3.35.
Temperature and salinity along the section
passing through Bussol' Strait in the summer of
1967. The location of the section is shown in
the left map as the A-B line (Yasuoka, 1968).
145E 1 55E
55N
zoo
o
L2 ``
boom
. e.
``
Q
I.I I0 t.ll,
50N
2.46
1900.
a()
19
1.{
45N
TempereturC
---- Oxygen ml/L
Fig. 2.3.36.
75 65
Temperature (°C) and dissolved oxygen (ml/1) on the
a, = 27.4 surface in the summer of 1967 (Yasuoka,
1968). The arrows are the paths of water advection
deduced from the distributions (Yasuoka, 1968)..
110
Fig. 2.3.37. (a) Calculated tidal amplitudes and phases, and (b) tidal ellipses for the different
constituents of the tide (Suzuki and Kanari, 1986).
Fig. 2.3.37.
(c) Currents at different phases of the tides (Suzuki and Kanari, 1986).
111
140
145 150°E
ON
46
45
44
43
O
Fig. 2.4.1. Bathymetric chart (m) of the southern Okhotsk Sea (Takizawa, 1982).
112
10
0
1 2 3 4 `5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 2 3 4 5
E
30
20
10L
2 3 4 5 6 7 6 9 10 11 12 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 2 3 4 5
1981 1982 1983
Fig. 2.4.2. Sea level variations (upper figure) at Wakkanai (solid) and at Abashiri (dashed), and the
sea level difference (lower figure) between the two stations from December, 1980 to
May, 1983. Sea levels are measured from the standard level at Tokyo Point (Nakamura
et al., 1985).
CURRENT SPEED
1 9 7 3
50
SURFACE
LAYER
-\7.5 N.MILE
it
\ \ 1 59._<-.`
l
'\ *17. 5
0
/\e/ 27.5.__.-_ ° \.<
\e
a
L j I 1 I
D 1 F M A M 1 1 A S 0 N 0 1
Fig. 2.4.3. Seasonal variations of the surface current off Mombetsu calculated from the sea level
differences between Wakkanai, Mombetsu and Abashiri in 1973. The along shore
current velocities are given for several distances from shore (numerals attached indicate
the distance in miles) (Aota, 1975).
113
too
Fig. 2.4.4. Locations of observations on R/V Tansei-maru of the Ocean Research Institute, Univ. of
Tokyo, 17-21 April, 1971 (Aota, 1971).
St. 1 0 7 6 5 4 3 2
50 20 0 N.M
0
50
D
150
St. 24 22 22 71 20 11 18 17 16 15 14 13
60 5o 40 30 20 0 N.M
St. 24 25 26 27 24 25 20
60 50 c0 20
St.31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 St.48 47 46 45 44 43
10 20
10 20 30 40 N.M 0
(e)
30 N.M
Fig. 2.4.5. Temperature (°C) and chlorinity (o/oo) distribution for sections along line A (a), line C
(b), line D (c), line E (d), and line F (e). See Fig. 2.4.4 for the positions of these lines
(Aota, 1971).
114
(d)
Fig. 2.4.6.
Horizontal distributions of temperature (°C) and chlorinity (o/oo) on 17-21 April, 1971
(Aota, 1971).
Fig. 2.4.7. Vertical sections of temperature (°C) and salinity (o/oo) in Soya Strait on 19 August,
1933 measured on R/V Tankai-maru (Aota et al., 1988). The line runs from Cape Soya
to Cape Nishi-Notoro (Cape Krilion: the southernmost tip of Sakhalin), and the distance
from Cap Soya is shown in abscissa.
115
10
Fig. 2.4.8.
70
1tz
=mss
1933tF- 5 !I 17-- 6 1=110E1
o..
u 3O 14.00
The temperature (°C) and chlorinity (o/oo)
distributions from the section off Wakkanai on 21-23
January, 1969 (Aota, 1975).
Fig. 2.4.9.
Current measurements over 24 hours using Ekman-
Merz current meters in Soya Strait for 17 May - 10
June, 1933 on the survey ship Ohdomari of the
Japanese Imperial Navy (Nakamura et al., 1985).
116
Fig. 2.4.10.
Currents measured by GEK in late
August, 1958 (Wakao and Kojima,
1963). Numerals indicate current
speed in knots.
15
0 10
5
0
30
I
31
Hokko maru Katu maru
A Strt 9 3/17 1977 . Ko- 2620 6121.1977
x
5 4/11
15 4J14
R ot0 maru
39 7128 . Ry-5310 1111 1978
v 1.1. 7/29
60 7131
32 33
5 (G/00)
34 35
Fig. 2.4.11.
Typical T-S curves of the water masses
in the southwestern Okhotsk Sea. The
observation locations and dates are
shown in the map and in the table in
the upper column. T-S domains for
typical masses are shown.
S: Soya Warm Water
S': Forerunner of the Soya Warm
Water
IC: Intermediate Cold Water
TL: Transient Layer Water
0: Okhotsk Surface Water
E: East Sakhalin Current Water
Numbers attached to data points
indicate depths in m (Takizawa, 1982).
117
20
a
m
v
x
100
DISTANCE (N. MILES)
10 20 30
7
....'
:- 18.0
2
f", -0
18,2.......
4'\x.18.8
APR. 10 X68
18.6
\\\ 18,4
TEMPERATURE *C
CHLORINITY %.
DISTANCE (N.MILES)
10 20
104 MAY. 2 '68
30
,` `..:
;:. ` I..O,
0 182......
6'- 8.4
1 r 18.6
I0 20 30 40
0 rn
100
2
100
100
DISTANCE (N.MILES)
10 20
DISTANCE (N.MILES)
10 20
Fig. 2.4.12. Vertical sections of temperature (°C) and chlorinity (o/oo) off Mombetsu in March-May
in the period from 1968 to 1970. The left, center and right columns are the observation
years 1968, 1969 and 1970, respectively. Observation times are arranged roughly from
top to bottom (Aota, 1975).
DISTANCE( N.MILES)
30
20
MONTH
9 i 10 t 11 1 12
Fig. 2.4.13.
25 mite
5
4
3
2
Fig. 2.4.14.
1
0
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1
Seasonal variations of the vertical
temperature and salinity profiles
deduced from three years of
observations. The upper figure is at
the station 5 miles off Mombetsu, the
middle figure at the station 15 miles,
and the lower figure at the station at 25
miles, respectively (Aota, 1971).
Seasonal variation of the cross-sectional area
(km2) of the Soya Current Water off Mombetsu
and off Esashi (Aota, 1971). The symbols
used are listed in the figure.
119
r--
X t 06
M ;/Sec
1.0
ON
12 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
MONTH
CAPE
SOYA
VOLUME
TRANSPORT
OF SOYA WARM CURRENT
20 40 N.MILE
N
Fig. 2.4.15.
Seasonal variation of the volume
transport of the Soya Current
calculated from the cross-sectional area
variation in Fig. 2.4.14 and from the
velocity field variation deduced from
the sea levels at Wakkanai, Mombetsu
and Abashiri (Section 2.4.2) (Aota,
1975).
Fig. 2.4.16.
Locations of the moored current meter
observations (open circles): at 25 m at
the 4 mile and 8 mile stations in 1976-
1977, at 25 m at the 4 mile station, at
25 m and 60 m at the 8 mile station and
at 25 m at the 15 mile station in 1977-
1978, and at 25 m at the 8 mile station
in 1978-1979. In 1978-1979, measure-
ment at 25 m at the 6 mile station of
Ohmu was also carried out. Tem-
perature and salinity distributions will
be shown along the line to the northeast
of Mombetsu. (Aota and Kawamura,
1978)
120
- PARALLEL COMP. -20
eC
NORMAL COMP.
A
2
0
-2
TEMPERATURE
SALINITY
...v- ,;'.^--^-,.--%'
30
DEC
1976
30
DEC
1976
10 20
JAN
JAN
30 10 20
FEB
1977
10 20
MAR
20 30 10 20 10 20
FEB MAR
1977
3
33
32
431
Fig. 2.4.17. Current components (24 hour running means) parallel and normal to the coast, and of
temperature and salinity, off Mombetsu in winter of 1976-1977.
Positive speed is
southeastward and offshore. The upper figure is at 25 m at the 4 mile station, and the
lower figure at 25 m at the 8 mile station. (Aota and Kawamura, 1978).
121
MOMBETSU
0
10N.MILE
I
-NE
SOYA
0 10N.MILE
E
Fig. 2.4.18. Temperature and salinity sections along the line off Mombetsu (left) on 25 December and
in Soya Strait (right) on 23 December, 1977. The positions of moored current meters in
winter 1977-1978 are shown by white open circles in the upper and left figure (Aota and
Kawamura, 1978).
122
47
/ X28 IJ1
3-
2 7
PEP oa" BPS
X25 1
4
P
Sf
Pt
24 80
1
4
of
of
So{>2-23
29
17
4
8 0
34 l `R
35
..
.
37 FP
4 f 10
Rv cow 40 1 S 0
Ja
12 4 4
5 '- a 41
F 33"
0
6
7 8
c
38
39
o{P
cp 6-
P
3 p s
Fp
48
AREA OF SUBARCTIC BOUNDARY
142' 143 144' 145' 146' 147 f48' f49' 15O 151'
Fig. 2.4.19. Schematic of circulation of water masses in the southern Kuril area (Bobkov, 1993).
123
C)
0 40km
0 40km
V-9 10 11
2CO
12
160
- T(°C)
-- S(./-)
Off Cape Notoro
16 -17 May 1955
Tenryu
b)
V-16 17
33.0
0
10 iii/I ,--f-
.L
5
33.6
I '6 \ \336t2
E
100
a
a,
200
318 340 \ :312
I H
0
340 1 I -1 1 0
0 40km
16 15 14
`\\ 33.4 100
f
\` 0
21
` 33.8 33.6
Off Monbetsu
17 May 1955
Tenryu
Fig. 2.4.20.
(a):
(b):
200
0
Oceanic conditions on 14-19 May, 1955 (Takizawa, 1982).
The horizontal distribution of sea surface temperature
(solid: °C) and salinity (dashed: o/oo)
Temperature (solid: °C) and salinity
(dashed: o/oo)
sections (left figure), and thermosteric anomaly (solid:
cl/t) and dissolved oxygen (dashed: ml/1) sections (right
figure) along line M off Mombetsu
The same as (b) except along line N off Cape Notoro
The same as (b) except along line S off Cape Shiretoko
33
0
100
-334
200
300
400
500
2
40km
3
T(IC)
Off Cape Shiretoko
14 May 1955
Tenryu
0 40km
V-1 2 3
0 t60-_9
60-
0
7\ /6- 120 17
1 \ \! H
H \ i
\\\ \
110
1 \
6 '
100
- S' (Cut)
---02 (m1/I)
124
0
140
145
150°E
Fig. 2.4.21.
Schematic representation of the paths of the
Soya Current. The shaded area indicates the
area where the Soya Current Water eventually
decays (Takizawa, 1982).
11r
113'
115'
46'
Fig. 2.4.22.
Variability of the 5°C isotherm
15'
position at 50 m depth. All positions
measured in the period 1968 to 1982
are shown.
This can be regarded as the
southern boundary of the Dichothermal
Water. Although there exists a narrow
mixed water zone, the position also
1{'
141' 11'_' 113' 111'
14, 11:'
snows roughly the offshore boundary
of the Soya Current Water (Nakamura
et at., 1985).
Fig. 2.4.23.
Sea surface temperature (°C) obtained by
NOAA IR image in the southern Okhotsk Sea
at 13:28 on 28 September, 1990.
The cold
water belt is indicated by hatching. The
shaded area indicates no observation due to
cloud cover. Al through A4 indicate the
position of hydrographic observations shown in
Aota et at. (1991).
125
DISTANCE
Fig. 2.4.24.
5W-
10
E-line
TEMP.('C )
CROSS SECTION
AUG.26 - SEP. 3 1981
HOKUYO MARU
150
(m)
DISTANCE
0
50 F-
100F
5
(N.M.)
15 20 25 30 0
50F-
a
w
0
100F-
DISTANCE
Vertical sections of
temperature (°C: left
figure) and salinity
(o/oo: right figure)
along the line extending
northeast off Mombetsu
on 26 August-3
September, 1981.
White circles on the
upper margin indicate
the positions of CTD
observations and black
circles those of XBT
observations (Motoi et
al., 1982).
Fig. 2.4.25.
TEMP.('C)
150
CROSS SECTION
(m) AUG.26 - SEP. 3 1981
HOKUYO MARU
a
SALINITY('/..)
150 CROSS SECTION
(m) AUG. 26 - SEP. 3 1981
HOKUYO MARU
SALINITY('/..)
CROSS SECTION
AUG.26 - SEP. 3 1981
HOKUYO MARU
b
The same, as in Fig.
2.4.24 except along the
line 20 miles southeast
of the line off
Mombetsu (Motoi et
al., 1982).
126
F-line
10 20 30 40 50 (km)
Offshore distance
Fig. 2.4.26.
Temperature (°C) and salinity (o/oo) sections off
Mombetsu in late April, 1984 (Wakatsuchi and
Ohshima, 1990).
Fig. 2.4.27. A photograph of a cyclonic ice-ocean eddy observed off the coast of Esashi-Ohmu from
an aircraft at altitude 1000 feet at 07:00 on 23 January, 1987. The eddy was about
20
km in diameter and was marked by ice belts composed of homogeneous sized ice floes
with a diameter of about 10 m (Wakatsuchi and Ohshima, 1990).
127
ombetsu
Fig. 2.4.28.
Evolution of the backward breaking wave
pattern in the ice edge observed by the sea ice
radar network from 0:00 on 14 April, 1984 to
12:00 on 16 April, 1984: left figures show the
radar images and right figures are sketches of
pack-ice area with arrows which indicate the
moving direction of ice floes (Wakatsuchi and
Ohshima, 1990).
128
Esash
Esash
ombetsu
E
(ti
°c
0 10
'V
+ ¶ +'
+
+O
+++ + +
+4
++tF ++ + +
with no pack ice
o with pack ice
Of
-1
1
1
0 50 100 150
200 250
Distance from the
Strait (km)
Fig. 2.4.29. Wavelengths of the frontal
waves as a function of distance from Soya Strait.
Data (+)
are based on the records of radar images collected during the
years 1969-1988. Data
(black and white circles)
are based on the NOAA IR images in the spring (March
through May): black circles indicate that
no sea ice exists and white circles that sea ice
exists (Wakatsuchi and Ohshima, 1990).
Fig. 2.5.1.
KC: Kuroshio
KE: Kuroshio Extension
CC: California Current
SAC: Subarctic current
AC: Alaska current
AS: Alaskan Stream
WSAG: Western subarctic gyre
CBWS: cold saline bottom water
Schematic of the subarctic gyre in the North Pacific (Ohtani,
1991).
KCC: Kuroshio Counter current
NPC: North Pacific Current
SAB and Oy: Subarctic boundary and Oyashio
WWD: West Wind Drift
AG: Alaskan gyre
EKC: East Kamchatka Current
OSG: Okhotsk gyre
129
50
Ma
TSUGARU
WARM WATER
%614 2
38°
Fig. 2.5.2.
Hirano's (1957) classification of waters in the
western subarctic gyre.
K: Kuroshio Water
0: Oyashio water (Okhotsk water in
Hirano's classification)
B: Bering water, C: central water of the
western subarctic region
A: water from Gulf of Alaska
Ma and Mb: mixed water between the
Kuroshio and Oyashio waters off the
Sanriku coast and along the subarctic
boundary, respectively
Me: mixed water between the central
water
Mb, Md: mixed water between the central
water and the Oyashio water
\V1 I
2F4FIRST
OYASHIO
INTRUSION
N k
0 rr SG =P#fl 71: t
9ZO.
N,y OYASHIO AREA
c oc
O
oy Ny
-Po
o yA
Fig. 2.5.3.
Schematic of circula-
tion and water masses
in the Mixed Water
Region from Kawai
(1972).
130
10
10
nil
Winter
m11
11 Argo 1966
5
W. BERING
SEA
EAST KAM
5
-CHATKA C.
02
33.0 34.0
. .
,2;
01.11 /
5
U
OYASHIO
URIL K-HOKKI00
33
33.0
(a) (b)
(c)
Fig. 2.5.4. (a) T-S relation in the East Kamchatka Current and western Bering Sea. L.L.T.P.:
34
34.0
lower limit of temperature in the Pacific waters. U.L.T.W.B.: upper limit of
temperature in the western Bering Sea
(b) T-S relations in the southern Okhotsk Sea. U.L.T.S.O.: upper limit of temperature
in the southern Okhotsk Sea
(c) T-S in the Oyashio, showing that its properties lie between the East Kamchatka
Current (which is warmer) and Okhotsk Sea properties.(which is colder). "Argo"
stations are those used in Figs. 2.5.6 and 2.5.7 (Ohtani, 1989).
L LO..0..;
0:
3_
33
.
Summer
Kof u 1977
SOYA WC.
34
0C
T
Typical winter structures of the Western
subarctic waters
(West Bering Sea & Western subarctic Gyre)
500
1000
1500
m
011
26.5 27 275
T, O:0
5
_NC,mI/I
S
33.0. 34.0
loured lwul
N,aluj
SPn4 Lm
11
U,: Puor
Nulrlentr
: N, cl,
P:an
S, aw:rerse
L
01 T
Ileep 4),uncrers
Nrlrr SI:,Mcrrrre
Fig. 2.5.5. Typical winter structure of the western subarctic waters. (Ohtani, 1989).
132
BOREAS EXPEDITION
o
R
P ;
s a
AD 0/1000 g5 (a)
115 1
._
'
%
, , I
; .
I I' LI ' i
iL
IA 5
'I 1.2 '12SI
-7
12M5
50
40
BORERS EXPEDITION
Temperature at the /L)
Sea Surface UJ
IO
0'.
X10
-10
3.0
I J 2.0 . -..
40
fI
r20
60
50
40
Fig. 2.5.6. (a) Geopotential anomaly at the sea surface with respect to 1000 dbar
(b) Temperature (°C) at the sea surface
(c) Salinity at the sea surface
(d) Thermosteric anomaly at the sea surface (Reid, 1972).
170° 180° 170- 160-
105/
60
40
ST
3.6=
3'\.6
-3. r-
SALINITY
Boreas Rehoboth
50 51 5253 17 32.8 20
Om 32r
-.
328
L-33----
N
34.4
Fig. 2.5.7. Vertical sections of temperature just south of Kamchatka Strait:
(left - winter; right -
summer), from Reid (1972).
M
BOREAS EXPEDITION
Depth of the
Mixed Layer
(T,S)
TEMPERATURE
Boreas Rehoboth
50 51 5253
/5
17 /2 2013
Om
/'/
/
170
125
125
170-
<D
01
i
a OJ
12"
--100-?--
71717171,
J is
25
5
1
co
o
Fig. 2.5.8. Mixed layer depth estimated from the saturation ratio of dissolved oxygen (Reid, 1982).
134
Rehoboth
17 19 20 13
;160,
.150.
0 100 0 100
(a)
30'E I.0'E 150E 160E i0'E
F
160 1)T0'r
`
160r 150'r' '10'W
JUNE
Sr
Sr
d¢ 1
00M
50.1
Fig. 2.5.9. Monthly mean integrated Sverdrup transport (Sv), 1960-1969, for (a) January and (b)
June (Favorite et al., 1976).
135
a
60n
0
00
0
M
Fig. 2.5.10. (a) Monthly mean wind stress and Sverdrup transport along the two lines in (b).
Open
circles are for the years of anomalous southward intrusion (Fig. 2.5.25) and solid circles
are for all other years during 1961 - 1983 (Sekine, 1988).
136
n
5
0. r1ap
1` /yam,'
_G /
Lr
:C'_ i1-
07
MM
6' -
np. KpysenWrepna:
0....'
- FB
_-_ -
.0'
a:.
0. CNMYW.'
- - - -
-7---
1P.
-
0. XON Na ItAO
=1 E:]1
3 4 j ]S
Fig. 2.5.11. Eddies in the East Kamchatka Current and Oyashio, from infrared images from NOAA
satellites for 29 September-2 October, 1980. The small panel at the top is for September
21-22, 1981. For the key in the lower right corner:
1 - cold currents
2 - subarctic waters and transformed waters of the cold currents
3 - transformed waters of warm currents
4 - branches of the warm currents
5 - location of CTD casts (Bulatov and Lobanov, 1983).
137
10
o.
S ea
Q
f t t 'A5
Okh otsk
10
5 9
/
10.5 t 1
0110.
A .
A4-
10.5
10
10.75 1 1
10.5 10
.A3 .
' 11
10
2
.A
:A1
11.5
10
10.5-
151° 155° 160°
52°
50°
48°
46°
44°
Fig. 2.5.12. Dynamic height at the sea surface relative to 1000 dbar in fall, 1990, showing Kuril
eddies (Rogachev et al., 1993).
138
141 144 147 160 163
48 V-
0 YPY
48
T
8XII' 990
p
pp ppp
00
p
ti pp0
8
: V -
O K KJi N' A'0.::.
6
16,V ;t
606
89 6.7.199
43
0p0 0.3
25,V 1988 '. °o
4000
`' 0 i Z 3 49 mlm
1986
40
. 5..:: 20V.1987
1987
37
611
1988
M 30.IV.19 86
00 Oft
90
1989
IrJ, C'NO
141 144 147
(a)
50°
5
A 1979
0 -- 1980
1981
URUO
KAHCNATKA'
O
11
0
15.10.81
81 ' 20.09 .
X2.10.80
: 20.08.
-1
20.o9.?n' 3 ;*1 .0
9.80
12.10.79
--20.08.79
13.10.81
150
0
t
155 °
(b)
Fig. 2.5.13. (a) Track of Kuroshio warm core ring 86B (A3), based on satellite photographs and ship
data. The insert panel is the translation
velocity of the eddy (Lobanov et al., 1991).
(b) Tracks of several Kuril eddies, moving northeastward at 2-6 cm/sec (Lobanov and
Bulatov, 1993).
160°
139
28.08.81
145'E
150'E 155E
45'N
40'N
Fig. 2.5.14. Volume transports relative to 1500 dbar and salinity at 120 cl/ton in September, 1989
(Kawasaki et al., 1991).
140
Fig. 2.5.15.
(b)
1991
KT'1
500
1 2 3 4 5 0 1 2 3 4 5
POTENTIAL TEMPERATURE (8.C)
(a) Potential temperature as a function of
specific
volume anomaly around the Kuril
Islands. The light dashed curves are reference
profiles from the East Kamchatka Current
(MU7) and the Okhotsk Sea
(KT'3) (Kawasaki
and Kono, 1993b).
(b) Individual comparison of waters from the East Kamchatka Current (KT1), the
Okhotsk Sea (KT'2), and the mixed water around the Kuril Islands (KT' 1) from
Kawasaki and Kono (1992).
141
142
Fig. 2.5.15 (c) Station locations for the preceding.
rn
_T
a
0 150
C
a
r.,:,
a 11
,50c
0 water
4 0 Ns'
C water ~t`'
a
~
(A)
'1... co
200 400 600 800 1000 1200
Depth (m)
a
0 2 4 6
Temperature (°c)
oa
ca
0 water
,%, C water
(C)
I I I
33.0 34.0
Salinity
C Water ,_X;"
ry. °o
0 water
1 a
(D)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Oxygen (ml/t)
(e)
150° 1550 160° 1650 E
Fig. 2.5.16. Okhotsk and Central (East Kainchatka Current) waters: (a) - (d) properties, (e) location
of stations (Ishikawa, 1988).
143
r
t :
l
1
jA,
Ip£.-. i 4/ it ii! u1 lc
6P
lr
. ;, .
III
!
s
`:
!!/
1 A
.
o
lift vii , ,f ;" _ _ .° a,
,i it tt - `-o= .
1
Y
` on
o /
x
k
! '/ i
k
1 1
moo= 1 j%;
; 11j ,l
i //
/
Ali,
144
Fig. 2.5.17. (a)
Results from drift
bottle releases in 1914
(Kajiyama, 1936). The
small circles show the
locations of regular
releases (approximately
50 at each site). The
arrows show the
inferred currents based
on the recoveries. A
total of 4960 were
released and 771
recovered.
Fig. 2.5.17 (b)
Results from drift
bottle releases in 1933
(Uda, 1936). In the
boxes are shown the
number of bottles
released and recovered.
f"F
40°
35°
140° E
18 17 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27
VELOCITY (cm/sec)
43°N 42° 41° 40° 39' 38' 37° 36° 35° 34'
:ITWPPRA()CTrPI1`
ton)
ANOMALY
Icv/
1200
° ° ° 43 N 42° 41 40 39 38 36 37 35° 34°
(b)
(a)
Fig. 2.5.18. (a) Geostrophic velocity relative to 1000 dbar, from the 144°E section across the
Oyashio and Kuroshio Extension, February 1967.
(b) Thermosteric anomaly for the same section (Kawai, 1972).
145
1000
loot
xx PROGRESSIVE VECTOR xx
.. PROGRESSIVE VECTOR ..
(a)
u 100 k .(INTERVAL) . 120
COMMENT KT-88-8 KS 1
POSITION 42-29.2 N 145-01.0 E
DEPTH 5400 / 17400
CM-NUMBER 5941
DURATION 1988 5/30 - 1989 5/28
hour3
Fig. 2.5.19. Progressive vector diagrams from a current meter deployed at about 500 m in water of
about 1700 m depth along the Akkeshi-line in 1987-1989:
(a) at 480 m in 1680 m depth in 1987 and
(b) at 540m in 1740 m depth for 1988-1989 (Kawasaki and Kono, 1992 paper 28).
146
142 144 146'
Ale
' /
1 .
42
42
AIO
' 40 40
0
A15
36' 36'
142' 144' 146'
(a)
2000
4W
350
300
250
200
150
1W
W
0
0 50 1W 150 270 250
I"1
1500
1000
Sao
Co
500 150 2000 250 km
300 350
(c)
4W 450
(b)
500 Mm
Fig. 2.5.20. (a) Current meter mooring locations since 1991 (large x's) and routine
hydrographic
station locations (solid circles) along the Akkeshi-line. Progressive vector diagrams
from
(b) the bottom current meter on the 3500 m mooring and (c) the near-surface and
mid-
depth current meters on the 3500 m mooring and the bottom current meter on the
1100 m
mooring. (Kawasaki and Kono, 1993c).
147
I-.
J
q)
F
.5
0
.5-1
---`-!mar
,-._, 50 km
DISTANCE (km)
N
+ I I I I I
T 33.1 0 100 200 300 400
33.2
33.3
33.4
33.5
33.6
33.7
33.8
33.9
34.0
34.1
34.2
34.3
34.4
5
1 34.5
1 30
140
+50
90
12O
130
-140
150
l 16O (C)
(d)
6000
STATION NUMBER
7000
0 100 200 300 400 500km
146°E 147° 148°
Fig. 2.5.21. Geostrophic velocities relative to the ocean bottom along nearly the same section as
shown in Fig. 2.5.20a, in summer, 1985 (Talley et al., 1991).
148
5 15
0
.-40`:"x.
27
36.70
36,77
2000
5000
0
(a)
-. 5
i 3000 m
(b)
11/5 12/5 1/4 2/3 3/5
1990
3000 m
3130
7/3 6/2 9/I 10/1 11/5 12/5 1/4 2/3 3/5 3/30
1990 1991
(C)
'p4't:illrGElititJ1r
1000 in
20 cm/s
current vectors
3000 m
7/3' 9/2 911 10/11/15 1215 1/4 213 3/4 3129
1 9 9 1
1 9 9 2
(C)
(B) Fig. 2.5.22. The 41 °30'N line:
(A) hydrographic station locations (filled circles) which have
been repeated many times over many years and current
meter locations (triangles) for 1989-1992;
(B) typical hydrographic section along 41°30'N, this one for
February 1992 (Uehara and Miyake, 1993);
(C) stick diagrams for the two current meters at about 1000m
and 3000m at ER-2, where the water depth
is about
3500m.
The first intrusion of the Oyashio often flows
acro3s these mooring sites (Miyake et al., 1993).
149
8/2 9/1 10/1
1989
Fig. 2.5.23.
25.0
25.5
26.0
26.5
33.0 34.0
SALINITY (°/°°)
Water property classification in the Mixed Water Region.
1. Tsugaru Warm Current water (TW)
2. Oyashio water (OW)
3. Kuroshio water (KW)
4. cold lower-layer water (CL)
5. surface-layer water (SW)
6. Coastal Oyashio Water (CO)
(Hanawa and Mitsudera, 1986).
Fig. 2.5.24.
27.0
27.5
150
33 34
SALINITY (psu)
35
Average potential density-salinity relations in the Mixed Water
Region, based on 278 CTD profiles from spring, 1989.
ST: subtropical; SP: subpolar (Oyashio)
STT: subtropical transitional
SPT:
subpolar transitional (Talley et al., 1994).
142° 143° 144° 145° 146° 147°
E 0
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1.5
1.5j
.5
2
2
. :
2
(A)
7t/
T
2
1.5
C=
2
.5
10 15 10km
(B)
Fig. 2.5.25. (a) Dissolved oxygen along the 41 °30'N line and (b) the area of Oyashio water at 100m
depth in the Tohoku area.
Anomalous intrusions of Oyashio water are seen in 1974,
1981, and 1984, corresponding to lower oxygen, which indicates a greater proportion of
East Kamchatka Current water relative to Okhotsk Sea water. (Ishikawa, 1988).
151
1.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2.5.26. (a) Potential density and (b) oxygen at the main salinity minimum of the subtropical gyre
(Talley, 1993).
152
n
It
N"
r\
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2.5.27.
C
O
O
076 77 78 79 80 81 82 83Ep8R4 85 86 87 88 89 90 91
Y
M
500
1,000
I
A
A
A
I
0
I
78 79 80 it 82 83_i4 85 86 87 88 89 90 91
40°N 39°N
`344
38°N 37°N
34.4
(a) Monthly-averaged density at at 10 meters depth at
390 30'N, 142°30'E just east of the northern coast
of Honshu
(b) The same but at 100 meters depth, with its standard
deviation (Nagata et al., 1993).
Salinity section in the mixed water region along
143°30'E in summer, 1979 (one of many examples in
Mutoh et al., 1975), illustrating the salinity minimum
found beneath the main warm core ring located
between the Kuroshio and Oyashio.
153
I : S > 3
Salinity and acceleration potential relative to 1000 dbar at 26.7-
III :33.9 < S < 31
26.8 Qe, in the mixed water region in May-June, 1992. The
freshest water is seen to be pulled southward and into the
IV : S < 33.8 Kuroshio axis (Yasuda et al., 1994).
154
o
0
rJlvloi011P i!!'
= 11/11/10 INtl1III1I !1 11/AiII!
0
CC)
v , o
. co
/IIIIIII1-
"01'm. ®\\m1,91m \\\ti
\! er. L11?I lIil11a
a \\\\1`11 lIIIIl !
Small
L. --mom
wwommmomm MOM1, ,44MIN'1
MIIIII
!ai we`It11r1I I
r1ltIII-00 111ti.\U'
mr".
1la \\II'Ii11111ft
CWIIIIIIIIe
m
Vo1ANIL 111111,
1 1
i /IIi:
41 411111
l ` !in
11111011F,71
0
,D
L
A
I
0 LO
M
0
LO
2
0
M
0
0
200
400
600
800
45° N
I I
40° N
K 0 5 2 9 5 96 97 98 99 00 01
35° N
02 04 06
T27.
08 1 0
(a)
Fig. 2.5.31. (a) Strong diffusive layers (shaded) and strong salt finger layers
(closed) on the 144°E
section
156
I I I I I I
45
0 20 40 0 20 40 0 20 40 0 20 40
Along 144°E Along 155°E I Along 170°E I Along 175°30'E
W
40
35
L
r
P-a = I
20 40 (%)
I Along 180°
Fig. 2.5.31 (b) Incidence of density ratios indicative of strong double diffusive fingering as a
function of latitude and longitude, based on high resolution CTD data (Shonai and
Miyake, 1993).
6.0 REFERENCES
The bibliography is organized into four sections. The first three sections were prepared by Y. Nagata
and L. Talley and comprise a special effort in collection of Japanese activities, but also include those
papers published in other countries which are referenced in the report. If an English language version
of a Japanese article was published, the Japanese language reference was omitted even if pubished
earlier. The fourth section is a special collection of Russian activities, prepared by G. Yurasov, V.
Lobanov and S. Gladyshev. Articles are in English unless noted.
A. The Okhotsk Sea and Sea Ice (with emphasis on Japanese references)
Akagawa, M. 1958. On the relation between oceanographical conditions and sea ice in the Okhotsk
Sea. Bull. Hakodate Mar. Obs. 5:91-104 (in Japanese).
Akagawa, M. 1963. Sea ice conditions in the Northern Okhotsk Sea in thawing time - Based on the
reports from Japanese loading fleet for importing USSR herring. Tech. Rep. JMA. 54-64 (in
Japanese).
Akagawa, M. 1964. On the Drifting of Pack-ice in the Pacific Ocean off Hokkaido. Tech. Rep. JMA.
30:50-65 (in Japanese).
Akagawa, M. 1967. Practical method for long range sea ice forecasting. Tech. Rep. JMA. 59:85-118
(in Japanese).
Akagawa, M. 1968. The mean sea surface temperature of the Okhotsk Sea in cooling season
(preliminary report) - Normal distribution of sea surface temperature. Rec. Oceanogr. Works
Japan. 9:263-278.
Akagawa, M. 1969. Sea ice in the Okhotsk Sea. Kisho-Kenkyuu Note. 101:47-77 (in Japanese).
Akagawa, M. 1972. The mean sea surface temperature of the Okhotsk Sea in cooling season (second
report) - Normal sea surface temperature. Oceanogr. Mag. 24:57-63.
Akagawa, M. 1973. The characters of atmospheric circulation in the years with abnormal sea ice
conditions along the Okhotsk coast of Hokkaido. Japan Oceanogr. Mag. 24:81-100.
Akagawa, M. 1977. Characteristics of oceanographic conditions in the Okhotsk Sea and meteoro-
logical conditions over the far east in November. Oceanogr. Mag. 28:33-45.
Akagawa, M. 1980. Relations between pack-ice in the Okhotsk Sea and oceanographic conditions off
Hokkaido and Tohoku District. Umi to Sora. 55:449-479 (in Japanese).
Akiba, Y., S. Yamamoto, and Ueno. 1959. On the oceanographic conditions of the Okhotsk Sea in
summer of 1958. Bull. Fac. Fish. Hokkaido Univ. 10:37-46.
Alfultis, M. A. 1987. Oceanographic implications of SMMR ice cover observations in the Sea of
Okhotsk. M. S. thesis, Univ. of Wash., Seattle. 161 p.
158
Alfultis, M. A., and S. Martin. 1987. Satellite passive microwave studies of the Sea of Okhotsk ice
cover and its relation to oceanic processes, 1978-1982. J. Geophys. Res. 92:13,013-13,028.
Aota, M. 1968. Study of the variation
of oceanographic condition north-east off Hokkaido in the Sea
of Okhotsk I. Low Temp. Sci. A26:352-361 (in Japanese).
Aota, M. 1970. Study of the variation of oceanographic condition north-east off Hokkaido in the Sea
of Okhotsk H. Low Temp. Sci. A28:261-279 (in Japanese).
Aota, M. 1971. Study of the variation of oceanographic condition
north-east off Hokkaido in the Sea
of Okhotsk III. Low Temp. Sci. A29:213-224 (in Japanese).
Aota, M. 1975. Studies on the Soya Warm Current. Low Temp. Sci. A33:151-172 (in Japanese).
Aota, M. 1979. Oceanographic conditions in the coastal area of southwestern Okhotsk Sea. Bull.
Coast. Oceanogr. 17:1-11 (in Japanese).
Aota, M. 1982. On oceanic structure of a frontal region of the Soya Warm Current. Preliminary
report. Low Temp. Sci. A41:207-215 (in Japanese).
Aota, M. 1984. Oceanographic structure of the Soya Warm Current. Bull. Coast. Oceanogr. 22:30-
39 (in Japanese).
Aota, M. 1986. The Okhotsk Sea and sea ice. Kaiyo Monthly. 18:66-74 (in Japanese).
Aota, M., and M. Ishikawa. 1991a. Fresh water supply to the Sea of Okhotsk and volume transport
of Soya Warm Current. Bull. Hokkaido Nat. Fish. Res. Inst. 55:109-113 (in Japanese).
Aota, M., M. Ishikawa, K. Murai, and T. Tsurubayashi. 1992. Relationship between air temperature
and accumulated ice concentration along the Okhotsk Coast of Hokkaido. Kaiyo Monthly.
24:217-219 (in Japanese).
Aota, M., M. Ishikawa, T. Takatsuka, M. Ikeda, and K. Shirasawa.
1988d. Distribution of pack ice
off Okhotsk Sea Coast of Hokkaido observed with sea ice radar
network, January-May, 1987.
Low Temp. Sci. (Data Report). A47:35-64 (in Japanese).
Aota, M., M. Ishikawa, T. Takatsuka, M. Ikeda, and K. Shirasawa.
1989. Distribution of pack ice
off Okhotsk Sea Coast of Hokkaido observed with sea ice radar network, January-April, 1989.
Low Temp. Sci. (Data Report ). A48:71-81 (in Japanese).
Aota, M., M. Ishikawa, T. Takatsuka, M. Ikeda, T. Yamada, and M. Matsuyama. 1991b. Short term
variation of Soya Warm Current Front. Umi to Sora. 67:85-96 (in Japanese).
Aota, M., M. Ishikawa, and E. Uematsu. 1988b. Variation in ice concentration off Hokkaido Island.
Low Temp. Sci. A47:161-175 (in Japanese).
Aota, M., M. Ishikawa, and T. Yamada. 1988a. Dynamics of flow in the Soya Strait. Low Temp.
Sci. A47:147-160 (in Japanese).
159
Aota, M., and T. Kawamura. 1977. Observation of oceanographic condition in the Okhotsk Sea
Coast of Hokkaido in winter. Low Temp. Sci. A37:93-105 (in Japanese).
Aota, M., and T. Kawamura. 1979a. Observation of oceanographic conditions in the Okhotsk Sea
coast of Hokkaido in winter - II. Low Temp. Sci. A38:135-142 (in Japanese).
Aota, M., and T. Kawamura. 1979b. Oceanographic condition in the Okhotsk Sea coast of Hokkaido
in winter. Kaiyo Monthly. 11:189-195 (in Japanese).
Aota, M., T. Kawamura, M. Oi, and H. Fukushi. 1982. Distribution of pack ice off Okhotsk Sea
Coast of Hokkaido observed with sea ice radar network, January-April, 1982. Low Temp. Sci.
(Data Report). A41:53-76 (in Japanese).
Aota, M., T. Kawamura, M. Oi, and H. Fukushi. 1983. Distribution of pack ice off Okhotsk Sea
Coast of Hokkaido observed with sea ice radar network, January-April, 1983. Low Temp. Sci.
(Data Report). A42:33-55 (in Japanese).
Aota, M., T. Kawamura, M. Oi, and H. Fukushi. 1984. Distribution of pack ice off Okhotsk Sea
Coast of Hokkaido observed with sea ice radar network, January-April, 1984. Low Temp. Sci.
(Data Report). A43:69-96 (in Japanese).
Aota, M., T. Kawamura, M. Oi, and H. Fukushi. 1985. Distribution of pack ice off Okhotsk Sea
Coast of Hokkaido observed with sea ice radar network, January-April, 1985.
Low Temp. Sci.
(Data Report ). A44:47-74 (in Japanese).
Aota, M., T. Kawamura, M. Oi, and H. Fukushi. 1986. Distribution of pack ice off Okhotsk Sea
Coast of Hokkaido observed with sea ice radar network, January-April,
1986. Low Temp. Sci.
(Data Report ). A45:25-50 (in Japanese).
Aota, M., T. Kawamura, M. Oi, and H. Fukushi. 1987. Distribution of pack ice off Okhotsk Sea
Coast of Hokkaido observed with sea ice radar network, January-April, 1987. Low Temp. Sci.
(Data Report ). A46:45-70 (in Japanese).
Aota, M., 0. Masayuki, M. Ishikawa, and H. Fukushi. 1985. Detection of an ice-forming area by
radar and satellite. Ann. Glaciol. 6:252-253.
Aota, M., and M. Matsuyama. 1987. Tidal current fluctuations in the Soya Current. J. Oceanogr.
Soc. Japan. 43:276-282.
Aota, M., Y. Matsuyama, Y. Nagata,and T. Yamada. 1990. Long-term change in volume transport
of the Soya Warm Current. Kaiyo Monthly. 22:211-215 (in Japanese).
Aota, M., Y. Nagata, H. Inaba, Y. Matsuyama, N. Ono, and S. Kanari. 1985. The Soya Warm
Current - A typical oceanic current flowing over shelf region, p.164-187. In K. Kajiura [ed.]
Ocean Characteristics and Their Changes. Koseisha-Koseikaku, Tokyo (in Japanese).
Aota, M., M. Oi, M. Ishikawa, and H. Fukushi. 1970. Distribution of pack-ice field off Hokkaido
Island observed with sea ice radar net work. January, February, March and April, 1970. Low
Temp. Sci. (Data Report). A28:43-79 (in Japanese).
160
Aota, M., M. Oi, M. Ishikawa, and H. Fukushi. 1971. Distribution of pack-ice field off Hokkaido
Island observed with sea ice radar net work. January-April, 1971. Low Temp. Sci. (Data
Report). A29:29-67 (in Japanese).
Aota, M., K. Shirasawa, M. Ishikawa, S. Ikeda, and S. Suehiro. 1988c. Temperature measurements
of first -year sea ice in the Sea of Okhotsk using an airborne infrared radiometer. Proc. NIPR
Sump. Polar Meteorol. Glaciol. 2:111-116.
Aota, M., and T. Tabata. 1980. Height distribution of pack ice off the Okhotsk Sea Coast of
Hokkaido. Low. Temp. Sci. A39:141-151 (in Japanese).
Aota, M., and E. Uematsu. 1989. The study on the polar ocean and the Sea of Okhotsk. Chigaku
Zassi. 98:600-612 (in Japanese).
Aota, M., M. Wakatsuchi, T. Takizawa, M. Oi, M. Ishikawa, H. Fukuchi, C. Ikeda, and T. Hasemi.
1973. Oceanographic observations north-east off Mombetsu and north off Cape Soya,
Hokkaido. June 1972 - October 1973. Low temp. Sci. (Data Report). A31:49-67 (in Japanese).
Aoyama, M. 1982. Estimation for the bottom depth of the vertical convection layer in the southern
Okhotsk Sea during cooling seasons. Bull. Jap. Soc. Fish. Oceanogr. 41:53-57 (in Japanese).
Armstrong, T. 1955. Soviet works on sea-ice forecasting. Polar Record, 7(49):302-311.
Berdnikov, S. V. 1990. Simulation model of basic components of the Okhotsk Sea ecosystem. Sov. J.
Phys. Oceanogr. 1(4):309-315.
Birulin G. M. 1954. Hydrometeorological characteristic of the fishery area of South Sakhalin. Papers
Kuril-Sakhalin Maritime Compl. Exp. ZIN.TINRO 1947-1949, 4, Moscow-Leningrad, 167-
303 (in Russian).
Bobkov, A. A. 1989. Soya Current and its branches. Papers Geograph. Soc. USSR, 121, N-6, 531-
534 (in Russian).
Bobkov, A. A. 1990. On the interseasonal variability of the Soya Current near the Southern Kruik
Islands. Papers Leningrad Univ. Ser. 7, 2(11):105-109 (in Russian).
Bobkov, A. A. 1991. Transformation of the Soya Current Waters. Umi to Sora. 67:41-46.
Bobkov, A. A. 1993. New schema of the circulation and wate rmass distribution in the southern
Kuril area. Umi to Sora. 69:41-52.
Bobkov, A. A., E. M. Petchugin, and S. S. Toporov. 1991. Water masses near the Southern Kuril
Islands. Papers Leningrad Univ. Ser. 7, (in press) (in Russian).
Bobkov, A. A., and E. V. Samko. 1989. Hydrological structure of waters within a zone affected by
the Soya Current. Papers Leningrad Univ. Ser. 7, 1(7):107-112 (in Russian).
161
Campbell, W. J., R. O. Ramseier, H. J. Zwally, and P. Gloerson. 1981. Structure and variability of
Bering and Okhotsk sea ice cover by satellite microwave imagery, p. 343-354. In Halbouty
[ed.] Energy Resources of the Pacific. Amer. Assoc. of Petr. Geologist, Tulsa, Oklahoma.
Cavalieri, D. J., and C. L. Parkinson. 1987. On the relationship between atmospheric circulation and
the fluctuations in the sea ice extents of the Bering Sea and Okhotsk Seas. J. Geophys. Res.,
92 (C7):7141-7152.
Chernyavskij, V. I. 1981. Circulation systems in the Sea of Okhotsk. In V. P. Shuntov [ed.]
Dynamics of abundance and reproduction conditions of commercial species in the far eastern
seas. Izv. Tinro. 105:13-19 (in Russian).
Chernyavskij, V. I. 1984. Thermal characteristics as the basis for determination of heat content in the
northeastern Sea of Okhotsk. In V. P. Shuntov [ed.] Oceanographic principles of catch
predictions. Izv. Tinro. 109:94-103.
Chernyafskij, V. I., V. A. Bobrov and N. N. Afanas'ev. 1981. The main productive zones of the Sea
of Okhotsk. In V. P. Shuntov [ed.] Dynamics of abundance and reproduction conditions of
commercial species in the far eastern seas. Izv. Tinro. 105:20-25 (in Russian).
Chishima, S. 1962. On the sea ice in Abashiri. J. Meteorol. Res. 14:639-673 (in Japanese).
Eda, M. 1962. Sea ice conditions of the Okhotsk Sea based on the broadcasting of USSR. Tech. Rep.
JMA. 19:52-61 (in Japanese).
Eda, M. 1962. On the relation between drift-ice development and atmospheric pressure patterns.
Tech. Rep. JMA. 19:66-73 (in Japanese).
Fedorov, K. N. and A. I. Ginsburg. 1989. Mushroom-like currents (vortex dipoles): one of the most
widespread forms of non-stationary coherent motions in the ocean. In J.C.J. Nihoul and B. M.
Jamart [ed.] Mesoscale/synoptic coherent structures in geophysical turbulence. Elsevier
Oceanography Series. 50:1-14.
Fujii, K., and M. Abe. 1976. Preliminary report on the water masses appeared in summer in the
western region of the Okhotsk Sea. Bull. Hokkaido Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 41:93-117 (in
Japanese).
Fukutomi, T. 1947. Study of sea ice (4th report). A theoretical study of the formation of sea ice in
central part of the Okhotsk Sea. Low temp. Sci. 3:143-157 (in Japanese).
Fukutomi, T. 1953. Study of ice (18th report). Drift of sea ice due to wind in the Sea of Okhotsk,
especially in its southern part. Low Temp. Sci. 9:137-144 (in Japanese).
Fukutomi, T., H. Kusunoki, and T. Tabata. 1951. Study of sea ice (13th report). On cl-contents of
the coastal ice observed at Abashiri and Monbetsu in Hokkaido. Low Temp. Sci. 6:71-83 (in
Japanese).
Hakodate Marine Observatory. 1957. Report of the oceanographic. observations in the Okhotsk Sea
in April, 1957. Oceanogr. Rep. JMA. 6:139-146 (in Japanese).
162
Hata, R. 1966. Forecasts for the appearance time and thawing time of drift-ice. Tech Rep. JMA.
49:68-71 (in Japanese).
Hatakeyama, Y., S. Tanaka, T. Sugimura, and T. Nishimura. 1985. Surface currents around
Hokkaido in the late fall of 1981 obtained from analysis of satellite images. J. Oceanogr. Soc.
Japan. 41:327-338.
Huang, R., W. Qiang and J. Zhen Gang. 1990. Extraction of the Sea ice information from NOAA
satellite imagery. Proceedings of the 11th Asian Conference on Remote Sensing, Nov. 15-21,
Guangzhou, China.
Huang, R., W. Qiang and J. Zhen Gang. 1992. Application of satellite imagery to monitoring of sea
ice motion in northern China Sea. Adv. in Space Res. 12:7,161-7,167.
Huang, R., W. Qiang and J. Zhen Gang. 1993a. Application of template match method to remote
sensing of sea ice displacement. Acta Oceanologica Sinica. 15:119-124 (in Chinese).
Huang, R., W. Qiang, J. Zhen Gang, and W. Qi Mao. 1993b. Satellite remote sensing of sea ice
temperature. WMOIIOC Technical Conference on Space-based Ocean Observation. Sept. 5-10,
Bergen, Norway.
lida, H. 1962. On the water masses in the coastal region of the south western Okhotsk Sea. J.
Oceanogr. Soc. Japan, 20th Anniversary Volume, 272-278.
lida, H. 1969. Oceanographic conditions of the Okhotsk Sea. Kisho-Kenkyuu Note. 101:480-491 (in
Japanese).
lizuka, A., I. Kojima, H. Kurohagi, M. Yamamoto, and J. Fujii. 1952. Water mass variations in the
fishing ground in the Okhotsk Sea off Hokkaido Coast. J. Hokkaido Fish. Exp. Sta. 9:3-9 (in
Japanese).
Ishida, K. 1967. On the first day of drift-ice in the Okhotsk Sea off Hokkaido. Tech. Rep. JMA.
59:80-84 (in Japanese).
Ishida, T. 1975. Numerical analyses of ice field movement with data processing of sea ice radar. Low
Temp. Sci. A33:173-177 (in Japanese).
Ishida, T., and N. Ono. 1969. On the correlation of sea ice constructure to radar pattern. Low Temp.
Sci. A27:317-325 (in Japanese).
Ishii, H. 1991. Oceanic structure of the southwestern Okhotsk Sea. Kaiyo Monthly. 23:535-540 (in
Japanese).
Ishikawa, M., T. Takatsuka, M. Ikeda, K. Shirasawa, and M. Aota. 1990. Distribution of pack ice
off Okhotsk Sea Coast of Hokkaido observed with sea ice radar network, January-April, 1990.
Low Temp. Sci. (Data Report). A49:33-63 (in Japanese).
163
Ishikawa, M., T. Takatsuka, M. Ikeda, K. Shirasawa, and M. Aota. 1991. Distribution of pack ice
off Okhotsk Sea Coast of Hokkaido observed with sea ice radar network, January-March,
1991. Low Temp. Sci. (Data Report). A50:93-108 (in Japanese).
Ishikawa, M., T. Takatsuka, M. Ikeda, K. Shirasawa, and M. Aota. 1992. Distribution of pack ice
off Okhotsk Sea Coast of Hokkaido observed with sea ice radar network, January-April, 1992
Low Temp. Sci. (Data Report). A51:87-106 (in Japanese).
Izumi, M., and M. Ishino. 1985. Estimation for the bottom depth of the vertical convention layer in
the southern Okhotsk Sea during cooling seasons. J. Tokyo Univ. Fish. 72(1):1-11.
JFA. 1989. The results of Fisheries Oceanographical Observations, January-December 1985, 1282 p.
JMA. (series of publications) The results of marine meteorological and oceanographical observations.
JMA. 1961. Sea ice observation along the Okhotsk Coast of Hokkaido from January to April 1959.
Tech. Rep. JMA. 10:1-47 (in Japanese).
JMA. 1962. Sea ice observation along the Okhotsk Coast of Hokkaido from January to April 1960.
Tech. Rep. JMA. 19:1-83 (in Japanese).
JMA. 1963. Sea ice observation along the Okhotsk Coast of Hokkaido from January to April 1961.
Tech. Rep. JMA. 29:1-95 (in Japanese).
JMA. 1964. Sea ice observation along the Okhotsk Coast of Hokkaido from January to April 1962.
Tech. Rep. JMA. 30:1-71 (in Japanese).
JMA. 1966. Sea ice observation along the Okhotsk Coast of Hokkaido from January to April 1963.
Tech. Rep. JMA. 49:1-92 (in Japanese).
JMA. 1967. Sea ice observation along the Okhotsk Coast of Hokkaido from January to April
1964,1965. Tech. Rep. JMA. 59:1-126 (in Japanese).
JMA. 1982. The statistical data of sea ice. 38p.
JMA. 1983- . The results of sea ice observations. (published annually from 1983 in Japanese)
JMA. 1988. Report on 30 years of observation of sea ice. Tech. Rep. JMA. 109:1-94.
JMA. 1991. The statistical data of sea ice. 2:1-103.
Kajiura, K. 1949. On the hydrography of the Okhotsk Sea in summer. J. Oceanogr. Soc. of Japan.
5:19-26 (in Japanese).
Kamihira, E, K. Sato, and S. Kondo. 1991. Operational works on sea ice and the numerical sea ice
forecasting. Weather Service Bull. 58:95-120 (in Japanese).
Kano, Y., K. Sato, and S. Shirato. 1989. Statistical study on sea ice in the Okhotsk Sea observed by
GMS for 10 years. Oceanogr. Mag. 39:43-58.
164
Kato, K. 1985. Heat budget in the atmosphere and the variation of the air temperature in the lower
layer over the Okhotsk Sea (A case study during the Baiu Season in 1979). Tenki. 32:425-438
(in Japanese).
Kawakami, K. 1959. Sea ice on the coast of Hokkaido December 1956-April 1957. Hydrogr. Bull.
61:50-64 (in Japanese).
Kawamura, T. 1977. On the divergence and rotation of ice field off Okhotsk Sea Coast of Hokkaido
H. Low Temp. Sci. A35:259-266 (in Japanese).
Kawamura, T. 1979. On the characteristics of the movement of pack ice and effects of wind and
ocean current on ice movement. Low Temp. Sci. A35:259-266 (in Japanese).
Kawamura, T., M. Aota, and T. Tabata. 1975. On the divergence and rotation of ice field off
Okhotsk Sea Coast of Hokkaido. Low Temp. Sci. A33:179-190 (in Japanese).
Kawasaki, Y. and T. Kono. 1992. Baroclinic water exchange in the Kuril Basin and the northwestern
Pacific in summer. Umi to Sora. 68(2):41-54 (in Japanese).
Ketchum, B. H. [ed.] 1983. Ecosystems of the world. Elsevier Scientific. 26:1-512.
Kimura, T. 1983. Analysis of sea ice in the Sea of Okhotsk using LANDSAT MSS data. -
Comparison with GMS data. Met. Satell. Cent. Tech. Note. 8:41-59.
Kitani, K. 1973a. An oceanographic study of the Okhotsk Sea - Particularly in regard to cold waters -
. Bull. Far Seas Fish. Res. Lab. 9:45-76.
Kitani, K. 1973b. On the transition layer in the Okhotsk Sea. Bull. Japanese Soc. Fish. Oceanogr.
22:1-9 (in Japanese).
Kitani, K. 1986. Water mass structure in the Okhotsk Sea. Kaiyo Monthly. 18:93-98 (in Japanese).
Kitani, K., and K. Shimazaki. 1971. On the hydrography of the northern part of the Okhotsk Sea in
summer. Bull. Fac. Fish. Hokkaido Univ. 12(3):231-242.
Korchagin, V.V. 1989. Thermohaline properties of sea water in the presence of a gas source.
Oceanology. 29(2):165-166.
Kovalev, P. D., A. B. Rabinovich and V. V. Kovbasyuk. 1989. Hydrophysical experiment on the
southwest shelf of Kamchatka. Oceanology. 29(5):565-569.
Kovshov, V. A., and Y. N. Sinyurin. 1982. Permanent spareness of the ice cover in open areas of
the Okhotsk Sea. Meteorol. Gidrol. 11:76-81 (in Russian).
Kovshov, V.A. and Y. N. Sinyurin. 1990. Breaks in the marine ice cover. Sov. Meteor. and Hydr.
7:85-91.
Kubo, T. 1981. Seasonal changes of the coastal current and sea condition along the southeast coast of
the Soya Straits. Bull. Hokkaido Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 46:121-131 (in Japanese).
165
Kurashina, S. 1954. Sea ice in the Okhotsk Sea. Hydrographic Bull. 40:1-12 (in Japanese).
Kurashina, S. 1958. On Sea ice in adjacent sea Japan (Mainly on the relation between navigation and
sea ice). Hydrogr. Bull. 56:23-31 (in Japanese).
Kurashina, S. 1959. Sea ice observation and drift-ice movement prediction. Hydrogr. Bull. 61:45-49
(in Japanese).
Kurashina, K. 1986. Water exchange of the Okhotsk Sea - sea ice and oceanic currents in the
passages of Kuril Islands-. Kaiyo Monthly. 18:123-127 (in Japanese).
Kurashina, S., K. Nishida, and S. Nakabayashi. 1967. On the open water in the southeastern part of
the frozen Okhotsk Sea and the current through the Kuril Island. J. Oceanogr. Soc. Japan.
23:57-62 (in Japanese).
Kusunoki, K. 1955. Recent advances in the study of sea ice. Low Temp. Sci. A14:155-184 (in
Japanese).
Kuz'mina, N. P., and V. E. Sklyarov. 1984. Drifting ice as a tracer for the study of the general
circulation of marginal seas. Issled. Zemli Kosm. 1:16-25 (in Russian).
Leonov, A. K. 1960. The Sea of Okhotsk. NTIS AD 639 585, 95 p, Natl. Tech. Inf. Serv.,
Springfield, Va.
Maeda, S. 1968. On the cold water belt along the northern coast of Hokkaido in the Okhotsk Sea.
Umi to Sora. 43:71-90.
Maenaka, T., T. Nakayama, and I. Takahashi. 1943. On oceanic curents in the southern part of the
Okhotsk Sea. Umi to Sora. 23:415-425 (in Japanese).
Masuzawa, N. 1966. On the drifting of pack-ice in the adjacent sea of Hokkaido in the early winter.
Tech. Rep. JMA. 49:72-78 (in Japanese).
Mitnik, L. M., and A. I. Kalmykov. 1992. Structure and dynamics of the Sea of Okhotsk marginal
ice zone from "Ocean" satellite radar sensing data. J. Geophys. Res. 97(C5):7429-7445.
Miyake, H., J. Fukuoka, and N. Matsuura. 1989. Surface cold water belt and dome-like density
distributions off Abashiri in the Okhotsk Sea. Umi to Sora. 65:29-47.
Motoi, T., N. Ono, and M. Aota. 1982. Cold water masses appeared in the Okhotsk Sea near
Hokkaido in summer. Low Temp. Sci. A41:199-206 (in Japanese).
Nakamura, K., M, Aota, and T. Ohtsuki. 1985. Coastal area of the Okhotsk Sea-Physics. In Coastal
Oceanogr. Res. Committee, Oceanogr. Soc. Japan [ed.] Coastal Oceanogr. of Japanese Islands,
7-22 (in Japanese).
Nasukawa, I. 1961. On the phenomena that observed soon after the sea ice melted in the eastern
region of the Soya Strait. J. Hokkaido Fish. Exp. Sta. 18:1-12 (in Japanese).
166
Obata, N., and M. Akagawa. 1985. On the correlations between 500 mb height over the northern
hemisphere and sea ice phenomena in the Okhotsk Sea. J. Met. Res. 37:105-113 (in Japanese).
Ogata, T. 1969. On the relation of oceanographic conditions of the Okhotsk Sea to meteorological
conditions. Kisho-Kenkyuu Note. 101:418-448 (in Japanese).
Ogata, T. 1976a. On the relation between sea ice generation and the meteorological and marine
phenomena in the Okhotsk Sea (1). Umi to Sora. 51:121-143 (in Japanese).
Ogata, T. 1976b. On the relation between sea ice generation and the meteorological and marine
phenomena in the Okhotsk Sea (II). Umi to Sora. 52:7-34 (in Japanese).
Ogata, T., and K. Nakagawa. 1948. On the sea ice in the Kurile Islands. Kisho Shusi. 26:138-146 (in
Japanese).
Ogura, S. 1927. On the currents in the Soya Strait. Hydrogr. Bull. 6:369-377 (in Japanese).
Ogura, S. 1929. On the tidal and drift currents at Urkt Road, North Karafuto. Hydrogr. Bull. 8:339-
355 (in Japanese).
Ohshima, K. 1986. Barotropic instability of the boundary current - Special application to the Soya
Warm Current. Kaiyo-Kagaku. 19:508-512 (in Japanese).
Ohshima, K. 1987. On the stability of the Soya Warm Current. J. Oceanogr. Soc. Japan. 43:61-67.
Ohshima, K. 1988a. Submesoscale waves in the region of the Soya Warm Current I. -Descriptive
study, Low Temp. Sci. A47:117-129 (in Japanese).
Ohshima, K. 1988b. Submesoscale waves in the region of the Soya Warm Current H. -A numerical
model experiment. Low Temp. Sci. A47:131-145 (in Japanese).
Ohshima, K., and M. Wakatsuchi. 1989. A numerical model study of ice-ocean eddy street associated
with the Soya Warm Current in the Sea of Okhotsk. Workshop Proc. Regional and Mesoscale
Modeling of Ice Covered Oceans, Norway, 19-23.
Ohshima, K., and M. Wakatsuchi. 1990. A numerical study of barotropic instability associated with
the Soya Warm Current in the Sea of Okhotsk. J. Phys. Oceanogr. 20:570-584.
Ono, N. 1977. Drift of pack ice observed using radar buoys. Low Temp. Sci. A35:267-273 (in
Japanese).
Ono, N. 1978. Inertial period motions of drifting sea ice. Low Temp. Sci. A37:107-113 (in
Japanese).
Ono, N. 1983. Heat flow water to ice at lower surface of sea ice. Low Temp. Sci. A42:175-178 (in
Japanese).
Ono, N. 1985. Movements of marginal pack ice off the Okhotsk Sea Coast of Hokkaido. Annals of
Glaciology. 6:298-299.
167
Ono, N., and T. Ishida. 1970. On the correlation of sea ice construction to radar pattern II. Low
Temp. Sci. A28:281-289 (in Japanese).
Ooi, S. 1969. Okhotsk High. Kisho-Kenkyuu Note. 101:404-417 (in Japanese).
Parkinson, C. L. 1983. On the seasonal sea ice cover of the Sea of Okhotsk. J. Geophys. Res.
88(C5):2793-2802.
Parkinson, C. L. 1990. The impact of the Siberian High and Aleutian Low on the sea-ice cover of the
Sea of Okhotsk. Annals of Glaciology. 14:226-229.
Parkinson, C. L., and A. J. Gratz. 1983. On the seasonal ice cover of the Sea of Okhotsk. J.
Geophys. Res. 88:2793-2802.
Sagalevich, A. M., and V. N. Ivanenkov. 1982. High-turbidity water in the Tinro Basin, Sea of
Okhotsk. Dokl. Earth Sci. Sect. 267:215-217 (in English).
Saito, M. 1963a. On the drift ice in the Soya Straits. Tech. Rep. JMA. 29:65-73 (in Japanese).
Saito, M. 1963b. On the movement of ice-area off the Pacific coast of East-Hokkaido and damages by
the sea ice on the coast of Kushiro. Tech. Rep. JMA. 29:74-80 (in Japanese).
Sasaki, T. 1963. A method of the sea ice forecasting, using the high level temperature field. Tech.
Rep. JMA. 29:81-95 (in Japanese).
Sato, K., and Y. Kano. 1992. One month forecast of sea ice. J. Meteorol. Res. 44:81-91 (in
Japanese).
Sato, K., Y. Kano, and S. Kondo. 1989a. A study of the anomalous sea ice distribution in the seas
around Hokkaido. J. Meteorol. Res. 41:163-170 (in Japanese).
Sato, K., Y. Kano, and S. Kondo. 1989b. Evaluation of accuracy for numerical sea ice forecast in the
seas around Hokkaido. J. Meteorol. Res. 41:205-214 (in Japanese).
Sato, K., Y. Kano, and Shirato. 1989. A numerical sea ice model for seas around Hokkaido. J.
Meteorol. Res. 41:121-136 (in Japanese).
Sawada, T. 1960. On the transition of ice-limited and ice-thickness for the early drift-ice season on
the Okhotsk Sea. J. Met. Soc. Japan. 38:250-258.
Sawada, T. 1969. Ice accretion on ships in the Okhotsk Sea. Kisho-Kenkyuu Note. 101:492-497 (in
Japanese).
Schell, I. I. 1964. Interrelations of the ice off northern Japan and the weather. J. Meteorol. Soc.
Japan. 42:174-185.
Sekine, Y. 1990. A barotropic numerical model for the wind-driven circulation in the Okhotsk Sea.
Bull. Biores. Mie Univ. 3:25-39.
168
Sekine, Y. 1992. The interannual variation in sea ice area of the Okhotsk Sea and its relation to the
Oyashio variation. Kaiyo Monthly. 24:220-225 (in Japanese).
Shigematu, R. 1933. On the origin of the oceanic currents in the Okhotsk Sea and of the Oyashio.
Hydrogr. Bull. 12:325-329 (in Japanese).
Shinohara, Y. 1989. A review on dynamic models of sea ice. Weather Service Bull. 56:23-52 (in
Japanese).
Shinohara, Y. 1990. A redistribution function applicable to a dynamic model of sea ice. J. Geophys.
Res. 95:13,423-13,431.
Shinohara, Y., and N. Shikama. 1988. Marine climatological atlas of the Sea of Okhotsk. Meteor.
Res. Inst. Tech. Report. 23:1-54.
Stefan, J. 1890. Ueber die Theorie der Eisbildung, insbesondere uber die Eisbildung im Polarmeere.
Sitzungd berichte Wien. Aksd. Wiss. A., 98, 965.
Sugiura, J. 1958. On the sea conditions in the Okhotsk Sea. J. Meteorol. Res. 10:549-543 (in
Japanese).
Suzuki, K., and S. Kanari. 1986. Tidal simulation of the Sea of the Okhotsk. Kaiyo Kagaku. 18:455-
463 (in Japanese).
Tabata, T. 1952a. On the prediction as to the latest date of disappearance of drift ice at Abashiri in
the Southern Okhotsk Coast of Hokkaido. Low temp. Sci. 9:149-157 (in Japanese).
Tabata, T. 1952b. On the hydrography of the southern side of Kurile Islands and of the southern part
of the Okhotsk Sea, Low Temp. Sci. 9:159-170 (in Japanese).
Tabata, T. 1958. On the formation and growth of sea ice especially on the Okhotsk Sea, p. 169-180.
In Arctic Sea Ice. Nat. Acad. Press, Washington DC.
Tabata, T. 1971. Measurements of strain of sea ice field off the Okhotsk Sea Coast of Hokkaido.
Low Temp. Sci. A29:199-211 (in Japanese).
Tabata, T. 1972a. Radar network for drift ice observation in Hokkaido. Sea Ice Conf. Proc.,
Reykjavik, 67-71.
Tabata, T. 1972b. Observations of deformation and movement of ice field with the sea ice radar
network. Sea Ice Conf. Proc., Reykjavik, 72-79.
Tabata, T., M. Aota, M. Oi, and M. Ishikawa. 1969. Observations on the movement of drift ice with
the sea ice radar. Low Temp. Sci. A27:295-315 (in Japanese).
Tabata, T., M. Ishikawa, M. Oi, H. Fukushi, and M. Aota. 1972. Distribution of pack ice field off
Hokkaido observed with sea ice radar net work. January-April, 1972. Low Temp. Sci. (Data
Report). A30:33-62 (in Japanese).
169
Tabata, T., M. Ishikawa, M. Oi, H. Fukushi, and M. Aota. 1973. Distribution of pack ice field off
Hokkaido observed with sea ice radar net work. January-April, 1973. Low Temp. Sci. (Data
Report). A31:20-48 (in Japanese).
Tabata, T., M. Ishikawa, M. Oi, H. Fukushi, and M. Aota. 1974. Distribution of pack ice field off
Hokkaido observed with sea ice radar net work. January-April 1974. Low Temp. Sci. (Data
Report). A32:55-84 (in Japanese).
Tabata, T., M. Ishikawa, M. Oi, H. Fukushi, M. Aota, and T. Kawamura. 1975. Distribution of
pack ice field off Hokkaido observed with sea ice radar net work. January-April 1975. Low
Temp. Sci. (Data Report). A33:47-76 (in Japanese).
Tabata, T., M. Ishikawa, M. Oi, H. Fukushi, M. Aota, and T. Kawamura. 1976. Distribution of
pack ice field off Hokkaido observed with sea ice radar net work. January-April 1976. Low
Temp. Sci. (Data Report). A34:39-56 (in Japanese).
Tabata, T., M. Ishikawa, M. Oi, H. Fukushi, M. Aota, and T. Kawamura. 1977. Distribution of
pack ice field off Hokkaido observed with sea ice radar net work. January-April 1977. Low
Temp. Sci. (Data Report). A35:45-70 (in Japanese).
Tabata, T., M. Ishikawa, M. Oi, H. Fukushi, M. Aota, and T. Kawamura. 1978. Distribution of
pack ice field off Hokkaido observed with sea ice radar net work. January-April 1978. Low
Temp. Sci. (Data Report). A36-37:77-105 (in Japanese).
Tabata, T., M. Ishikawa, M. Oi, H. Fukushi, M. Aota, and T. Kawamura. 1979. Distribution of
pack ice field off Hokkaido observed with sea ice radar net work. January-May 1979. Low
Temp. Sci. (Data Report). A38:39-70 (in Japanese).
Tabata, T., M. Ishikawa, M. Oi, H. Fukushi, M. Aota, and T. Kawamura. 1980. Distribution of
pack ice field off Hokkaido observed with sea ice radar network. January-April 1980. Low
Temp. Sci. (Data Report). A39:35-61 (in Japanese).
Tabata, T., M. Ishikawa, M. Oi, H. Fukushi, M. Aota, and T. Kawamura. 1981. Distribution of
pack ice field off Hokkaido observed with sea ice radar net work. January-May 1981. Low
Temp. Sci. (Data Report). A40:47-77 (in Japanese).
Tabata, T., Y. Nohguchi, and T. Saito. 1980. Observed sea ice thickness in the northern Okhotsk
Sea. Low Temp. Sci. A39:153-158 (in Japanese).
Tabata, T., M. Oi, M. Ishikawa, and H. Fukushi. 1970. The distribution of pack ice field off
Hokkaido Island with the sea ice radar. Low Temp. Sci. A28:301-310 (in Japanese).
Tabata, T., T. Kawamura, and M. Aota. 1980. Divergence and rotation of an ice field off Okhotsk
Sea Coast of Hokkaido, p. 273-282. In R. Prichard [ed.] Sea Ice Process and Models, Proc. of
AIDJEX and ICSI Symp. Seattle 1977, Univ. Washington Press.
Tachibana, Y., and G. Wakahama. 1989. Effect of the Equatorial Pacific Ocean on interannual
variability in the Okhotsk Sea ice. Low Temp. Sci. A48:71-77 (in Japanese).
170
Takizawa, T. 1979. Studies on interaction between ice floes I. Low Temp. Sci. A38:143-152 (in
Japanese).
Takizawa, T. 1982. Characteristics of the Soya Warm Current in the Okhotsk Sea. J. Oceanogr. Soc.
Japan. 38:281-292.
Takizawa, T., and M. Aota. 1978. Observations of the Soya Warm Current and currents in the
Okhotsk Sea by drifters. Low Temp. Sci. (Data Report). A36-37:71-76 (in Japanese).
Takizawa, T., and Y. Nohguchi. 1979. Studies on interaction between ice floes II. Periodical change
in horizontal divergence of an ice field accompanied by inertial period motion. Low Temp.
Sci., A38:153-159 (in Japanese).
Talley, L. D. 1991. An Okhotsk Sea water anomaly: implications for ventilation in the North Pacific.
Deep-Sea Res. 38(Suppl. 1):5171-5190.
Torokhov, P. V. 1989. Some characteristics of water mass structure off the slope of Iturup Island in
the Sea of Okhotsk. Izv.-Vgo. 121(5):405-413 (in Russian).
Trousenkova, O. 1991. Winter ventilation of the intermediate waters in the north-western Pacific
Ocean. Institute for Auto. and Cont. Proc. Far East Div. of the USSR Acad. Sci. (preprint, in
English).
Tsuruoka, Y. 1962. On sea conditions and sea ice in the Okhotsk Sea Area. Tech. Rep. JMA. 19:74-
83 (in Japanese).
Uda, M. 1934. Hydrographical researches on the normal monthly conditions in the Japan Sea, the
Yellow Sea, and the Okhotsk Sea. J. Imperial Fish. Exp. Sta. 5:191-236 (in Japanese).
Wakao, M., and I. Kojima. 1962. On the oceanographical conditions in the southwestern region of
the Okhotsk Sea. J. Hokkaido Fish. Exp. Sta. 18:1-25 (in Japanese).
Wakao, M., and I. Kojima. 1963. On the oceanographical conditions in the southwestern region of
the Okhotsk Sea (2). Sci. Rep. Hokkaido Fish. Exp. Sta. 1:1-12 (in Japanese).
Wakatsuchi, M. 1985. Brine exclusion process from growing sea ice. Contr. Inst. Low Temp. Sci.
A33:29-65.
Wakatsuchi, M., and S. Martin. 1990. Satellite observations of the ice cover of the Kuril Basin
Region of the Okhotsk Sea and its relation to the regional oceanography. J. Geophys. Res.
95:13,393-13,410.
Wakatsuchi, M., and S. Martin. 1991. Water circulation of the Kuril Basin of the Okhotsk Sea and
its relation to eddy formation. J. Oceanogr. Soc. Japan. 47:152-168.
Wakatsuchi, M., S. Martin, and E. Munnoz. 1990. Satellite and Oceanographic observations of large
ice-edge eddies in the Kuril Basin region of the Okhotsk Sea. Annals of Glaciol. 14:360-361.
171
Wakatsuchi, M., and K. Ohshima. 1990. Observations of ice-ocean eddy streets in the Sea of
Okhotsk off the Hokkaido coast using radar images. J. Phys. Oceanogr. 20:585-594.
Wakatsuchi, M. and N. Ono. 1983. Measurements of salinity and volume of brine excluded from
growing sea ice. J. Geophys. Res. 88:2943-2951.
Watanabe, K. 1959. Appearance of drift ice off the coast of Hokkaido, and its precedent changes of
oceanic conditions. Tenki. 6:190-195 (in Japanese).
Watanabe, K. 1962a. Summary of sea ice conditions off the coast of Hokkaido. Oceanogr. Mag.
14:16-27.
Watanabe, K. 1962b. Summary of sea ice conditions off the coast of Hokkaido-Study on sea ice in
the Okhotsk Sea (1). Oceanogr. Mag. 14:15-28.
Watanabe, K. 1962c. Drift velocity of ice measured from air and separately computed value of their
wind-induced and currents induced components - Study in sea ice in the Okhotsk Sea (II).
Oceanogr. Mag. 14:29-41.
Watanabe, K. 1962d. Ice cover in the southern Okhotsk Sea rectified from a TIROS-I photograph.
Tech. Rep. JMA. 19:62-65 (in Japanese).
Watanabe, K. 1963a. On an estimation of the origin and drifting speed of ice appearing off the coast
of Hokkaido - Study in sea ice in the Okhotsk Sea (III). Oceanogr. Mag. 14:101-116.
Watanabe, K. 1963b. On the reinforcement drift of the East Sakhalin Current preceding to the ice
season off the coast of Hokkaido - Study in sea ice in the Okhotsk Sea (IV). Oceanogr. Mag.
14:117-130.
Watanabe, K. 1964. On the oceanographic and meteorological conditions around Hokkaido. Bull.
Coast. Oceanogr. 3:23-30 (in Japanese).
Watanabe, K. 1965. Sea ice in the Okhotsk Ocean. Umi no Kishou. 11:26-44 (in Japanese).
Watanabe, K. 1966. Summary of drift ice in the Okhotsk Sea, p. 667-703. In Physics of Snow and
Ice. Proc. Int. Conf. on Low Temp. Sci., Sapporo, 1966.
Watanabe, K. 1967. Summary of drift ice in the Okhotsk Sea, p. 667-686. In Oura [ed.] Physics of
snow and ice. Inst. Low Temp. Sci., Hokkaido Univ., Sapporo.
Watanabe, K. 1972. An averaged pattern of extending and retreating of an ice area in the Sea of
Okhotsk. In Karlsson [ed.] Sea Ice. Nat. Res. Council, Reykjavik, Iceland.
Watanabe, K., S. Kajihara, and M. Akagawa. 1966. Report of sea ice investigation in the Okhotsk
Sea by the patrol ships "Soya" in March 1963. Tech. Rep. JMA. 49:79-92 (in Japanese).
Wu, H., and M. Lepparanta. 1988. On the modelling of sea drift in the Bohai Sea. Finnish Institute
of Marine Research Internal Report, 1988(1):1-40.
172
Wu, H., and W. Zhi Lian. 1990. Sea ice thermodynamic process and its simulation. 69 p. (in
Chinese).
Yamamoto, K. 1981. On relationship between the recent 12 years sea ice information along the coast
of Hokkaido and the east-west zonal index on 500 mb surface over the Far East. J. Meteorol.
Res. 33:75-78 (in Japanese).
Yamamoto, K. 1982. On the relationship between the recent years sea ice condition in the Okhotsk
Sea and the atmospheric circulation on 500 mb surface over the Far East. J. Meteorol. Res.
34:175-180 (in Japanese).
Yasuoka, T. 1967. Hydrography in the Okhotsk Sea. Oceanogr. Mag. 19:61-72.
Yasuoka, T. 1968. Hydrography in the Okhotsk Sea. Oceanogr. Mag. 20:55-63.
Zhukov, L. A. 1954. Foundations of the hydrological regime of the Kuril area of the Pacific. Papers
Kuril-Sakhalin Maritime Compl. Exe. ZIN. TINRO 1947-1949, 1, Moscow-Leningrad, 304-
390 (in Russian).
173
B. The Oyashio Region and western subarctic North Pacific
Allen, J. 1964. A descriptive report on the physical and chemical properties of the Northwest Pacific
Ocean during summer 1963. Informal Manuscr. Rep., U.S. Naval Oceanogr. Off., No. 0-17-
64, 21 p. & appendix, 52 p., unpub. manuscript.
Bulatov, N. V., and V. B. Lobanov. 1983. Investigation of mesoscale eddies east of Kuril Islands on
the basis of meteorological satellite data. Issledovanie Zemli iz Kosmosa (Soviet J. Remote
Sensing) 3-1983:40-47 (in Russian).
Dodimead, A. J. 1967. Winter oceanographic conditions in the Central Subarctic Pacific. Int. North
Pacific Comm., Doc. 999:1-14.
Dodimead, A. J., F. Favorite, and T. Hirano. 1963. Salmon of the North Pacific Ocean-1T, Review
of oceanography of the Subarctic Pacific region. Bull. Int. North Pacific Comm. 13:1-195.
Dodimead, A. J., and G. L. Pickard. 1976. Annual changes in the oceanic-coastal waters of the
eastern Subarctic Pacific. J. Fish. Res. Bd. Canada. 24:2207-2227.
Favorite, F., A. J. Dodimead, and K. Nasu. 1976. Oceanography of the Subarctic Pacific region,
1960-71. Bull. Int. North Pacific Comm. 33:1-187.
Fukai, R. 1958. On the deep circulation in the north-western North Pacific with special reference to
vertical distribution of dissolved oxygen. Proc. UNESCO Symp. Phys. Oceanogr., Tokyo
1955, 149-152.
Fukushima, S. 1969. Studies on the migration and the fishing condition of saury cololabis saira, in
the North Pacific Ocean. Bull. lap. Soc. of Fish. Oceanogr. special number:263-268 (in
Japanese).
Gladyshev, S. V. 1989. Geostrophic circulation and transport in the Eastern North Pacific Ocean.
Okeanologia. 19:580-588 (in Russian).
Gladyshev, S. V. 1992. Ventilation of Kuroshio warm eddies in the summer. Oceanology. 32:695-
700.
Hanawa, K. 1984. Current system in the Subarctic North Pacific and the Oyashio. Kaiyo Monthly.
16:683-689 (in Japanese).
Hanawa, K. 1991. Long-term variations of the atmospheric circulation over the North Pacific and the
Oyashio. Bull. Hokkaido Nat. Fish. Res. Inst. 55:125-139 (in Japanese).
Hanawa, K., and N. Iwasaka. 1988. Characteristics of SST variations in the Western North Pacific -
Partition of the North Pacific based on similarity in temporal variation of SST and its
relationship to the ENSO events. Umi to Sora. 64:31-47 (in Japanese).
Hanawa, K., Y. Tanimoto, and M. Saeki. 1990. Surface temperature front in the Western North
Pacific. Kaiyo Monthly. 22:216-220 (in Japanese).
174
Hasunuma, K. 1978. Formation of intermediate salinity minimum in the Northwestern Pacific Ocean.
Bull. Ocean Res. Inst., Univ. of Tokyo. 9:1-47 pp.
Hata, K. 1963. The report of drift bottles released in the North Pacific Ocean. J. Oceanogr. Soc.
Japan. 19:6-15 (in Japanese).
Hata, K. 1965. Seasonal variation of the volume transport in the Oyashio Area. J. Oceanogr. Soc.
Japan. 21(5):193-201. (in Japanese)
Hata, K. 1969. Some problems relating to fluctuation of hydrographic conditions in the sea northeast
of Japan (Part 1) - Relation between the patterns of the Kuroshio and the Oyashio -. J.
Oceanogr. Soc. Japan. 25:25-35.
Hata, K. 1973. Variations of the dichothermal water of the Oyashio south of Hokkaido in relation to
the heat budget on the sea surface. Umi to Sora. 49:21-26 (in Japanese).
Hirano, T. 1957. The oceanographic study on the Subarctic region of the Northwestern Pacific Ocean
- I. On the water systems in the Subarctic region (based upon the oceanographic survey by the
R. V. Tenyo-maru in summer, 1954. Bull. Tokai Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 15:39-55.
Hirano, T. 1957. The oceanographic study on the Subarctic region of the Northwestern Pacific Ocean
- II. On the formation of the Subarctic Water systems. Bull. Tokai Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 15:57-
69.
Hirano, T. 1958. The oceanographic study on the Subarctic region of the Northwestern Pacific Ocean
- III. On general condition of the sea in spring and summer. Bull. Tokai Reg. Fish. Res. Lab.
20:23-46.
Hirano, T. 1961. The oceanographic study on the Subarctic region of the Northwestern Pacific Ocean
- IV. On the circulation of the Subarctic Water. Bull. Tokai Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 29:11-39.
Ishikawa, K. 1984. The Oyashio Front. Kaiyo Monthly. 16:690-696 (in Japanese).
Ishikawa, K. 1988. The Oyashio Water System in the sea of South Hokkaido. Umi to Sora. 64(1):9-
18 (in Japanese).
Kajiyama, E. 1936. Oceanographic investigations in the waters adjacent to Hokkaido in 1914. Report
of Fisheries Investigation, Hokkaido Regional Fisheries Experimental Station. 7:1-18. (in
Japanese).
Kashiwai, M. 1991. Long-term variability of Oyashio appearing in the coastal sea-level. Bull.
Hokkaido Nat. Fish. Res. Inst. 55:141-160.
Kashiwai, M., and T. Kono. 1990. Surface topography, sea-level difference and volume transport of
the Oyashio Current. Bull. Hokkaido Nat. Fish. Res. Inst. 54:9-24.
Kawai, H. 1972. Hydrography of the Kuroshio extension. In H. Stommel and K. Yoshida [ed.]
Kuroshio: physical aspects of the Japan Current.
175
Kawasaki, Y. and T. Kono. 1990. Flow path of the Oyashio and its vertical flow structure. The 4th
International Symposium on Okhotsk Sea and Sea Ice, abstracts, 119-124 (in Japanese with
English abstract).
Kawasaki, Y., and T. Kono. 1992. Baroclinic water exchange in the Kuril Basin and the
Northwestern Pacific in summer. Umi to Sora. 68:41-54 (in Japanese).
Kawasaki, Y., and T. Kono. 1992. Continuation of volume transport and of water-type of the
Oyashio. Kaiyo Monthly. 24:81-89 (in Japanese).
Kawasaki, Y. and T. Kono. 1993a. Water exchange between the Okhotsk Sea and Pacific Ocean
through the middle of Kuril Islands. Abstract of 8th international symposium on Okhotsk Sea
and Sea ice and ISY/Polar Ice Extent Workshop, Feb. 1993, Mombetsu, Hokkaido, 60-63.
Kawasaki, Y. and T. Kono. 1993b. Water exchange between the Okhotsk Sea and the North Pacific.
Abstract of Nemuro Workshop on western subarctic circulation '93.
Kawasaki, Y., and T. Kono. 1993c. Results of current measurement southeast of Kushiro. Abstract
of Nemuro Workshop on western subarctic circulation '93.
Kawasaki, Y., T. Kono, M. Kashiwai, and K. Okuda. 1991. Dynamic structure of the Oyashio I. Net
geostrophic summer in 1989. Bull. Hokkaido Nat. Fish. Res. 55:79-89 (in Japanese).
Kawasaki, Y., T. Kono, and T. Sugimoto. 1990. Current speed variability of the Oyashio. Kaiyo
Monthly. 22:199-211 (in Japanese).
Kitano, K. 1958. Oceanographic structure of the Bering Sea and the Aleutian Waters, Part 1. Based
on the oceanographic observations by R.V. "Tenyo-maru" of 1957. Bull. Hokkaido. Reg. Fish.
Res. Lab. 19:1-9.
Kitano, K. 1966. Oceanographic structure near the western terminus of the Alaskan Stream. Bull.
Hokkaido Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 32:23-40.
Kitano, K. 1973. The uplifting phenomena of halocline bottom in the cyclonic eddies near the
western terminus of the Alaskan Stream. Bull. Hokkaido Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 39:26-47.
Koizumi, M. 1956. Researches on the variations of oceanographic conditions in the region of the
ocean weather station "Extra" in the North Pacific Ocean (III) - The variation of hydrographic
conditions discussed from the heat budget balance point of view and the heat exchange between
sea and atmosphere. Papers Meteorol. Geophys. 6:273-284.
Kono, T. 1990. Transport of waters having various water-type in the Oyashio. Kaiyo Monthly.
22:187-198 (in Japanese).
Kono, T. 1991. Water masses and water systems in the North Pacific western Subarctic region, Bull.
Hokkaido. Nat. Fish. Res, Inst. 55:91-108 (in Japanese).
Kono, T. 1993. Water mass structure in the southwestern part of the subarctic circulation in the
North Pacific Ocean. (In preparation, to appear in Deep-Sea Res.)
176
Lobanov, V. B., and N. V. Bulatov. 1993.
Physical structure and behavior of the Kuril eddies.
Proceedings of Nemuro Workshop on western subarctic circulation '93.
Lobanov, V. B., K. A. Rogachev, N. V. Bulatov, A. F. Lomakin, and K. P. Tolmacher. 1991.
Long-term evolution of the Kuroshio warm eddy. Trans. Dokl. USSR Acad. Sci., Earth Sci.
Sect. 317:984-987.
Lomakin, A. F., and K. A. Rogachev. 1983. North Pacific sea-surface temperature anomalies
connection with atmospheric processes in transitional seasons. Meteorologia i gidrologia.
11:60-67 (in Russian).
Miyake, H. 1989. Water mass structures and the salinity minimum waters in the western Subarctic
Boundary Region of North Pacific. Umi to Sora. 65:107-118 (in Japanese).
Miyake, H., G. Anma, and T. Meguro.
1990. Averaged oceanic structure in the western Subarctic
Boundary Region of North Pacific. Kaiyo Monthly. 22:181-186 (in Japanese).
Miyake, H., M. Kajihara, Y. Fujiyoshi, and M. Matsuoka. 1977. Turgidity distribution in the Funka
Bay for the period of inflow of the Tsugaru Warm Water. Bull. Fac. Fish., Hokkaido Univ.
28:154-164 (in Japanese).
Miyake, H., G. Kobayashi, and O. Moriyoshi. 1993. Some preliminary
results on the deep western
boundary current off Cape Erimo, Hokkaido, during 1989 to 1992. Proceedings of Nemuro
Workshop on western subarctic circulation '93.
Miyake, H., G. Kobayashi, and M. Okazaki.
1991. On the current flowing along the continental
slope off Cape Erimo. Kaiyo Monthly. 23:484-499 (in Japanese).
Murakami, T. 1984.
Intrusion of the Coastal Oyashio into the area south of Hokkaido. Kaiyo
Monthly. 16:667-701 (in Japanese).
Murakami, T., and K. Ohtani.
1992. Wind induced sea level changes in and around Funka Bay,
Hokkaido. Umi to Sora. 68:55-66 (in Japanese).
Nagata, Y. 1993. The western Subarctic Pacific and possible formation mechanisms of the North
Pacific Intermediate Water. Kaiyo Monthly, special volume No.5:196-204 (in Japanese).
Nagata, Y., T. Kagimoto, K. Kutsuwada, S. Takasugi, and K. Ishida.
1993. The saline Tsugaru
Current Water as an possible source of the North Pacific Intermediate Water. Kaiyo Monthly.
25:128-134 (in Japanese).
Nasukawa, I.
1960. On the oceanographic conditions and the annual fluctuation in the sea adjacent to
the Kurile Islands. Bull. Hokkaido. Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 21:15-30 (in Japanese).
Nishiyama, K. 1981. The Oyashio Front. Umi to Sora. 57:19-30 (in Japanese).
Nishiyama, K., S. Wakaki, and T. Iwao. 1984. The Oyashio and the Labrador Current. Kaiyo
Monthly. 16:676-682 (in Japanese).
177
Ogasawara, J. 1987. The Oyashio and the Dohto (East Hokkaido) Coastal Current. Kaiyo Monthly.
19:21-25 (in Japanese).
Ohnishi, H., K. Ohtani, and G. Anma. 1992. On the zonal transport in the North Pacific Subarctic
Gyre. Kaiyo Monthly. 24:252-257 (in Japanese).
Ohshima, K., and H. Miyake. 1990. A numerical study of wind-induced circulation off southern
coast of Hokkaido and in Funka Bay. Umi to Sora. 66:53-66 (in Japanese).
Ohtani, K. 1965. On the Alaskan Stream in Summer. Bull. Fac. Fish., Hokkaido Univ. 15(4):260-
273 (in Japanese).
Ohtani, K. 1970. Relative transport in the Alaskan Stream in winter. J. Oceanogr. Soc. Japan.
26:271-282.
Ohtani, K. 1970. Studies on the change of the hydrographic conditions in Funka Bay. I. The annual
change of the water of the bay. Bull. Fac. Fish. Hokkaido Univ. 20:303-312 (in Japanese).
Ohtani, K. 1971. Studies on the change of the hydrographic conditions in Funka Bay. II.
Characteristics of the water occupying Funka Bay. Bull. Fac. Fish. Hokkaido Univ. 22:58-66
(in Japanese).
Ohtani, K. 1973. Oceanographic Structure in the Bering Sea. Mem. Fac. Fish. Hokkaido Univ.
21(1):65-106.
Ohtani, K. 1979. Renewal of the water in Funka bay. Bull. Coast. Oceanogr. 17:50-59 (in Japanese).
Ohtani, K. 1981. Funka Bay - Physical environments. Bull Coast. Oceanogr. 19:68-80 (in Japanese).
Ohtani, K. 1985. Physics in Funka Bay, p. 344-361. In Coast. Oceanogr. Japanese Islands, Tokai
Univ. Press, Tokyo (in Japanese).
Ohtani, K. 1987. Characteristics of oceanic currents along the coast of Hokkaido. Kaiyo Monthly.
19:13-20 (in Japanese).
Ohtani, K. 1987. Westward inflow of the Coastal Oyashio Water into the Tsugaru Strait. Bull. Fac.
Fish., Hokkaido Univ., 38(3):209-220 (in Japanese).
Ohtani, K. 1988. Re-consideration on the Oyashio, p. 11-26. In Proceeding of Mini-symposium on
the Oyashio and its Productivity in Sapporo, 1988 (in Japanese).
Ohtani, K. 1989. The role of the Sea of Okhotsk on the formation of the Oyashio Water. Umi to
Sora. 65:63-83 (in Japanese).
Ohtani, K. 1991. Re-consideration on the definition of the Oyashio. Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res.
Lab. 55:1-24. (in Japanese)
Ohtani, K., Y. Akiba, and A. Y. Takenouti. 1972. Formation of Western Subarctic Water in the
Bering Sea. Bio. Oceanogr. North. Pac. Ocean. 31-44.
178
Ohtani, K., Y. Akiba, K. Yoshida, and T. Ohtsuki. 1971. Studies on hydrographic conditions in the
Funka Bay. III. Oceanographic conditions of the Funka Bay occupied by the Oyashio Waters.
Bull. Fac. Fish. Hokkaido Univ. 22:129-142 (in Japanese).
Ohtani, K., Y. Akiba, K. Yoshida, and T. Ohtsuki. 1971. Studies on hydrographic conditions in the
Funka Bay. IV. Oceanographic conditions of the Funka Bay occupied by the Tsugaru Warm
Waters. Bull. Fac. Fish. Hokkaido Univ. 22:129-142 (in Japanese).
Ohtani, K., and R. Deguchi. 1981. Coastal upwelling off the eastern coast of Oshima Peninsula-1.
Bull. Fac. Fish., Hokkaido Univ. 32:77-96 (in Japanese).
Ohtani, K., and R. Deguchi. 1983. Coastal upwelling off the eastern coast of Oshima Peninsula-1.
Bull. Fac. Fish., Hokkaido Univ. 34:291-311 (in Japanese).
Ohtani, K., and K. Kido. 1980. Oceanographic structure in Funka Bay. Bull. Fac. Fish., Hokkaido
Univ. 31:84-114 (in Japanese).
Ohtani, K., and T. Murakami. 1987. Oceanic currents in the coastal area of Hokkaido. Kaiyo
Monthly. 19:13-20 (in Japanese).
Ohtani, K., T. Murakami. 1989. Statistics on wind-induced coastal currents along the east coast of
the Oshima Peninsula. Bull. Fac. Fish., Hokkaido Univ. 40:30-49 (in Japanese).
Reid, J. L. 1965. Intermediate Waters of the Pacific Ocean. Johns Hopkins Oceanogr. Studies. 2:1-
85.
Reid, J. L. 1973. Northwest Pacific ocean waters in winter. Johns Hopkins Oceanogr. Studies. 5:1-
96.
Reid, J. L. 1982. On the use of dissolved oxygen concentration as an indicator of winter convection.
Naval Res. Rev. 34:28-39.
Rogachev, K., E. Carmack, M. Miyake, R. Thomson, and G. Yurasov. 1992. Drifting buoy in
Oyashio anticyclonic ring. Dokladi Akademii Nauk. 326:547-550 (in Russian).
Rogachev, K. A., E. C. Carmack, G. I. Yurasov, M. Miyake, and V. Sosnin. 1993. Structure of
anticyclonic rings and volume transport of the Oyashio and Kamchatka Current in Autumn
1990. Proceedings of Nemuro Workshop on western subarctic circulation '93.
Rogachev, K., and A. Lomakin. 1992. Sea-surface temperature anomalies in North Pacific.
Proceedings of an Intern. Conference on the role of the Polar regions in global change. Univ.
of Alaska, Fairbanks, 1, 319.
Sekine, Y. 1988. Anomalous southward intrusion of the Oyashio east of Japans. Influence of the
seasonal and interannual variations in the wind stress over the North Pacific. J. Geophys. Res.
93:2247-2255
Sekine, Y. 1989. On the volume transport of the Oyashio and subarctic circulation in the North
Pacific. Umi to Sora. 65:85-94 (in Japanese).
179
Shonai, M., and H. Miyake. 1993. Mapping of the density anomaly ratios and the double diffusive
fluxes in the interfrontal zone along the five meridional sections. Proceedings of Nemuro
Workshop on western subarctic circulation '93.
Shuto, K. 1990. On the role of surface and intermediate circulation of the Pacific ocean in climate
change and the significance of oceanographic observation lines. Umi to Sora. 66:113-129 (in
Japanese).
Sigematu, R. 1932. Some oceanographical investigation of the results of oceanic survey carried out
by H.I.J.M.S. Manshu from April to March 1928. Rec. Oceanogr. Works Japan. 4:151-170.
Sugiura, J. 1956. A note on current branches in the Oyashio area. J. Oceanogr. Soc. Japan. 12:117-
119 (in Japanese).
Sugiura, J. 1957. On the Oyashio Current in the sea Adjacent to Hokkaido. Oceanogr. Mag.
9(1):133-142.
Sugiura, J. 1958. On the sea conditions to the east off the Kuril Islands. Oceanogr. Mag. 10(2):169-
178.
Sugiura, J. 1958. Oceanographical conditions in the Northwestern North Pacific based upon the data
obtained on board the "Komahashi" from 1934-1936. J. Oceanogr. Soc. Japan. 14:81-85 (in
Japanese).
Sugiura, J. 1959. On the currents south off Hokkaido in the Western North Pacific. Oceanogr. Mag.
11:1-11.
Sugiura, J. 1960. On the currents south off Hokkaido in the Western North Pacific (II). Oceanogr.
Mag. 11:79-97.
Sverdrup, H. U., M. W. Johnson, and R. H. Fleming. 1942. The Oceans: their physics, chemistry,
and general biology. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliff, NJ. 1087 p.
Talley, L. D. 1991. An Okhotsk Sea Water anomaly,
implications for ventilation in the North
Pacific. Deep-Sea Res. 38 (Suppl. 1): 171-190.
Talley, L. D. 1993. Distribution and formation of North Pacific Intermediate Water. J. Phys.
Oceanogr. 23:517-537.
Talley, L. D., T. M. Joyce, and R. A deSzoeke. 1991. Trans-pacific sections at 47°N and 152°W:
distribution of properties. Deep-Sea Res. 38:S63-S82.
Talley, L. D., and Y. Nagata. 1991. Oyashio and Mixed Water Regions as a formation area of the
North Pacific Intermediate Water. Umi to Sora. 67:65-74 (in Japanese).
Talley, L. D., Y. Nagata, M. Fujimura, T. Iwao, T. Kono, D. Inagake,
M. Hirai, and K. Okuda.
1993. North Pacific intermediate water in the Kuroshio/Oyashio mixed water region.
Submitted to J. Phys. Oceanogr.
180
Tomosada, A., and D. Inagake. 1986. Trajectory of Argos buoy released in the Oyashio. Bull. Tokai
Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 119:77-91.
Uda, M. 1933. Hydrographical researches on the normal monthly conditions of Oyashio and
Kuroshio. J. Imp. Fish. Exp. Sta. 3:79-136 (in Japanese).
Uda, M. 1935. The results of simultaneous oceanographical investigations 1933. J. Imp. Fish. Exp.
Sta. 6:1-130 (in Japanese).
Uda, M. 1935. The origin, movement and distribution of dichothermal water in the northeastern sea
region of Japan. Umi to Sora. 15:445-452 (in Japanese).
Uda, M. 1936. Results of simultaneous oceanographic investigations in the Japan Sea and its adjacent
waters during October and November, 1933. J. of the Imp. Fish. Exp. Station. 7:91-151. (in
Japanese with English abstract).
Uda, M. 1938. Hydrographical fluctuation in the north-eastern sea-region adjacent to Japan of North
Pacific Ocean (A result of the simultaneous oceanographical investigations in 1934-1937). J.
Imp. Fish. Exp. Sta. 9:1-66 (in Japanese).
Uda, M. 1955. The fluctuation of Oyashio Current in relation to the atmospheric circulation and to
the distribution of the dichothermal waters in the North Pacific Ocean. Rec. Oceanogr. Works
Japan. 2:43-55.
Uda, M. 1958. On the abyssal circulation in the Northwest Pacific area. Geophys. Mag. 28:411-416.
Uda, M. 1963. Oceanography of the subarctic Pacific Ocean. J. Fish. Res. Board Canada. 20:119-
179.
Uehara, K., and H. Miyake. 1993. Relationship between the direct measurement and the geostrophic
calculation in the first branch of the Oyashio Currents. Proceedings of Nemuro Workshop on
western subarctic circulation '93.
Warren, B. A., and W. B. Owens. 1988. Deep currents in the central subarctic Pacific ocean. J.
Phys. Oceanogr. 18:529-551.
Watanabe, N. 1955. Hydrographic conditions of the north-western Pacific. Part 1. On the
temperature change in the upper layer in summer. J. Oceanogr. Soc. Japan. 11:111-122.
Yasuda, I., K. Okuda, and Y. Shimizu. 1994. Distribution and modification of North Pacific
intermediate water in the Kuroshio-Oyashio inter-frontal zone. Submitted to J. Phys.
Oceanogr.
Yoshida, T. 1988. Two origins of the Oyashio Water and those distributions in the Oyashio Area.
Umi to Sora. 64:1-8 (in Japanese).
Yoshida, T. 1992. Climatological seasonal variations of the distribution of Oyashio Cold Water. Umi
to Sora. 68:79-88 (in Japanese).
181
C. Mixed Water Region (including the Oyashio and Kuroshio F)ronts, southward Oyashio
intrusions, and warm-core rings), and the Tsugaru Current Region.
An, H. S. 1980. Observational evidence of upwelling off the Cape Shioyazaki in Fukushima
Prefecture, Japan. J . Oceanogr. Soc. Japan. 36:85-95.
Conlon, D. M. 1981. Dynamics of flow in the region of the Tsugaru Strait. Coast. Studies Inst.,
Univ. of Louisiana, Tech. Rep. 312:1-62.
Conlon, D. M. 1982. On the outflow modes of the Tsugaru Warm Current. La Mer. 20:60-64.
Fujimori, T. 1964. Preliminary report on the oceanographic anomaly in the early half of 1963 in the
water adjacent to Kanto district. Bull. Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 38:77-98.
Fujimura, M. 1992. Water mass modification of the intermediate Kuroshio Water in the Kuroshio
Extension Region. Kaiyo Monthly. 24:258-263 (in Japanese).
Fujimura, M., and Y. Nagata. 1992. Mixing process in the Mixed Water and Kuroshio Extension
Regions and modification of the Intermediate Kuroshio Water Oceanogr. Mag. 42:1-20.
Fukuoka, J. 1951. The Oyashio and the Oyashio Creeping Current. J. Oceanogr. Soc. Japan. 6:202-
208 (in Japanese).
Gladyshev, S. V. 1989. The features of the evolution of the warm cyclonic eddies of the Kuroshio.
Doklady Acad. Sci. USSR. 309:1204-1208 (in Russian).
Goryachev, V. A., K. A. Rogachev, and V. N. Soyfer. 1991. Tritium transport by the Kuroshio
warm-core ring. Okeanologia. 31:599-605 (in Russian).
Hakodate Marine Observatory. 1957. Report of the oceanographic observations in the sea east of
Tohoku district in May, 1957. Oceanogr. Rep. JMA. 6:147-154 (in Japanese).
Hakodate Marine Observatory. 1957. Report of the oceanographic observations in the sea east of
Tohoku district and the Okhotsk Sea from August to September, 1957. Oceanogr. Rep. JMA.
6:155-170 (in Japanese).
Hanawa, K. 1983. Sea surface temperature off Sanriku Coast and east of Tsugaru Strait by ferry
Ishikari (1) 1981. Tohoku Geophys. J. 29:192-222.
Hanawa, K. 1984. Coastal boundary current. Bull. Coast. Oceanogr.
22:67-82 (in Japanese).
Hanawa, K., and N. Iwasaka. 1987. A trial of forecast of the behavior of the Oyashio water and
water temperature in the coastal region of Sanriku in winter. Kaiyo Monthly. 19:53-59 (in
Japanese).
Hanawa, K., and H. Mitsudera. 1986. Variation of water system distribution in the Sanriku coastal
area. J. Oceanogr. Soc. Japan. 42:435-446.
182
Hata, K. 1969. Some problems relating to fluctuation of hydrographic conditions in the sea northeast
of Japan (Part 2)-Fluctuation of the warm eddy cut off northward from the Kuroshio.
Oceanogr. Mag. 21:13-29.
Hata, K. 1973. Variations in hydrographic conditions in the seas adjacent to the Tsugaru Strait. J.
Meteorol. Res. 25:467-479 (in Japanese).
Hata, K. 1974. Behavior of a warm eddy detached from the Kuroshio. J. Meteorol. Res. 26:295-321
(in Japanese).
Hata, K., and Z. Yasui. 1960. On the seasonal variations of the sea conditions in the Tsugaru Warm
Current Region. Mem. Kobe Mar. Obs. 14:3-12.
Hayashi, S., and A. Watanabe. 1982. Short-term variation of surface oceanographic conditions east
off Sanriku region obtained from analysis of NOAA-5, AVHRR-IR images/J. Meteorol. Res.
34:167-174 (in Japanese).
Hirai, M. 1982. Correlation of the fluctuation of water temperature between the fixed stations off
east coast of the mainland of Japan. Bull. Tohoku Reg. Res. Lab. 44:53-59 (in Japanese).
Hirai, M. 1984. Analysis of hydrographic conditions in the northeastern sea of Japan using infrared
images obtained by NOAA-6 satellite. Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 46:27-38 (in
Japanese).
Hirai, M. 1985. Satellite observation of characteristic feature of frontal eddies in the vicinity of the
Kuroshio Front. Bull. Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 47:69-78 (in Japanese).
Hishida, M. 1987. On southern movement and seasonal variation of Tsugaru Warm Current. Rep.
Hydrogr. Res. 22:1-22 (in Japanese).
Ichiye, T. 1956. On the movement of the upper water in the Polar Front region. Oceanogr. Mag.
8:29-40.
Ichiye, T. 1956. On the properties of the isolated cold and fresh water along the edge of the
Kuroshio. Oceanogr. Mag. 8:53-64.
lida, H., and K. Katagiri. 1964. Abnormal spreading of cold water along the east coast of Honshu
Island in February, 1974. Oceanogr. Mag. 26:41-47.
Ilyachev, V. I., V. B. Lobanov, and K. A. Rogachev. 1989. The features of the dynamics of the
Kuroshio warm eddy: the fast moving interior structure of the slowly rotating eddy. Doklady
Acad. Sci. USSR. 308:1224-1227 (in Russian).
Inagake, D. 1991. Oceanic structure of the warm streamer found near warm core ring. Kaiyo
Monthly. 23:504-508 (in Japanese).
Ishii, I. 1975. Oceanographic condition on the coastal sea of Fukushima Prefecture-I. Destination of
coastal sea. Bull. Fukushima Pref. Fish. Exp. Sta. 3:11-16 (in Japanese).
183
Ishii, I. 1975. Oceanographic condition on the coastal sea of Fukushima Prefecture-II. The cold water
phenomenon of 1974, 1975. Bull. Fukushima Pref. Fish. Exp. Sta. 3:17-24 (in Japanese).
Ishii, I. 1976. Oceanographic condition on the coastal sea of Fukushima Prefecture-III. On the
statistical analysis and prediction of the oceanographic condition. Bull. Fukushima Pref. Fish.
Exp. Sta. 4:79-86 (in Japanese).
Ishikawa, K., S. Shibata, and T. Miyao. 1987. Oceanic structure in the Tsugaru Strait. Kaiyo
Monthly. 19:34-39 (in Japanese).
Iwao, T. 1992. On the currents in Tsugaru Strait (II). Kaiyo Monthly. 24:226-229 (in Japanese).
Iwao, T., and S. Nishimura. 1990. On the currents in Tsugaru Strait (I). Kaiyo Monthly. 23:495-499
(in Japanese).
JMA. 1957. Report of the Oceanographic observation in the sea east of Honshu in May, 1957.
Oceanogr. Rep. JMA, 171-180 (in Japanese).
Johbashi, H., and K. Nishiyama. 1983. The remarkable northward deviation of the Kuroshio Current
axis, east of Honshu in 1979. Umi to Sora. 58:149-156 (in Japanese).
Joyce, T. M. 1987. Hydrographic sections across the Kuroshio Extension at 165°E and 175°W.
Deep-Sea Res. 34:1331-1352.
Kawai, H. 1955. On the Polar Frontal Zone and its fluctuation in the waters to northeast of Japan (I).
Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 4:1-46 (in Japanese).
Kawai, H. 1955. On the polar frontal zone and its fluctuation in the waters to northeast of Japan (II).
Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 5:1-42 (in Japanese).
Kawai, H. 1956. Note on the inversion of the upper water temperature in the waters to the northeast
of Japan in summer. Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. res. Lab. 5:71-80.
Kawai, H. 1959. On the polar frontal zone and its fluctuation in the waters to northeast of Japan (III).
Fluctuation of the water mass distribution during period 1946-1950 and hydrographic
conditions in the fishing grounds of skipjack and albacore. Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab.
13:13-59 (in Japanese).
Kawai, H. 1965. Physiography on the east coast of the mainland of Japan. Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish.
Res. Lab., 25:105-130 (in Japanese).
Kawai, H. 1972. Hydrography of the Kuroshio and the Oyashio. in Physical Oceanography II,
Kaiyokagaku Kiso Koza, Tokai Univ. Press, Tokyo, 129-320 (in Japanese).
Kawai, H. 1972. Hydrography of the Kuroshio Extension. in Kuroshio: Physical aspect of the Japan
Current, ed. H. Stommel and K. Yoshida, Univ. Washington Press, Seattle, p. 235-352.
Kawai, H. 1991. On the terminology of Oyashio Intrusion associated with its current features. Bull.
Hokkaido Nat. Fish. Res. Inst. 55:47-58 (in Japanese).
184
Kawai, H., and S. Saitoh. 1972. Secondary fronts, warm tongues and warm streamers of the
Kuroshio Extension. Deep-Sea Res. 33:1487-1507.
Kawamura, H. 1988. On the behavior of the Kuroshio Front and the warm-core ring, and the water-
mass formation and change in quality in Tohoku area - a case study in December 1981 to
October 1982 by a combination of satellite data and hydrographic data -. Bull. Tohoku Reg.
Fish. Res. Lab. 50:223-234 (in Japanese).
Kawasaki, Y., and T. Sugimoto. 1984. Experimental studies on the formation and degeneration
processes of the Tsugaru Warm Gyre, p. 225-238. In Ocean Hydra. of Japan and East China
Sea, Elsevier Sci. Pub., Amsterdam.
Kawasaki, Y., and T. Sugimoto. 1988. A laboratory study of the short-term variation of the outflow
pattern of the Tsugaru Warm Water with a change in its volume transport. Bull. Tohoku Reg.
Fish. Res. Lab. 50:203-215 (in Japanese).
Kitano, K. 1959. Studies on the "oceanic jet stream", Bull, Hokkaido Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 20:1-66.
Kitano, K. 1973. Notes on the heat balance over the confluence zone of the Kuroshio and the
Oyashio. Bull. Hokkaido Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 39:48-60.
Kitano, K. 1977. Note on the properties of the cold eddies generated over the confluence zone. Bull.
Hokkaido Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 42:43-50.
Kubo, H. 1984. Oyashio water in coastal areas from Kashima-Nada to South Joban. Kaiyo Monthly.
16:713-718 (in Japanese).
Kubo, H. 1988. Research on the oceanographic conditions of Kashima-Nada, off the east coast of
Honshu. Bull. Ibaraki Pref. Fish. Exp. Sta. 26:1-98 (in Japanese).
Kubo, H., and A. Tomosada. 1978. Oceanography of Kashima-Nada, off the east coast of Honshu-II.
On the warm water tongue. Bull. Tokai Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 96:11-28.
Kubo, H., and A. Tomosada. 1985. Physics in Kashima-Nada. in Coast. Oceanogr. Japanese Islands,
Tokai Univ. Press, Tokyo. 293-304 (in Japanese).
Kubokawa, A. 1988. Theoretical models of the variations of surface density fronts and possible
application to the Tsugaru Warm Current. Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 50:217-222 (in
Japanese).
Kubokawa, A. 1989. A theory on the behavior of outflows and its possible application of the Tsugaru
Warm Current. Umi to Sora. 65:95-106 (in Japanese).
Kubota, T., and K. Iwasa. 1961. On the currents in Tsugaru Strait. Hydrogr. Bull. 65:19-26 (in
Japanese).
Kuroda, R. 1958. Notes on the "inversion of water density" in the vertical distributions of sea water
density. Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 11:82-87 (in Japanese).
185
Kuroda, R. 1969. Notes on the phenomena of "inversion of water temperature" off the Sanriku Coast
of Japan (I). Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 13:1-12 (in Japanese).
Kuroda, R. 1960. Notes on the phenomena of "inversion of water temperature" off the Sanriku Coast
of Japan (II). Results from repeated observations in the fixed point. Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish.
Res. Lab. 16:65-86 (in Japanese).
Kuroda, R. 1962. On the states of appearances of "siome" in the waters to the northeast of Japan.
Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 22:45-115 (in Japanese).
Kuroda, R. 1974. On the variation of the easternmost limit of the Tsugaru Warm Current (1). The
variation based on the distribution of surface temperature. Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab.
34:59-66 (in Japanese).
Kutsuwada, K. 1991. Long-term variation of the temperature and salinity fields off Sanriku Coast.
Kaiyo Monthly. 23:540-544 (in Japanese).
Kutsuwada, K. 1992. Decadal variability of the oceanic structure off Sanriku Coast. Kaiyo Monthly.
24:237-240 (in Japanese).
Lobanov, V. B., K. A. Rogachev, N. V. Bulatov, A. F. Lomakin, and K. P. Tolmachev.
1991.
Long-term evolution of the Kuroshio warm-core ring. Dokladi Akademii Nauk. 317:984-988
(in Russian).
Lobanov, V. B., and E. V. Yaroschchuk. 1988. Satellite observations and numerical simulation of
synoptic-scale eddy interaction with a frontal zone in the ocean. Issredabanii Zemri iz
Kosmosa. 1:16-21 (in Russian).
Masuzawa, J. 1952. On the intermediate water in the northeastern sea of Japan. Rep. Central
Meteorol. Obs. 2:241-245 (in Japanese).
Masuzawa, J. 1958. On the short period fluctuation of the Kuroshio off Cape Kinkazan. Oceanogr.
Mag. 10:1-8.
Mitnik, L. M., N. V. Bulatov, and V. B. Lobanov. 1989. The Ocean synoptic eddies as seen on the
satellite side looking radar images. Doklady Acad. Sci. USSR. 307:454-456 (in Russian)
Mizuno, K. 1984. Note on the hydrographic variability in the vicinity of the beast coast of Japan.
Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 46:61-80 (in Japanese).
Mizuno, K. 1985. Some examples of short term fluctuations in the Kuroshio Extension detected by
IR imagery. Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 47:59-68 (in Japanese).
Mizuno, K., and M. Fujimoto. 1979. On the cool water in the Perturbed Area off northeastern Japan.
Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 41:117-128 (in Japanese).
Mutoh, S. 1977. A hydrographical study on the warm water mass in the north-eastern sea of Japan -
2. The structure of temperature and salinity in the warm water mass and its outskirts. Bull.
Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 38:103-126 (in Japanese).
186
Mutoh, S. 1981. A hydrographical study on the warm water mass in the north-eastern sea of Japan -
4. A complexion of two warm water masses. Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 43:1-14 (in
Japanese).
Mutoh, S. 1981. A hydrographical study on the warm water mass in the north-eastern sea of Japan -
5. On the submerged warm water mass. Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 43:15-27 (in
Japanese).
Mutoh, S. 1982. A hydrographical study on the warm water mass in the north-eastern sea of Japan -
6. The absorption of large scale warm water mass into the Kuroshio Current and the
characteristics of the submerged warm water mass. Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 44:33-
51 (in Japanese).
Mutoh, S., 1985. Physics in Sanriku coastal area. in Coastal Oceanogr. Japanese Island, Tokai Univ.
Press, Tokyo, 220-232 (in Japanese).
Mutoh, S., H. Kudo, and N. Arai. 1984. Anomalous cold water Phenomenon off Tohoku district.
Kaiyo Kagaku. 16:719-726 (in Japanese).
Mutoh, S., R. Kuroda, and E. Arai. 1975. A hydrographical study on the warm water mass in the
north-eastern sea of Japan. Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 35:31-71 (in Japanese).
Mutoh, S., K. Sano, M. Hirai, H. Kudoh, K. Yano, and Y. Yano. 1969. The hydrographic study in
the coastal region off Sanriku. 1. The variation of southward flow of Tsugaru Warm Current.
Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 29:93-123 (in Japanese).
Nagata, Y. 1968. Shallow temperature inversions in the sea to the east of Honshu, Japan. J.
Oceanogr. Soc. Japan. 24:103-114.
Nagata, Y. 1980. Detailed temperature cross-section of the cold water belt along the northern edge of
the Kuroshio. J. M. R. 28:1-14.
Nagata, Y., T. Kagimoto, K. Kutsuwada, S, Takasugi, and K. Ishida. 1993. Saline Tsugaru Current
Water as one of the sources of the North Pacific Intermediate Water. Kaiyo Monthly. 25:128-
134 (in Japanese).
Nagata, Y., K. Ohtani, and M. Kashiwai. 1992. Subarctic Gyre in the North Pacific Ocean. Umin no
Kenkyuu, 1:75-104 (in Japanese). (For English version, see Section 1I-1 of Some Important
Features in the Oceanographic Environment of the PICES Area and their Relationship to the
Fisheries Problems ed. by K. Okuda, K. Mizuno and K. Kitani in Part A, Summary Report
and Review Papers, PICES Scientific Workshop, December 1991.)
Nagata, Y., Y. Yoshida, and H. R. Shin. 1986. Detailed structure of the Kuroshio Front and the
origin of the water in warm-core ring. Deep-Sea Res. 33:1509-1526.
Nakamura, Y. 1977. Flow analysis of coastal region in Fukushima-II. Detailed current observation
off Okuma coast in the winter 1974. Bull. Fukushima Pref. Fish. Exp. Sta. 4:87-10.
187
Nakamura, Y., and M. Uda. 1973. On the thermal front in the waters of the northern parts in the
northeastern sea-region of Japan. Bull. Shizuoka Pref. Fish. Exp. Sta. 6:1-14 (in Japanese).
Niiler, P. P., W. J. Schmitz, and D.-K. Lee. 1985. Geostrophic volume transport in high eddy-
energy areas of the Kuroshio Extension and Gulf Stream. J. Phys. Oceanogr. 15:825-843.
Nishiyama, N., S. Kawae, and K. Furuhashi. 1988. The warm eddy off Sanriku observed on board
R/V Ryofu-maru in October 1985. J. Meteorol. Res. 40:1-6 (in Japanese).
Odamaki, M. 1984. Tide and tidal current in the Tsugaru Strait. Bull. Coast. Oceanogr. 22:12-22 (in
Japanese).
Odamaki, M., and T. Sugimoto. 1985. Physics in Tsugaru Strait. in Coast. Oceanogr. Japanese
Islands, Tokai Univ. Press, Tokyo, 145-154 (in Japanese).
Ogawa, K. 1989. Variations in latitude at the southern limit of the First Oyashio Intrusion. Bull.
Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 51:1-9 (in Japanese).
Ogawa, Y., M. Hirai, and I. Yasuda. 1987. Fluctuations of the First Oyashio Intrusion and its
influences on coastal fishery-resources. Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 49:1-15 (in
Japanese).
Ohtani, K., and M. Hatta. 1991. Heat and material transports of the Tsugaru Warm Current. Kaiyo
Monthly. 23:489-494 (in Japanese).
Okuda, K. 1986. Occurrence of extremely low temperature in the coastal region of the Tohoku area
associated with interannual variation of the Oyashio. Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 48:87-
96 (in Japanese).
Okuda, K., and S. Mutoh. 1986. Features of the abnormally cold water phenomena in the Tohoku sea
area and its cause. Bull. Jap. Soc. Fish. Oceanogr. 46:231-238 (in Japanese).
Rikiishi, K., Y. Hagiwara, and Y. Goto. 1987. Tides and tidal currents in the Tsugaru Strait. Kaiyo
Monthly. 19:26-33 (in Japanese).
Rikiishi, K., and K. Naganuma. 1992. Division of the volume transport between the Tsugaru Warm
Current and the northward Tsushima Current. Umi to Sora. 68:67-78 (in Japanese).
Rogachev, K., and V. Goryachev. 1991. Mixing in warm-core ring of the Kuroshio. Journal of
Geophys. Res. 96:8773-8777.
Sekine, Y. 1981. A note on the latitude of the confluence zone of the Kuroshio and the Oyashio.
Tohoku Geophys. J. 28:175-184.
Sekine, Y. 1988. Anomalous southward intrusion of the Oyashio east of Japan. 1. Influence of the
seasonal and interannual variations in the wind stress over the North Pacific. J. G. R. 93:2247
2255.
188
Sekine, Y. 1988. A numerical experiment on the anomalous southward intrusion of the Oyashio east
of Japan. Part I. Barotropic model. J. Oceanogr. Soc. Japan. 44:60-67.
Sekine, Y. 1988. On the anomalous southward intrusion of the Oyashio east of Japan. Umi to Sora.
64:19-30 (in Japanese).
Sekine, Y. 1992. Anomalous southward intrusion of the Oyashio and subarctic circulation in the
North Pacific. Umi no Kenkyuu. 1:153-165 (in Japanese).
Sekine, Y. 1993. Global changes in atmospheric and oceanic circulations before and after 1975. Umi
to Sora. 68:211-220 (in Japanese).
Sekine, Y., and Y. Suzuki. 1991. Occurrence of anomalous southward intrusion of the Oyashio and
the variation in global atmospheric circulation. Umi to Sora. 67:11-23 (in Japanese).
Shin, H. R., Y. Nagata, and J. Yoshida. 1988. Detailed water mass analysis in the Kuroshio Front
with special reference to its double structure. Dyn. Atmos. Oceans. 12:173-189.
Shin, H. R., Y. Michida, and Y. Nagata. 1991. The structure of the Kuroshio Front in the vicinity of
separation point where the Kuroshio leaves the Japanese Coast. J. Oceanogr. Soc. Japan.
47:111-125.
Shin, H. R., Y. Nagata, and J. Yoshida. 1992. Detailed structure and water-type distribution of the
warm-core ring 86B, September 1987. Deep-Sea Res. 39:s115-s130.
Sugimoto, T., and Y. Kawasaki. 1984. Seasonal and year-to-year variations of the Tsugaru Warm
Current and their dynamical interpretation. Bull. Coast. Oceanogr. 22:1-11 (in Japanese).
Sugimoto, T., Y. Kawasaki, and J. Li. 1992. A description of the time-dependent hydrographic
structure of the warm streamer around the Kuroshio warm-core ring 86-Sea Res. 39:s77-s96.
Sugimoto, T., and H. Tameishi. 1992. Warm-core rings, streamers and their role on the fishing
ground formation around Japan. Deep-Sea Res. 39:s183-s203.
Sugiura, J. 1958. On the Tsugaru Warm Current. Geophys. Mag. 28:400-409.
Syonai, M., and H. Miyake. 1992. Oceanic structure in the North Pacific Subarctic region and
distribution of density anomaly ratio. Kaiyo Monthly. 24:245-251 (in Japanese).
Toba, Y., K. Tomizawa, Y. Kurasawa, and K. Hanawa. 1982. Seasonal and year-to-year variability
of the Tsushima-Tsugaru Warm Current system and its possible cause. La Mer. 20:41-51.
Tomosada, A. 1975. Observations of a warm eddy detached from the Kuroshio east of Japan. Bull.
Tokai Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 81:13-85 (in Japanese).
Tomosada, A. 1975. Temperature inversions in a warm eddy and its adjacent sea in the east of
Honshu, Japan. Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 82:123-148 (in Japanese).
189
Tomosada, A. 1978. A large warm eddy detached from the Kuroshio east of Japan. Bull. Tokai Reg.
Fish. Res. Lab. 94:59-103.
Tomosada, A. 1984. A cold ring in the Kuroshio System observed in summer 1982. Bull. Tokai Reg.
Fish. Res. Lab. 113:87-114.
Tomosada, A. 1984. Fronts accompanying the Kuroshio and a warm core eddy related to fisheries.
Bull. Coast. Oceanogr. 21:129-138 (in Japanese).
Tomosada, A. 1986. Generation and decay of Kuroshio warm-core rings. Deep-Sea Res. 33:1475-
1486.
Tomosada, A. 1992. Eddy diffusivity deduced by tracking of ARGOS buoy in the region to the east
of Honshu, Japan. Kaiyo Monthly, 241-245 (in Japanese).
Tomosada, A., and H. Kubo. 1976. Oceanography of Kashima-Nada, off the East coast of Honshu-I.
Variation in surface water temperature and content of the Kuroshio Water. Bull. Tokai Reg.
Fish. Res. Lab. 86:113-125 (in Japanese).
Tomosada, A., and H. Kubo. 1980. Oceanography of Kashimanada-IV -GEK
observations-. Bull.
Tokai Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 103:1-15 (in Japanese).
Ueno, Y., and M. Yamazaki. 1987. Some features of seasonal changes in the Tsugaru Warm Current
along the Sanriku Coast. Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab., 49:111-124 (in Japanese).
Watanabe, N., and T. Hirano. 1955. An attempt to predict the surface temperature of the north
eastern sea adjacent to Japan, 1955. J. Oceanogr. Soc. Japan. 11:47-55.
Watanobe, M., and H. Miyake. 1991. Seasonal variation of the structure of the front found near the
east mouth of the Tsugaru Strait. Kaiyo Monthly. 23:521-525 (in Japanese).
Yang, S. K., and Y. Nagata. 1990. The properties of the intermediate layer water in the adjacent seas
of Japan. Umi to Sora. 66:1-13 (in Japanese).
Yang, S. K., Y. Nagata, K. Taira, and M. Kawabe. 1993a. Southward intrusion of the Intermediate
Oyashio Water along the east coast of the Boso Peninsula, Japan. I. Coastal salinity-minimum-
layer water off the Boso Peninsula. J. Oceanogr. 49:89-114.
Yang, S. K., Y. Nagata, K. Taira, and M. Kawabe. 1993b. Southward intrusion of the Intermediate
Oyashio Water along the east coast of the Boso Peninsula, Japan. II. Intrusion events into
Sagami Bay. J. Oceanogr. 49:143-191.
Yashima, K., and T. Miyauchi. 1990. The Tsugaru land bridge problem related to quaternary coastal
tectonics, Northeast Japan. Quaternary Res. 29:267-275 (in Japanese).
Yasuda, I., K. Okuda, and M. Hirai. 1992. Evolution of a Kuroshio warm-core ring - variability of
the hydrographic structure. Deep-Sea Res., s131-s162.
190
Yasuda, I., K. Okuda, M. Hirai, Y. Ogawa, H. Kudoh, S. Fukushima, and K. Mizuno. 1988. Short-
term variations of the Tsugaru Warm Current in autumn. Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Lab.
50:153-191 (in Japanese).
Yasuda, I., K. Okuda, and K. Mizuno. 1986. Numerical study on the vortices near boundaries -
Consideration on warm core rings in the vicinity of east coast of Japan -. Bull. Tohoku Reg.
Fish. Res. Lab. 48:67- 86 (in Japanese).
Yoshida, T. 1992. Climatological seasonal variations of the distribution of Oyashio Cold Water. Umi
to Sora. 68:79-88 (in Japanese).
191
D. Bibliography of Russian papers concerning the Okhotsk Sea
Anan'nok, A. L. 1987. Stability of fairways and alluvial particulate mater distribution in the Amur
River estuary. FERI. 130:29-32.
Atlas of hydrometeorological and fish-catching data. Kurilo-Hokkaido area and western Kamchatka
coast (1968). GU MO USSR. 312 p.
Batalin, A. M., and N. G. Vasyukova. 1960. The attempts of the Okhotsk Sea heat balance
calculations. Proceedings of Oceanographic Commission. 7:37-51.
Berdnikov, S. V., et al. 1989. Imitation model of the main components of the Okhotsk Sea
ecosystem. J. Mar. Geophys. 3:52-57.
Bobkov, A. A. 1987. Influence of anemobaric formations on the sea surface temperature in the
Southern Kuril region. Pap. Leningr. Univ. 7(4):97-103. (In Russian).
Bobkov, A. A. 1989. Soya Current and its branches. News of All-Union Geogr. Society.
121(6):531-535.
Bobkov, A. A. 1989. Oceanological causes of the saury apparition within a zone affected by the Soya
current. IV All-Union conf. by the Geography of the World Ocean. Kaliningrad, 14-19 Sept.
1989. Thesis and report, 45-46. (In Russian).
Bobkov, A. A. 1990. On interseasonal changeability of Soya Current in the area of the southern
Kuril Islands. Newsletter of LSU. 7(2):105-109.
Bobkov, A. A. 1991. Transformation of the Soya current waters. Umi to Sora (Japan). 67(1):41-46.
(In English).
Bobkov, A. A. 1992. The Soya Current and its role in water system of the Southern Kuril Area.
Papeps Russian Geograph.Soc. 124(5):461-470 (in Russian).
Bobkov, A. A. 1993. New scheme of the circulation and water mass distribution in the Southern
Kuril Area. Umi to Sora.69:41-52 (in English).
Bobkov, A. A. 1993. On tidal changeability of thermohaline water structure on the Ekaterina/
Kunashiri Strait. 8th Inter. Symposium on Okhotsk Sea and Sea Ice. Mombetsu, Hokkaido,
Japan, Jan. 31-Feb. 5, 1993. Thesis and report (in English).
Bobkov, A. A. 1993. New schema of the circulation and water mass distribution in the Southern
Kuril area. Umi to Sora (Japan) (in English).
Bobkov, A. A. 1994. Water mass exchange between the Okhotsk Sea and the Pacific Ocean through
the Kunashiri Strait. 9th Inter. Symposium on Okhotsk Sea and Sea Ice. Mombetsu,
Hokkaido, Japan, Feb. 6-9, 1994.
Bobkov, A. A., et al. 1990. (Collect. auth. of Dep. Oceanolog. Leningr. Univ. and Pacific Sci. Inst.
of Fish and Oceanogr.). Methodical foundations of "Fisheries - Oceanographical Atlas of the
192
Southern Kuril Region)". VIII All-Union conf. by Fish. Oceanogr. Leningrad, 15-19. Thesis
and Report (in Russian).
Bobkov, A. A., and A. E. Antsulevich. 1990. Oceanic currents of the Southern Kuril area as
ecological and biogeographical factor. Proceed. IX Congr. of Geogr. SOC. USSR, Kazan, 20-
25, Sept. 1990. Thesis and report. (In Russian).
Bobkov, A. A., and A. E. Antsulevitch. 1992. Oceanographical grounds of a biogeo-graphical
dividing of the Southern Kuril Area. Okeanologia. 32(5):910-916 (in Russian).
Bobkov, A. A., E. M. Petchugin, and S.S. Toporov. 1991. Water masses near the Okhotsk side of
the Southern Kuril islands. Pap. Leningr. Univ. 7(1):121-127. (In Russian).
Bobkov, A. A., and E. V. Samko. 1989. Specific hydrological water structure in the area suffering
the influence of Soya Current. Newsletter of LSU. 1(7):107-112.
Bogdanov, K. T. 1968. Hydrological conditions in the Freeze Strait in summer period. Oceanological
studies. 19:95-104.
Bondarenko, A. L., V.S. Bychkov, and B. A. Avdeev. 1971. Statistic and spectral characteristics of
long-period waves observed in the coastal Pacific around Kunashir Island. Meteorolog. and
Hydrolog. 5:92-94.
Bruevich, S. V., A. N. Bogoyavlensky, and V. A. Mokievskaya. 1960. Chemical characteristics of
the Sea of Okhotsk. Proceedings of IO AS. 17:125-198.
Budaeva, V. D., V. G. Makarov, and I. Yu Melnikova. 1980. Diagnostic calculations of stationary
currents in the Bay Strait of Aniwa and Laperuz. Proceedings of FERI. 87:66-78.
Bulatov, N. V., and V. B. Lobanov. 1983. The studies of mesoscale eddies east off the Kurils
realized with the help of satellite information. Investigation of the Earth from the space. 3:40-
47.
Bulgakov, N. P. 1964. A limit ice boundary in the Far-Eastern Seas. Okeanolog. Issled., 13.
Characteristics of the modern hydrometeorological and hydrochemical regimes of the Sea of
Okhotsk and its alteration under the influence of natural and anthropogenic factors (1986):
Report /Sakhl. HS N G.R. 01080107870.-Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk, 224 p.
Chernyavsky, B. I. 1971. On the factors caused high biological productivity in the northern sea of
Okhotsk. News of PRIFO. 71:13-22.
Chernyavsky, V. I. 1970. Hydrological front of the northern Sea of Okhotsk. News of PRIFO. 71:3-
11.
Chernyavsky, V. I. 1973. On some problems concerned with the forecasts of thermal regime of the
Sea of Okhotsk. News of PRIFO. 86:49-55.
Chernyavsky, V. I. 1975. Specific hydrological regime of the north-western Sea of Okhotsk in
summer 1972. Report. Magalan Dep. of PRIFO.
193
Chernyavsky, V. I. 1979. On the possibility to forecast thermal conditions of the Sea of Okhotsk.
Investigation of fish biology and fish-catching oceanography. Vladivostok. 10:33-38.
Chernyavsky, V. I. 1981. Circulation systems of the Sea of Okhotsk. News of PRIFO. 105:13-19.
Chernyavsky, V. I. 1984. Thermal characteristics of the north-western Sea of Okhotsk as the basis
for type determination of the Okhotsk Sea thermal state. News of PRIFO. 109:94-103.
Chernyavsky, V. I., V. A. Bobrov, and N. N. Afanas'ev.
Main productive zones of the Sea of
Okhotsk. News of PRIFO. 105:20-25.
Davydov, B. V. 1923. The seas of the RSFSR. The Okhotsk Sea and eastern coast of Kamchatka
including Karaginskiy Island. Vladivostok: Izd. Upravl. Obespech. Bezopasn.
Korablevozhdeniya Dalnego Vostoka. 1498 p.
Davydov, N. V. 1975. Some features of atmospheric circulation
over the north-west Pacific
associated with water regime on Kamchatka shelf. News of PRIFO. 99:157-171.
Deryugin, K. K. 1960. The structure and transport of waters in the area of the Fourth Kuril Pass.
Proceedings of COI, 26.
Deryugin, K. M. 1930. Japanese hydrographic studies in Japan and Okhotsk Seas (Yaponskie
gidrologicheskie issledovaniya v Yaponskom i Ohotskom moryah). Zapiski po gidrografii,
1930. 59:35-51.
Drobrovolskiy, A. D., and Y. A.Vladimirtsev. 1973. Convective mixing in the seas of the USSR.
Vestnik Moscow Univ., ser. Geogr. 5:13-19.
Dobrovolsky, L. D., and B. S. Zalogin. 1982. Seas of the USSR.-M/Publications of MSU. 192 p.
Fedorov, K. N. 1969. On vertical stability of temperature inversions in the ocean. Oceanology,
9(1):106-109.
Ginzburg, A. I. 1988. On a nature of diametrical jets at a sea ice marginal zone revealed at satellite
images. Issled. Zemli Kosm. 3:3-10.
Gladyshev, S. V. 1993. Thermohaline analyses of the water mixing near the Kuril islands. Report of
the Russian Academy of Sciences. 331:359-363.
Glagoleva, K. A., and A. D. Kovalev. 1965. Some specific features of winter temperature regime of
the Sea of Okhotsk. News of PRIFO, 59.
Gogina, L. V., and A. O. Kharchenko, O. Tsoi. 1990. On the reality of using satellite images for
thermal field observations. Remote oceanic studies, Vladivostok, PRIFO, 111-116.
Hydrological conditions and seasonal specific dynamics of currents in the Tartar Strait and the
southern-western Sea of Okhotsk registered for the period of 1975-1976, (1977): Sakhalin
Division of PRIFO, 111 p.
194
Hydrological conditions in the Tartar Strait and southern-western Sea of Okhotsk registered in 1974,
(1975): Sakhalin Division of PRIFO, 60 p.
Isatullin, T.A., and M. Nazirov. 1972. Ice eddies at a sea surface. Priroda. 4:101-102.
Ivanov, A. Yu, V. P. Nefed'ev, A. V. Cmirnov, and V. S. Etkin. 1986. The studies of dynamics of
mesoscale fronts fulfilled with the help of remote sounding performed in VH frequency range.
News of USSR AS. Physics of the atmosphere and oceans. 22(4):440-447.
Ivanov, Y. A. 1992. Megapolygon Experiment: Hydrophysical studies in the North West Pacific.
Ed. by Moscow: Nauka, 415 p.(in Russian).
Kan, S. I. 1966. Forecast and calculations of ice characteristics of the Sea of Okhotsk// Proceedings
of TcIP. 279:105-112.
Kharitonova, O. A. 1965. On a distribution of feeding herring in northern part of the Okhotsk Sea.
Izvestiya TINRO. 59:92-98.
Khen, G. V. 1991. On anomalous warming of the Bering and Okhotsk seas in the eighties of the 19th
century. Monitoring of the environment in the area of fish catching in 1989-1990. VNIRO.
M., 63-73.
Komarov, G. E. 1982. Some specific features of western Kamchatka water dynamics registered for
the period of pollack reproduction. Ecology and reproduction conditions for fish and
invertebrates inhabiting Russian Far Eastern seas and North-West Pacific. Vladivostok, 3-10.
Kort, V. G. 1958. The studies of Russian Far Eastern Seas carried out by 10 USSR AS in 1949-
1954. Proceedings of Oceanographic Commission, 3.
Kovalev, A. D. 1973. Salinity of waters of Tayiski Inlet and fish catching area registered in summer.
News of PRIFO, 86:56-65.
Kovalev, A. D., and Chernyavsky V. I. 1965. On daily changeability of hydrological elements in
Tayiski Inlet. News of PRIFO. 59:39-47.
e Sea Kovalev, A. D., and V. M. Glagol'ev. 1965. Some specific features of temperature regime in th
of Okhotsk. News of PRIFO, 59:48-54.
Kovshov, V. A., and V. E. Borodachev. 1990. The structure of ice cover in the sea of Okhotsk.
Proceedings of AARI. 418:37-47.
Kovshov, V. A., and Y. N. Sinyurin. 1982. Permanent spareness of the ice cover in open areas of
the Okhotsk Sea. Meteorl. Gidrol. 11:76-81.
Kozlov, V. F. 1972. Calculations of level surface for the sea of Okhotsk. Proceedings of FERHMI.
37:37-43.
Kozlovsky, V. B. 1978. Some specific features of dynamics registered for the Amur River estuary.
Proceedings of SOI. 142:93-99.
195
Kudryavaya, K. I. 1946. Main clauses of long-period forecasts techniques adjusted for the Sea of
Okhotsk. Proceedings of NIY GUGMC. 5(12):37-51.
Kuksa, B. I. 1959. Hydrological characteristics of the waters in the north Kuril area. Proceedings of
10 AS. 36:191-214.
Kuksa, V. I. 1971. On temperature calculations of surface waters observed in subarctic structure of
the Pacific Ocean in winter period. Oceanology. 1:44-47.
Kulikov, E. A. 1975. Some specific features of hydrophysical fields found on the shelf of North-West
Pacific// Complex studies of the World Ocean.-M. 32-36.
Kuzmina, I. P., and V. E. Sldyarov. 1984. Drifting ice as a tracer for the studies of peculiar water
circulation of the Pacific marginal seas. Investigation of the Earth from the space. 1:16-25.
Leonov, A. K. 1959. Water masses of the Sea of Okhotsk. News of LSU.- Ser. geogr. and geology.
24(4):111-119.
Leonov, A. K. 1960. Regional oceanography.-L/ Gidrometeoizdat. Part 1, 766 p.
Likhacheva, O. N. 1984. Forced fluctuations of sea level close to the Kurils in synoptic frequency
range. Oceanology, 24(4):245-250.
Lobanova, N. I. 1987. General characteristics of the mixing zone in the Amur river estuary.
Proceedings of FERI. 130:33-44.
Lobanova, N. I., T. G. Ponomareva, G. I. Ryabchikova, and L. M. Yakovleva. 1987. The effect of
economic activity on hydrological hydrochemical regime of the Amur river estuary.
Proceedings of FERI. 130:45-49.
Lobanova, N. I., and T. N. Ryabchikova. 1991. Dynamics of water and salinity and heat exchange
between the Seas of Okhotsk and Japan Sea realized through the Tartar Strait. Dynamics of
currents and lithodynamic processes in rivers, water reservoirs, and marginal seas, IWP, M,
200-211.
Luchin, V. A. 1982. Diagnostic calculations of water circulation in the Sea of Okhotsk for summer
period. Proceedings of FERI. 96:69-77.
Luchin, V. A. 1987. Trustworthiness estimation fulfilled for harmonic constants of tidal currents.
Proceedings of FERI. 36:13-22.
Luchin, V. A. Water circulation in the Sea of Okhotsk and its specific interyear changeability as a
result of diagnostic calculations. Proceedings of FERI.3 6:13-13.
Lundberg, O. R. Tidal currents in the Bussol Strait. Proceedings of SOI, 26.
Lyubitsky, Yu. V. 1986. Specific formation of tides in the Amur River estuary in ice-lacking period.
Proceedings of FERI. 125:53-64.
196
Lyubitsky, Yu. V. 1987. Long-period sea-level fluctuations on the Sakhalin shelf. Proceedings of
FERI. 129:64-74.
Makarov, S. O. 1984. R/V "Vityaz" and the Pacific Ocean. S-Pit, 505 p.
Mandel, E. 1879. Additional information on the cold current of the Laperuza Strait.// Book of marine
selected papers, 171, 4.
Markina, V. V., and B. I. Chernyavsky. 1984. Quantitative distribution of plankton and bentos in the
Sea of Okhotsk. News of PRIFO. 109:109-119.
Menovshchikov, V. A., and V. G. Yarichin. 1987.
Hydrological regime of the near-Kuril area in the
Sea of Okhotsk registered in December 1983. Proceedings of FERI. 36:22-30.
Mitnik, L. M., G. I. Desyatova, and V. V. Kovbasyuk. 1985. Determination of the Okhotsk Sea ice
cover parameters in winter 1983-1984 using
radar sensing. Issled. Zemli Kosm. 3:16-22.
Mitnik, L. M., G. I. Desyatova, and V. V. Kovbasyuk. 1991. An analyzing of the Far-Eastern Seas
ice using radar sensing data. Methodical recommendations. (Deshifrirovanie morskogo l'da
Dal'nevostochnyh morey po dannym radiolokatsionnogo zondirovaniya). Leningrad:
Gidrometeoizdat, 56 p.
Mitnik, L. M., and A. I. Kalmykov. 1992. Structure and dynamics of the Sea of Okhotsk marginal
ice zone from "Okean" satellite radar sensing data. J.Geophys.Res. 97C:7429-7445 (in
English).
Mordasova, N. V., A. K. Gruzevich, and V. L. Zubarevich 1991. On specific hydrological
conditions of the Far Eastern seas,
winter-summer, 1990. Monitoring of environmental
conditions in the areas of fish catching in 1989-1990. VNIRO, M. 73-89.
Moroshkin, K. V. 1955. Water masses of the North-West Pacific in the
area of the Kurilo-Kamchatka
Basin. Proceedings of IO AS, 12.
Moroshkin, K. V. 1964. New scheme of the surface Okhotsk Sea currents, Oceanology 1(4):641-643.
Moroshkin, K. V. 1966. Water masses of the Sea of Okhotsk. Science, 65 p.
Muktepavel, L. S. 1990.
Interyear changeability of ice conditions of the Sea of Okhotsk in 1980-
1985. Remote oceanic studies, Vladivostok, PRIFO, 99-104.
Nguen, Van Tu. 1984.
Synoptic changeability of oceanological conditions in the South Kurils area.
Cand. Sc degree thesis. LGU, Leningrad, 153 p.
Oganov, M. M., and A. G. Murashov. 1977. Some features of thermal structure of the surface layer
in the Kurilo-Hokkaido area. Investigation of oceanic fields in the Indian and Pacific oceans.
Vladivostok, FESC of USSR Academy of Sciences, 40-48.
On the application of satellite information to fishery research of PRIFO in 1987. Report on research
activities, (1987): PRIFO. -N G.R. 01826005302" Stock N 028800552158. Vladivostok, 68 p.
197
Pavlychev, B. P. 1976. Specific hydrology of the Tatar Strait and south-western Sea of Okhotsk
registered in 1984. Report of SakhPRIFO.
Pavlychev, V. P. 1979. Some specific features of the water found at great depths in the Kurilo-
Hokkaido area. Report. PRIFO.
Peregudin, A. S. 1976. Water and heat transport in the active layer of the Sea of Okhotsk.
Proceedings of FERHMI, 62:174-183.
Pervukhina, T. P. The currents changing with depth those found in the Bussol Strait. Proceedings, 26.
Pishchalnik, V. M., and S. M. Klimov. 1990. The state of knowledge of the shelf of Sakhalin.
Abstracts of the report presented at the fourth scientific conference "Ecological fundamentals
of the efficient nature exploitation on the Sakhalin and Kuril Islands". Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk.
166-168.
Plotnikov, V. V. 1982. Forecasts of ice element fields made for the Sea of Okhotsk by physico-
statistic method. Proceedings of FERI. 96:77-86.
Plotnikov, V. V., and V. A. Luchin. 1987. Some specific effect of water temperature on the ice
conditions of the Sea of Okhotsk. Proceedings of FERI. 36:41-48.
Plotnikov, V. V., and L. P. Yakunin. 1980. Application of physico-statistic techniques to the studies
of the ice in the Sea of Okhotsk. Proceedings of FERI. 87:79-85.
Pokudov, V. V. 1985. Initial estimation of water and heat transport by currents of the North-West
Pacific. Proceedings of FERHMI. 56:3-76.
Pokudov, V. V., V. G. Yarichin, and Yu N. Volkov. 1978. The results obtained on cruises to the
North Pacific organized within the 'POLECS' Project in winter 1975. Proceedings of
FERHMI. 71:3-138.
Pomazanova, N. P. 1974. Vertical movement of the Okhotsk Sea waters in summer. Proceedings of
FERHMI. 45:24-35.
Pomazanova, N. P. Surface currents of northern and eastern fish catching areas of the Sea of Okhotsk
in summer. Proceedings of FERHMI. 19(30):94-104.
Ponomareva, T. G. 1987. Calculation of hydrological regime elements of the Amur River estuary.
Proceedings of FERI. 130:33- 44.
Popov, E. D., S. A. Osochenko, and A. G. Ludanov. 1976. On the migration of warm current in the
Sea of Japan. Proceedings of SakhRI. 50, 53-55.
Putov, V. F., and G. V. Shevchenko. 1991. Spatial-temporal changeability of sea-level fluctuations
on the north-eastern shelf of the Sakhalin Island. Meteorol. and Hydrol. 10:94-101.
Rabinovich, A. B. 1984. Topographic vortexes in the area of the Kurilo-Kamchatka Trench. Reports
of USSR AS. 277(4):976-979.
198
Rabinovich, A. B., and A. E. Zhukov. 1984. Tidal fluctuations on the Sakhalin shelf. Oceanology.
24(2):238-244.
Rass, G. S. 1959. Complex studies of waters in the area of the Northern Kurils and Kronotsk Bay.
Proceedings of 10 AS, 36, C 282.
Rostov, I. D., and E. P. Varlatyi. 1982. On small-scale thermohaline and dynamic structure of
waters in the North-West Pacific. Vladivostok. FESC USSR AS, 115-134.
Rostov, I. D., and I. A. Zhabin. 1991. Specific Hydrology of near-estuarine Amur River.
Meteorology and Hydrology. 7:94-99.
Rumyantsev. G. V. 1969. Water and temperature distribution on the surface of the Sea of Okhotsk in
cold seasons. Selected papers of Magadan Hydrometeorological Observatory. 2:148-157.
Rumyantsev, G. V.
1974. Water and temperature distribution of the surface and hydrological fronts
of the Okhotsk sea fish catching areas. Plane survey data. Proceedings of FERHMI. 45:15-23.
Shatilina, T. A. 1989. Interyear variabilities of water temperature of the Southern Kuril region and
possibilities of its
forecasting. Long-period changeability of the environment and some
problems of fish-catching forecast. 178-187.
Shelegova, E. K. 1960. Some cases of sharp water cooling around the south-western Sakhalin
registered in summer period. News of PRIFO, 1960. 46:249-251.
Sheremet'evskaya, O. I. 1988. Statistic analysis of the dates of first ice formation in the seas of
Russian Far East. Proceedings of Hydrometeorol. Research Center of the USSR. 292:124-129.
Shrenk, L. I. 1869. An outline on physical geography of the Northern Japan Sea (Ocherk fizicheskoi
geografli Severo-Japonskogo morya). Sankt-Petersburg. 254 p.
Shrenk, L. I. 1874. On the currents of the Okhotsk,
Japan and adjacent seas. Zapiski Imp. St.
Petersb. Acad. Sci. 23:1-112.
Shtokman, V. B. 1954. On the cause of rotational currents around islands and contrary currents at
coasts of a strait. Izvestia USSR Acad. Sciences, Geophys. Ser. 4:29-37.
Smetanin, D. A. 1958. Some problems associated
with chemistry and hydrology of the lower
subarctic water in the area
of the Kurilo-Kamchatka Basin. Information 1. Proceedings of IO
AS. 27:22-53.
Soskin, I. M. 1960. Tidal currents in the Fourth Kuril Pass. Proceedings of SOI, 26.
Staritsin, D. K., and V. R. Fuks. 1986. Synoptic changeability of frontal zones and interfaces in the
Oyashio-Southern Kuril Area system. Newsletter of LSU, Ser.7, 4:71-81.
Stolyarova, T. A. 1974.
Air temperature effect on the formation of ice in the Tatar Strait.
Proceedings of FERHMI. 45:46-53.
199
Temperature, salinity, water masses of the Sea of Okhotsk (1985): Report. Sakhl. HS N G.R.
81078070" Stock N 0286003932.- Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk, 105 p.
Torokhov, P. V. 1989. Some specific features of water mass structure in the area of Okhotsk slop of
the Iturup Island. News of All Union Geographic Society. 121(5)405-413.
Trusenkova, O. O. 1990. On ventilation of north Pacific intermediate water. Preprint IACP.
Vladivostok, 37 p.
Tsapko, G. A. 1974. A role of Amur river calculated discharge in the formation of temperature and
salinity distribution in the adjacent sea area. Trudy DVNIGMI. 45:54-60.
Tyuryakov, B. I. 1970. A calculated scheme of the Okhotsk Sea active layer structure seasonal
variations. Trudy LGM. 32:94-120.
Ushakov, P. V. 1947. The role of the Kuril passes in the Okhotsk Sea oxygen regime. Proceedings of
SOI. 1(13):175-188.
Veselova, L. E. 1972. On the coefficient of vertical temperature conductivity in the Sea of Okhotsk.
Proceedings of FERI, 37.
Veselova, L. E. 1972. On the coefficient of vertical temperature conductivity in the Sea of Okhotsk.
Trudy DVNIGMI. 37:29-33.
Veselova, L. E. 1972. Spatial temperature distribution in the surface waters of the Sea of Okhotsk.
Proceedings of FERI. 37:13-28.
Veselova, L. E. 1974. On the method of short-period temperature forecasts for the waters of western
Kamchatka coasts. Proceedings of FERI, 45.
Veselova, L. E. 1975. Specific features of an annual temperature cycle at the surface of the southern
part of Okhotsk Sea. Trudy DVNIGMI. 50:38-56.
Veselova, L. E., and V. D. Budaeva. 1975. On the possible use of dynamic-statistic method for long-
term forecasts of water temperature in southern part of the Okhotsk Sea. Trudy DVNIGMI.
50:57-65.
Veselova, L. E., and V. D. Budaeva. On the possible use of dynamic- statistic method for long-term
forecasts of temperature of the southern Sea of Okhotsk. Proceedings of FERHMI.- 50:57-65.
Veselova, L. E., P. P. Povorotov, and S. V. Chirikov. 1975. The structure and interrelations
between interyear fluctuations of the elements of hydrometeorological regime in the southern
Sea of Okhotsk. Proceedings FERHMI. 55:3-22.
Vinokurova, T. T. 1964. On the near bottom water temperature distribution off the western coast of
Kamchatka. Izvestiya TINRO. 55:165-174.
Vinokurova, T. T. 1965. Changeability of water temperature conditions of the northern Sea of
Okhotsk. News of PRIFO. 59:14-16.
200
Vinokurova, T. T. 1975. Near bottom temperature distribution around the western Kamchatka coast.
Proceedings of SOI, 144.
Water distribution in the Shelikhov bay (multiyear aspect) (1987): Report. PRIFO Division in
Magadan. N G.R. 01821005244" Stock N 02880036550. -Magadan. 53 p.
Water temperature of individual areas of the Sakhaline shelf zone (1986): Report FERI.- N G.R.
01830019383 "Stock N 02860020276. Yuzhno- Sakhalinsk. 112 p.
Yakunin, L. P. 1974. Estimation of the Okhotsk Sea heat balance accounting the ice cover in the Sea.
Proceedings of FERHMI. 45:36-45.
Yakunin, L. P. 1975. The effect of the Amur River discharge on ice formation in the Amur river
estuary. Proceedings of FERHMI. 50:66-70.
Yakunin, L. P. 1978. Water discharge distribution over the fairways of the Amur River estuary.
Proceedings of FERHMI. 71:162-166.
Yarichin, B. G., and T. S. Motyrkina. 1987. Principal stages of the Okhotsk Sea research
distinguished with the help of hydrochemistry. Proceedings of FERI. 36:31-41.
Yurasov, G. I. Local changeability of currents on the shelf of the North-West Pacific. Proceedings of
FERI, 10987, 36:88-102.
Zenkevich, L. A., and A. N. Bogoyavlensky. 1959. Complex oceanographic studies performed in the
area of Kurilo-Kamchatka basin in May-June of 1953. Proceedings of IOAS, 24.
Zhabin, I. A., and G. I. Yurasov. 1987. Surface thermal front of the Seas of Japan and Okhotsk,
Vladivostok, 16 p. Manuscript. 11.03.1987, 1956-B87.
Zhabin, I. A., Yu. I. Zuenko, and G. I. Yurasov. 1990. Surface cold spots of the Sea of Okhotsk
registered by satellite observations. Investigation of the Earth from the space. 5:25-28.
Zhdanko, M. E. 1910. On the currents of the Sea of Okhotsk and Bering Sea. Russian shipping.
9:132-133.
Zhukov, L. A. 1954. Fundamentals of hydrological regime of the Kurils area in the Pacific.
Proceedings of Kurilo-Sakhalin marine complex expedition of ZIN-PRIFO, 1947-1949. 304-
309.
Zyryanov, V. N. 1974. On water exchange through northern Kuril passes. Oceanology. 14(1):16-21.
Zyryanov, V. N. 1977. Numerical calculations of steady currents in the Okhotsk Sea (prognostic
model). Trudy VNIRO. 119:24-30.
201
E. Russian papers, concerning the Oyashio Region and western subarctic North Pacific
Bulatov, N. V. and V. B. Lobanov. 1992. Influence of the Kuroshio warm-core rings on
hydrographic and fishery conditions off Southern Kuril Islands. Proceedings PORSEC- 92,
Okinava, Japan, 25-31 Aug. 1992, 1127-1131 (in English).
Gorbanev, V. A. and A. D. Dobrovolsky. 1972. Some peculiarities of waters horizontal structure in
western subarctic area of the Pacific. Vestnik Moscow Univ. 6:53-61.
Man'ko, A. N. and V. V. Pokudov. 1980. Modification of the main water structures of the North
Pacific in summer. Trudy DVNIGMI. 80:3-22.
Pokudov, V. V. 1975. Preliminary estimate of volume and heat transport by currents in the North-
West Pacific. Trudy DVNIGMI. 46:3-48.
Rogachev, K. A. 1991. Long-term variations of salinity in the Oyashio. Meteorl. Gidrol. 6:67-72.
Solomon, H. and K. Ahlnas. 1978. Eddies in the Kamchatka current. Deep-Sea Res. 25:403-410 (in
English).
Yusupov, V. I., V. B. Lobanov and A. V. Martynov. 1992. Influence of synoptic scale eddies in
Kuril-Kamchatka area on acoustic scattering. Okeanologia. 32:837-843.
202
F. Russian papers concerning the mixed water region
Belkin, I. M., and Y. G. Mikhailichenko. 1986. Thermohaline structure of the North West Pacific
frontal zone. Okeanologia. 26(1):70-72.
Bogdanov, K. T., and S. V.Gladyshev. 1991. The features of sound velocity field in warm-core
Kuroshio eddies. Okeanologia. 31(6): 899-903.
Bogdanov, K. T., V. I. Ilyichev, V. B. Lobanov, and R. D. Medjitov. 1985. Investigation of an
anticyclonic eddy in the north-western Pacific. Dokl. USSR Acad.Sci. 281:1210-1213.
Bubnov, V. A. 1960. On the influence of cabbeling process to water dynamics of Pacific subarctic
frontal zone. In: Voprosy Oceanologii, Moscow Univ., Moscow, 127-133.
Bubnov, V. A. 1960. On water dynamic in the Kuroshio-Oyashio frontal zone. Trudy Morskogo
Gidrofiz. Inst. 22:15-25.
Bulatov, N. V. 1978. Mesoscale eddy formation in the Oyashio-Kuroshio frontal zone. Vestnik
Leningrad Univ. 18(3):87-94.
Bulatov, N. V. 1980. On structure and dynamics of warm water strips north of subarctic front in the
Pacific ocean. Izvestiya TINRO. 104:50-57.
Bulatov, N. V. 1980. Some features of synoptic and mesoscale variability in the Kuroshio system
waters from the data of meteorological satellites. Trudy DVNIGMI. 80:34-45.
Bulatov, N. V. 1980. Vortex structure of subarctic front in the North West Pacific. Uchenye Zapiski
Leningrad Univ., Satellite oceanology. 2:61-72.
Bulatov, N. V. 1982. Peculiarities of the cyclonic meanders and eddies formation in subarctic frontal
zone from satellite data. Issled Zemli Kosm. 3:53-58.
Bulatov, N. V., V. B. Lobanov, A. F. Lomakin, K. A. Rogachev, and K. P. Tolmachev. 1988.
History of the A2: Structure and dynamics of the Kuroshio ring. Vladivostok:POI FEB AS
USSR, 45 p.
Bulgakov, N. P. 1967. The main features of structure and position of subarctic front in the North
West Pacific. Okeanologia. 7 (5):878-888.
Bulgakov, N. P., B. A. Glushchuk, V. F. Kozlov, V. N. Novozhilov, and E. G. Starodubtsev. 1972.
Subarctic front in the North-West Pacific. POI FESC Ac.Sci.USSR: Vladivostok, 133 p.
Burkov, V. A. 1963. Circulation of the North Pacific. Oceanologia. 3(5):761-776.
Burkov, V. A. 1972. General circulation of the Pacific waters. Moscow. Nauka. 192p.
Burkov, V. A., and V. S. Arseniev. 1958. An experience of water mass deliniation in the Kuroshio
and Kuril Current contact zone. Trudy IOAN. 27:5-11.
203
Burkov, V. A., and Y. V. Pavlova. 1979. Seasonal and synoptic variability of surface temperature
field in the North Pacific east of Japan. Okeanologia. 19(3):373-380.
Burkov, V. A., and Y. V. Pavlova. 1979. The synoptic eddy field in the Kuroshio. Okeanologia.
19(4):584-592.
Diakov, B. S., N. V. Bulatov, and V. A. Beliaev. 1984. Influence of hydrographic conditions on
macerel distribution east of Japan. Izvestiya TINRO. 109:73-82.
Ginzburg, A. I., and K. N. Fedorov.
1986. On surface water motion in subarctic frontal zone (from
satellite data). Issled. Zemli Kosm. 1:8-13.
Gladyshev, S. V. 1992. The ventilation of Kuroshio warm-core eddies in summer. Okeanologia.
32(6):1005-1011.
Gladyshev, S. V., and A. Y. Gurulev. 1993. Numerical simulation of the front-eddy interaction in
the Kuroshio current zone. Okeanologia, 33(1), 62-68. Hydrography of the Pacific ocean
(Gidrologia Tikhogo okeana). 1968. (Ed. by A.D.Dobrovolsky), Moscow: Nauka. 524 p.
Hydrography of the Kuroshio and adjacent areas of the Pacific. 1967. (Ed. by Muromtsev
A.M.), Trudy GOIN, 106. 210 p.
Gladyshev, S. V., and S. P. Zakharkov. 1992. The variability of the chlorophyll "a" concentration
and primary production in a Kuroshio warm-core eddy. Okeanologia. 32(6):1082-1092.
Ivanov, Y. A., M. N. Koshlyakov, V. A. Melnikov, G. G. Panteleev, S. M. Shapovalov, and M. I.
Yaremchuk. 1992. On a stucture of subarctic frontal zone of northwestern Pacific.In:
Coherent stuctures and self-organization of oceanic motions. P.P.Shirshov Inst.Oceanol.,
Moscow, 127-135.
Kilmatov, T. R. 1990. The influence of stratification on cross-structure of geostrophic front.
Izvestiya Akad. Sci. USSR, ser. fiz. atmos. i okeana. 26:103-105.
Kilmatov, T. R., and V. A. Kuzmin. 1990. The Pacific Subarctic Frontal Zone: structure, dynamics,
modelling (Subarkticheskiy front Tihogo okeana: struktura,
dinamika, modeli- rovanie.
Vladivostok: FEB of USSR Academy of Sciences, 114 p.
Kilmatov, T. R., and V. A. Kuzmin. 1991. The effect of cabbeling
and its seasonal variations at the
subarctic front. Izvestiya Akad. Sci. USSR, ser. fiz. atmos. i okeana. 27:883-887.
Kozlov, V. F., and V. A. Kuzmin. 1984. On the nature of main frontal zones in the ocean.
Okeanologiya. 24(4):574-577 (In Russian).
Kuksa, V. I. 1963. Main peculiarities of the North Pacific intermediate
waters: formation and
translation. Okeanologia, 3(1). Megapolygon experiment. 1992. (Ed. by Y.A.Ivanov),
Moscow: Nauka. 415 p.
Kuzmin, V. A. 1980. Subarctic front and its role in the mechanism of the North Pacific low salinity
layer formation. In: Hydrographic Studies in the North West Pacific (Ed. by K.T.Bogdanov).
POI: Vladivostok, 28-48.
204
Kuzmin, V. A. 1988. On the method of the Pacific subarctic front delineation using T-S- Density
relation. Morskoy Gidrofizicheskiy Zhurnal. 6:60-62.
Kuzmin, V. A. 1989. A manifestation of T-S-Density relation nonlinearity at subarctic frontal zone of
the Pacific. Morskoy Gidrofizicheskiy Zhurnal. 4:58-61.
Lobanov, V. B. 1990. Sea surface temperature spatial variation at the areas of Kuroshio eddies, p.
63-71. In Distantsionnie Issled. Okeana. Vladivostok: TINRO..
Mitnik, L. M., and V. B. Lobanov. 1991. Reflection of the oceanic fronts on the satellite radar
images. In: Oceanography of Asian Marginal Seas. Elsevier: Amsterdam, 85-101 (in English).
Moroshkin, K. V., and K. D. Sabinin. 1984. On the mixing of Oyashio and Kuroshio waters at the
Polar front. Okeanologia. 24(3):421-426.
Morozov, E. G., and Y. V. Pavlova. 1983. Observation of the eddies in the North-Western Pacific.
Okeano-logia. 23(5):782-786.
Muromtsev, A. M. 1958. Main features of the Pacific hydrography (Osnovnye cherty gidro-logii
Tikhogo okeana). Leningrad: Gidrometeoizdat.
Novozhilov, V. N. 1980. Subarctic frontal zone in the field of speed of sound, p. 3-16. In Hydro-
graphic Studies in the North West Pacific (Ed. by K.T.Bogdanov). POI: Vladivostok.
Pavlychev, V. P. 1975. Water regime and position of subarctic front in the North West Pacific ocean
(1965-1973). Izv. TINRO. 96:3-18.
Rogachev, K. A. 1989. Oxigen supersaturation at the edges of Kuroshio warm-core ring.
Okeanologia. 29(6):960.
Rogachev, K. A., and N. V. Bulatov 1991. Long-term change of the Oyashio frontal zone.
Rogachev, K. A., and V. B. Lobanov. 1990. On the concentrating of organisms at mesoscale
convergence area, p. 72-82. In Distantsionnie Issled. Okeana. Vladivostok: TINRO.
Yurasov, G. I., and I. D. Rostov. 1989. Anomaly peculiarities of the subarctic front meandering and
structure. Dokl.USSR Ac. Sci. 308(2):472-476.
205
APPENDICES (A)
Acronyms
Institutions
FERHRI
FERRC
HRC
IAPC
JFA
JMA
JODC
MSA
NOAA
ODC
PMEL
POI
RHA
ROC
TINRO
WDCA
WDCB
Far Eastern Regional Hydrometeorological Research Institute (Vladivostok)
Far Eastern Regional Receiving Center (Khabarovsk)
Head Receiving Center (Moscow)
Institute for Automation and Process Control (Vladivostok)
Japan Fisheries Agency (Hokkaido branch in Kushiro, Hokkaido)
Japan Meteorological Agency (Hakodate Marine Observatory, Japan)
Japan Oceanographic Data Center (MSA) (Tokyo)
Maritime Safety Agency: Ocean Surveys Division, Hydrographic Department (Tokyo)
National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (Washington D.C.)
Oceanographic Data Center (Obninsk)
Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory (NOAA, in Seattle, WA, USA)
Pacific Oceanological Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences (Vladivostok)
Regional Hydrometeorological Administration
Research Oceanographic Data Center of the Naval Hydrographic Service (St. Peters-
burg)
Pacific Research Institute of Fisheries and Oceanography (Vladivostok)
World Data Center A (Washington, D.C.)
World Data Center B (Moscow)
Other
APT Automatic Picture Transmission (AVHRR low resolution product)
AVHRR Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer (satellite instrument)
ESMR U.S. Nimbus 5 electrically scanning microwave radiometer (satellite instrument)
GMS Japanese geostationary meteorological (Himawari) satellite
HRPT High Resolution Picture Transmission (AVHRR product)
IR Infrared (satellite instrument)
MSS-M Multichannel Scanning System of medium resolution
NPIW North Pacific Intermediate Water
SLR USSR "Ocean" side-looking radar (satellite instrument)
SMMR U.S. Nimbus 7 scanning multichannel microwave radiometer
SST Sea surface temperature
Institutions where Okhotsk Sea and Oyashio region data are held
Far Eastern Regional Hydrometeorological Research Institute (Vladivostok, Russia)
Institute for Automation and Process Control (Vladivostok, Russia)
Japan Fisheries Agency (Hokkaido branch in Kushiro, Hokkaido, Japan)
Japan Meteorological Agency (Hakodate Marine Observatory, Japan)
Japan Oceanographic Data Center (JMA, Tokyo, Japan)
Maritime Safety Agency (1st Regional Maritime Safety Headquarters, Otaru, Hokkaido, Japan)
National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (Washington D.C., USA)
NOAA/Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory (NOAA, in Seattle, WA, USA)
Oceanographic Data Center (Obninsk, Russia)
206
Pacific Oceanological Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences (Vladivostok, Russia)
P.P. Shirshov Institute of Oceanology RAS (Moscow, Russia)
Pacific Research Institute of Fisheries and Oceanography (TINRO) (Vladivostok, Russia)
Research Oceanographic Data Center of the Naval Hydrographic Service (St. Petersburg, Russia)
Sakhalin Regional Hydrometeorological Administration (Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk, Russia)
World Data Center A (Washington, D.C., USA)
World Data Center B (Moscow, Russia)
WG 1 Terms of Reference
With regard to the importance of the Okhotsk Sea and Oyashio Region to the ventilation of the North
Pacific Ocean, such as the formation of the North Pacific Intermediate Water:
Review the present level of knowledge of the oceanic circulation and water mass modification in
the this area, and identify gaps in this knowledge;
Review studies relating chemical, biological and geographical regimes, and encourage interactive
understanding and planning of multidisciplinary experiments;
- Identify the scientific and logistical difficulties of ocean studies in the area;
Encourage the planning of experiments and discussion of related physical processes in the area.
Members of WG 1 and additional observers who participated in the Nemuro WG 1 meeting, 19-23
September 1993
WG 1 members (* - attended Nemuro meeting):
Canada Dr. R.J. Beamish China Prof. Ming-Yu Zhou*
Dr. Ed Carmack
Japan Dr. Makoto Kashiwai* U.S.A. Dr. Stephen C. Riser*
Dr. Hiroyuki Yoritaka* Dr. Lynne D. Talley (Chairman)*
Prof. Yutaka Nagata* Dr. John L. Bullister
Observers at Nemuro meeting who contributed to report:
Dr. Masaaki Aota (Japan)
Dr. Howard J. Freeland (Canada)
Dr. Toshihiko Kono (Japan)
Dr. Vyacheslav Lobanov (Russia)
Dr. Victor Sapozhnikov (Russia)
Also contributing to report:
Dr. Seelye Martin (U.S.A.)
207
Appendices (B)
The following reports are taken from the
monograph Hydrometeorology and
Hydrochemistry of the Seas, Vol.9, Okhotsk Sea.
Part 1 - Hydrometeorological conditions.
Gidrometeoizdat: Sankt-Petersburg, 1993, in
press (in Russian)
RUSSIAN HYDROGRAPHIC STUDIES IN
THE OKHOTSK SEA - HISTORICAL
BACKGROUND
Vladimir A.Luchin
1. Temperature and salinity distribution
The first review on the Okhotsk Sea
hydrography was written by L.I. Shrenk (1869,
1874). Later it was defined and developed by
S.O.Makarov (1894). He prepared maps of
temperature and density distribution at the
surface of Okhotsk Sea. Makarov also noted an
existence of cold intermediate layer as a result of
surface water deepening due to winter
convection, he found an upwelling areas off
Koni-Piagina Peninsula and off Kuril Islands and
mentioned large diurnal variations of water
temperature.
First Soviet expedition was carried out in
1932 headed by K.M. Deryugin (joint expedition
of TINRO and State Hydrological Institute).
They obtained the main features of spatial
temperature distribution in the sea.
The next stage started in the 50's with a
few expeditions of r/v "Vityaz" of P.P. Shirshov
Institute of Oceanology (Moscow). One of the
main problems investigated in these expeditions
and developed by following studies was the
importance of Kuril Straits for the Okhotsk Sea
hydrography and complex physical structure of
water masses distributions and currents at the
straits (Bogdanov, 1958; Ushakov, 1947;
Bruevich et al., 1960; Batalin and Vasyukova,
1960; Yakunin, 1974; Peregudin, 1976; and
Rumyantsev, 1974).
The thermal regime of the sea was
studied by Vinokurova, 1964, 1965; Glagolieva
and Kovalev, 1965; Tsapko, 1974 and
Chemyavsky, 1973 while relations of hydro-
graphic structure with hydrochemistry and
biology was presented by Ushakov, 1947;
Bruevich et al., 1960; and Kharitonova, 1965; a
role of heat balance components in the sea
hydrography - Batalin and Vasyukova, 1960;
Yakunin, 1974; convective mixing and an active
layer structure variability - Tyuryakov, 1970;
Dobrovolsky and Vladimirtsev, 1973.
Besides that the Okhotsk Sea
hydrography was summarized in the monographs
by Leonov, 1960; Moroshkin, 1966; and
Supranovich, 1969. Studying the water masses
distribution Leonov (1959, 1960) found an
influence of Pacific water inflow, continental
discharge and atmospheric precipitations on
water mass characteristics and classified T,S-
indexes of the sea water masses. Having a larger
data set (about 11,000 stations) Moroshkin
(1966) defined water mass parameters and
described more exactly boundaries between the
water masses. He was the first who showed an
existence of a second layer of temperature
minimum at the depth of 250-600 m.
From the second half of the 60's and till
the end of 70's an observational activity in the
Okhotsk Sea was stopped, however the data
summarizing and analyzing were still going on.
L.I. Veselova studied vertical temperature
stratification and made an attempt to calculate the
coefficient of vertical temperature diffusion
(Veselova, 1972a), added information on spatial
distribution of surface temperature and explained
some local peculiarities of it (Veselova, 1972b).
She also studied temporal variations of water
temperature of different scales including annual
cycle of SST in southern part of Okhotsk Sea
(Veselova, 1975) and forecast of thermal regime
(Veselova, 1974).
208
An influence of Amur river discharge on
temperature and salinity distribution of adjacent
areas of Okhotsk Sea (including Sakhalin Bay)
was investigated by G.A. Tsapko (1974). It was
shown that two maxima and minima are present
in an annual cycle of surface salinity which are
connected with ice melting and with inflow of
river floods. The first salinity minimum in
Sakhalin Bay occurs in June and the second in
September, while the maxima are in late July-
early August and in February-March.
On the basis of 150 cruises (4,617
hydrographic stations) T.I. Supranovich (1973)
studied seasonal variability of water mass
structure in the Kuril Straits and surrounded
areas of Okhotsk Sea and Pacific. T,S-indexes of
three water mass types present in the area were
defined and their transformation from season to
season was traced. It was found that the lower
boundary of an intermediate cold layer is
deepened down to 400 m in the straits and no
minus temperature observed there.
Since the second half of the 70's, large
scale observational studies in the Okhotsk Sea
were started again with governmental programs,
"Shelf" and "The Seas of the USSR". Research
vessels of State Hydrometeorological Committee
conducted hydrographic cruises (the majority of
stations were with full hydro-chemistry) both in
summer and winter seasons. The quality and
amount of TINRO observations were also
increased. Academy of Sciences and Naval
Hydrographic Service carried out special
observational experiments. A database of more
than 50,000 stations have been collected by
FERHRI and analyzed and published in the
monograph, Hydrometeorology and Hydro-
chemistry of the Seas, Vol.9, The Okhotsk Sea.
Gidrometeoizdat: Sankt-Petersburg, 1993 (in
press).
General circulation
The first scheme of Okhotsk Sea surface
currents presented by Shrenk (1869, 1874) was
based on a different sort of observations over the
100 years period including ship, ice and timber
drift, some climatic phenomena and a few (not
many) water temperature measurements (Fig. 1).
It was criticized by S.O. Makarov (1894)
especially the existence of a southward current
along Kamchatka coast and the southwestward
flow from Shelikhov Bay to the northern part of
Sakhalin Island. Using data on water
temperature and summarizing the experience of
navigators and fishermen Makarov pointed out
that wind stress and the Koriolis force on sea
water circulation should form of a gyre. M.E.
Zhdanko (1910) found the same thing. Studying
the tracks of drifting bottles he showed a
northward current along Kuril Islands and
western Kamchatka.
B.V. Davydov (1923) essentially defined
the circulation pattern by demonstrating that
northward current along Kamchatka (Makarov,
1894) does not come close to the coast but flows
at a some distance of it. So a compensation
southward current with water of lower
temperature exists in a narrow zone (20-30 miles)
just off the coast of Kamchatka to the south of
Utkolonsky Cape.
The results of the expeditions in 1932-
1933 and some previous data on current
measurements in the Kuril Straits were the basis
for Leonov (1959, 1960) circulation scheme
(Fig.2). He constructed the complete cyclonic
gyre over the whole Okhotsk Sea. This stationary
gyre is maintained by the annual northwestern
winds (southward currents) and compensation
inflow from Pacific Ocean.
Moroshkin (1964) presented more
detailed circulation pattern calculated on about
11,000 hydrographic stations (Fig.3). On the
large scale cyclonic gyre background he
constructed three stable local anticyclonic gyres:
to the west of southern Kamchatka, over the
Kuril Deep Basin and over the TINRO Deep
Basin. He noted the barotropic character of the
currents.
The main features of Moroshkin's pattern
were confirmed and some new features were
found by Pomazanova (1970), Kozlov (1972),
209
Zyryanov (1977) and Luchin (1982). In
particular, the existence of stationary and
migrated mesoscale eddies was demonstrated and
the existance of small-scale anticyclonic eddies in
Kamchatka coastal areas of river mouths was
confirmed by direct current measurements
(Pomazanova, 1970).
The results of Magadan Branch of
TINRO expeditions of more then 8,000 hydro-
graphic stations were used by Chernyavsky
(1981) to calculate geostrophic currents of
Okhotsk Sea circulation. He presented a more
detailed analysis and found some new structures,
for example, the Middle Current which departs
from Kamchatka Current at 52°N and turns
westward to Sakhalin Island. He also noted the
stability of coastal currents that produce
convergent downward motion and downwelling
of warm surface water in summer.
Currents in the Kuril Straits
Investigation of non-periodical currents
in the area of Kuril Straits was started by L.I.
Shrenk (1869, 1874). According to his scheme a
current flowing along Kamchatka coast from
Shelikhov Bay enters the ocean through the First
and Second Kuril Straits. Pacific water flows
into the Okhotsk Sea through the straits between
Simushir and Onekotan Islands while water flows
out of the sea through the southern straits. In the
upper layer of Bussol' Strait there is a seaward
current in its northern part and a backward flow
in southern part. Along the whole Pacific coast
of the islands the currents have a south westward
direction. In general this scheme is very close to
contemporary views.
Shrenk explained the low temperature
zone around the islands as a result of cold water
advection by the south westward currents flowing
along the islands from Kamchatka coasts.
(Another explanation for this phenomenon is the
result of tidal mixing was presented by Makarov
(1894)). Analyzing the possible tracks of drifting
bottles deployed in Okhotsk Sea over 1907-1910
Zhdanko (1910) affirmed the existence of a
northward current along the sea side of the
islands.
Studying the north eastward area
Davydov (1923) also noted an outflow of
Okhotsk Sea water through the First and Second
Kuril Straits pointed out by Shrenk.
Summarizing previous results and
analyzing direct current measurements and water
mass distribution of 1932-1952 Leonov (1941,
1959, 1960) and Zhukov (1954) found the Kuril
straits consisted of the three parts: through the
northern straits the main flow is directed into the
sea while through the southern straits it is
oceanward and it is in both directions in the
straits of the central part of Kuril Islands.
Zhukov (1954) also found the water flowing out
of the Okhotsk Sea through the southern Kuril
Straits is the main source of the Oyashio Current.
Direct current measurements in the Kuril
area were summarized and analyzed by
Supranovich (1969). It was found that there are
no straits with only one direction flow. Water
flows into the sea through the northern part of
each strait and flows out to the ocean through the
southern part. Outflowing water is carried
southwestward by the Oyashio Current and an
anticyclonic circulation is formed around each
island. Direct current measurements were taken
down to 500 m and showed no significant current
variability with depth.
Current measurements down to 1,200m
taken from moored stations in winter in the 70's
(Supranovich, 1975, 1979; Luchin, 1982b)
showed that the flow in Bussol' and
Kruzenshterna Straits changes direction to
opposite down from the depth 400-500 m. An
intensification of the Okhotsk Sea water outflow
was found through central and southern straits in
winter. No seasonal variations of the current
field in the 4th Kuril Strait were found.
210
SYSTEM OF CURRENTS AND PECU-
LIARITIES OF TEMPERATURE DISTRI-
BUTION IN THE OKHOTSK SEA
Vladimir A. Luchin, Far Eastern Hydrometeo-
rological Research Institute, Vladivostok
1. Introduction
The large-scale spatial distribution of
hydrological characteristics for different seasons
in the Okhotsk Sea have been studied rather well,
and factors responsible for them have been
analyzed /1,4-8,12,14,15,17,21,25/. We have a
true understanding on the vertical parameters
structure at the sea /8,12,15,20/. An attempt to
compile the prognostic dependences
characterizing the changes in water density
conditions have been made /2,3,20,22/.
However, the problems of characteristic
variability at different scales have been poorly
studied. By these observations daily variability
in the active layer of the Okhotsk Sea can be
compared with the annual one. The problem of
revealing the hydrological seasons and the lower
boundary of the active layer has not been studied
in full measure.
Data of the instrumental current
measurements (approximately, 1,000, mainly
daily recordings) are not sufficient to represent
the whole picture of the Okhotsk Sea water
movement (Fig.1). Such data are irregular and
have been obtained, as a rule, in the summer
period. Our observations cover only the
periphery regions of the sea, but it is impossible
to get characteristics of the annual current
variabilities for them.
The complicated bottom topography and
the dynamical processes in the island shelf zone
of the Kuril range hamper the current system
analysis (within one model) of the Okhotsk Sea.
The sea currents and currents along the Kuril
Island arc are traditionally considered different.
The current characteristics in the region
of the Kuril Straits and along the sea water areas,
directly adjacent to them, have been studied by
many authors on the basis of a constantly
(continuously) supplemented instrumental
observation /9,12,15,16,24, Supranovich, 1969/.
For the Okhotsk Sea, besides a generalization of
the instrumental measurement /15,16/, the
traditional current calculations, based on the
density field, (known from observation) have
been conducted /13,15,23/. Within the frame of
different theoretical models attempts have been
made to determine the causal and resulting
dynamical processes occurring in the sea and
atmosphere /1,10,11,15/. All authors of the
current schemes, with the exception of S.O.
Makarov /14/, emphasize that the atmospheric
circulation is essential in the circulation current
formation, directed counter-clockwise, in the
Okhotsk Sea.
The present study was carried out within
a frame of the project "Seas of the USSR". After
implementation of this project the scheme of the
Okhotsk Sea water circulation was obtained, the
results of diagnostic calculations and data of
instrumental current measurements were put in
the basis of this scheme. The vertical structure
peculiarities and spatial changes of hydrological
and hydrochemical parameters distribution at the
standard levels have been studied as well.
Individual aspects of daily, annual and inter-
annual characteristics variabilities have been
considered. The charts have been created, the
peculiarities characterizing the boundary position
and temperature, and salinity distribution in the
sea water cores have been analyzed.
2. Data and method
The information on the deep-sea
hydrographic observations along the Okhotsk Sea
from 1930 up to 1988 served as the initial data to
carry out the present work. The total number of
implemented stations is estimated to be 51,607.
The monthly data spatial distribution is
demonstrated in Fig. 1.1.3 while the data
distribution is shown in Table 1. The data set
has been sorted out in the spherical trapezia of
one degree size. The assumed trapezium
dimensions were substantiated by the density
distribution of the initial information along the
studied sea water area. For temperature, salinity,
211
and sea water density in the active layer, monthly
and seasonal data averaging has been undertaken.
At the lower levels annual mean averaging has
been considered within the seasonal scale of the
initial data averaging.
One thousand, 'mainly daily, current
observation data have been used. More than a
half of them have been conducted in the region of
the Kuril range. The observations were
conducted either at the autonomic buoy stations
or on board anchored ship. The total currents
were divided into the tidal and non-periodic
compositions. A major part of the instrumental
observation results was processed and
summarized (generalized) earlier in N.P.
Pomazanova /16/ and T.I. Supranovich, 1969.
Within the frame of the present work the data
from 67 observational stations, located in the
Kuril region, were processed. The period of
current records is estimated to be 3-8 days.
Applying A.S. Sarkisyan's model Dl
/18/ and the created charts of sea water density
from the surface down to the bottom levels of the
Okhotsk Sea Current scheme has been calculated.
Monthly density has been used in the layer of 0-
100 m, seasonal means in the layer of 150-250
in, and nonvariable estimation of water density
during a year starting from 300 m down to the
near bottom levels have been calculated. The
atmospheric pressure fields have been taken from
I.P. Timofeeva's work.
3. Currents
The results are evidence that the basic
elements of a level surface topography exist
during a year. The main peculiarity of the
Okhotsk Sea water circulation in the Northern
hemisphere is its cyclonic character. The main
links of the general cyclonic gyre are: (Fig.2)
the Kamchatka Current transporting the Pacific
waters to the north along the meridian of 152°E,
the North-Okhotsk Current moving along the
northern sea coast and the East-Sakhalinsk
Current is a flow of the cold southern waters
along the Sakhalin Island coast.
Against a background of the general
cyclonic movement in the open sea regions, the
system of eddy formation is of different scale and
sign. The eddy scale is estimated to be
approximately 150-200 miles. In the eastern and
southern sea parts, adjacent to the coast of
Kamchatka Peninsula and the Kuril Islands, the
eddy formation is anticyclonic, and in the north-
west they are the cyclonic (Fig.2).
The Pacific waters enter through the
straits of the Kuril range (from the Fourth Kuril
up to the Strait of Ekaterina). However, their
direct influence on the sea water dynamic is
limited to the great extent by the southeast
periphery of anticyclonic circulation over the
southern deepsea hollow. Only the Pacific water
penetration through the Bussol' straits and the
Fourth Kuril give an essential contribution to the
south and south eastern current formation (Fig.
2).
A comparison of calculations and current
measurements (400 examples) in the warm period
of a year was conducted. The current vectors,
obtained with the current measurements, do not
contradict the Okhotsk Sea movement (Fig. 2).
However, in consequence of different temporal
scale averaging of the current measurements and
the initial fields for the diagnostic calculations,
the results are considered to be preliminary.
To build the chart of non-periodic
currents in the region of the Kuril range (Fig. 3),
data measure-ments for the period of 1949-1977
have been used. As the measurements were
conducted in different months and years, the
assumption was that the basic elements of water
circulation preserve their feature during a year
and are not characterized by the interannual
variabilities. T.I. Supranovich's results from
1969 show that the basic regularities of water
movement do not change during a year and from
year to year in the strait narrows of the Kuril
range. On the Pacific side of the Kuril range,
starting from the First Kuril Strait to the
Ekaterina Strait the Kuril Current transports the
cold water to Hokkaido Island (Fig. 3).
212
The data show that the anticyclonic water
circulations are formed around the large islands
of the Kuril range (or around the groups of not
large ones). Thus, the water movement in the
strait narrows of the Kuril range is characterized
by the Okhotsk Sea water outflowing in the ocean
through their southern parts, and the Pacific
water inflowing takes place through the northern
ones. The First Kuril, the Second Kuril and the
Middle Straits, where the water transport in one
direction is observed, are the exception (Fig. 3).
It should be noted that very strong tidal
currents were recorded in the region of the Kuril
range, their velocity at the individual strait parts
can reach (particular, in shallows) 5-7 knots.
The tidal current at a major part of the Kuril
range have a combined character with a diurnal
component prevailing (Fig.4). Fig.5 shows the
parameters of maximal tidal currents: the main
axis of a tidal ellipse direction and the maximal
current speed. Analysis of current measurements
in the Kuril Straits from 40 moorings with 7-8
days duration of individual records revealed that
a current vector rotates with depth by the angle
of no more then 10-30 degree and only in Bussol'
strait it may turn by 40- 90 deg. No conformity
to any law for the direction of current vector
rotation with depth in different straits was found.
As the non-periodic currents are not an essential
part in the total currents in the Kuril region, the
represented non-periodic current scheme (Fig. 3)
will essentially differ from the actually existing
resulting water movement at a specific moment of
time.
4. Temperature distribution
From previous studies /1,6-
8,12,14,15,17,21,22/, the state of Okhotsk Sea
water, to a great extent, depends on the
dynamical processes occurring at its boundaries
and in the deep water layers of open area. The
advective factors prevail along the studied area,
as well the vertical and lateral tidal water mass
mixing in the dynamical active regions.
The annual variabilities of sea surface
temperature fields are evidence that two periods
are distinguished at the sea; they differed by the
large-scale peculiarities of the sea water
temperature distribution. As a criterion for such
periods and transition situations, it is assumed
the thermal state of the Kuril range region is
related to the temperature field of the rest part of
the Okhotsk Sea (Fig. 6). From December to
April the formation of high temperature values in
the mentioned region is observed because of the
Pacific water entering. Also, the increased
temperature is observed in the Kamchatka
Current (Fig. 2, 6a). Such distribution is mainly
related to the more high temperature of the
Pacific surface water. Furthermore, the intensive
vertical water exchange in the range straits
(against background of the thermal cooling of the
sea surface water during this period) leads to heat
transport from the lower level up to surface.
With the Pacific water extension and mixing with
the Okhotsk cold waters, gradual decreasing of
the sea surface temperature has occurred (for
example, Fig. 6a).
From June up to September the large-
scale distribution of the Okhotsk Sea surface
temperature is opposite to the winter one. In this
period light winds and calms have the highest
frequency over the considered water area.
Therefore, in the shelf regions where the
seasonal thermocline is the most pronounced and
is located near the sea surface, the sea surface
temperature is the highest. The lowest tempera-
ture values are observed in the dynamical active
regions (the Kuril range, enter to Shelikhov Bay
and adjacent sea water areas). Characteristics
exchange between the surface and lower layers
leads to heat transmission down to lower levels
and to more weak heating of the surface water
(for example, Fig. 6c).
The transition of the surface temperature
distribution is noted in May, October and
November. During these months the thermal
contrasts between separate sea parts disappear.
In spring (Fig. 6b) the coastal water freshening,
gentle breeze over the sea, and the surface
formation of a pronounced thermocline lead to
quick surface water heating. In the dynamical
active regions, intensive mixing of the surface
213
and subsurface water mass resolution the surface
waters being warmed slowly.
Insignificant heat content of the upper
quasi-homogeneous layer in the shelf regions
increase probability of storms and the low air
temperature over the sea contribute to an inten-
sive heat exchange in the atmosphere during the
autumn season. In the intensive water mixing
zones (the Kuril range and the southern sea part,
enter to Shelikhov Bay, the area of the Shantar
Islands), where the heat exchange from the lower
level up to the surface has taken place, the sea
surface temperature in autumn is comparatively
high. The whole mentioned processes lead to
thermal contrasts smoothing between the separate
sea parts (Fig. 6d).
The estimation distribution of annual sea
temperature oscillations at the surface and at the
level of 50m is presented in figure 7a, b. The
variations, to great extent, are defined by the
intensive dynamical processes in the separate sea
parts. The maximum values (14-18°C) are
referred to the area of the warm Soya Current
extension and to the areas of an insignificant
vertical and lateral water mass exchange (North
and central sea parts, as well the East-Sakhalin
Current zone). The dynamical active sea
regions, annual variability of the sea surface
temperature decreases to 6-9°C. At the level of
50m the large-scale peculiarities of annual
temperature changes do not differ from the
surface ones, however, their values decreases in
2-3 times (Fig. 7a, b).
Different intensity of the thermal-
dynamical processes in the remote sea parts leads
to the spatial inhomogeneous distribution of the
sea surface maximum heating and cooling (Fig.
7c, d).
The reason for the sea surface maximum
temperature lag in the region to the east of
Terpenie Cape (it comes in September), more
probable, is river run-off. This factor, though to
less extent (in relation to the tidal mixing) occurs
in the region of the Shantar Islands (Fig. 7 c).
One of the basic features of the Okhotsk
Sea structure is the cold intermediate layer which
is formed as a result of the winter-autumn
cooling. In the autumn-winter period of maxi-
mum convection development, its core wedges in
the surface, and in spring it becomes the
subsurface layer. The summer warming-up is not
sufficient to destroy the cold intermediate layer
completely. Only annual variability of its vertical
extension and core characteristics is observed.
In August (it is a period of the most vivid
occurrence of the cold subsurface layer) the
lowest temperature and the closest locations of its
core to the surface are observed in the points of
the cyclonic gyre location (north-eastern of the
Shantar Islands, center of the north sea part to
the east of the Sakhalin Island). In the direction
of Kamchatka Peninsula and the Kuril Islands the
temperature values and the depth of its core
location increase (Fig. 8a,b).
The peculiarity of the Okhotsk Deep Sea
Water is the presence of Pacific origin tem-
perature maximum in it. With the extension and
the Pacific and the Okhotsk waters mixing, the
temperature values decrease, and the depth of the
warm intermediate core location increases. The
temperature minimum in the most southern sea
part, probably, is a result of downwelling of the
colder upper level waters in the system of
anticyclonic circulation (Fig.8c, d). Below the
deep sea maximum temperature layer, slight
decrease occurs, and at the near bottom levels of
the Okhotsk deep-sea hollow the water
temperature does not exceed 1.6-1.8°C. To the
present it is very difficult to determine the
regularity of the spatial temperature variability
near bottom levels. It is due to insufficient high
accuracy observation data.
214
5. References *
1. Batalin, A.M., Vasyukova N.G. 1960. Opyt rascheta teplovogo balansa Okhotskogo morya. Tr.
Okeanograficheskoi komissii, tom VII, S. 37-51.
2. Chernyavsky, V.I. 1973. 0 nekotoryh osobennostyah prognozirovaniya tipa termicheskogo
rezhima v Okhotskom more. Izv. TINRO, T. 86, 49-55.
3. Chernyavsky, V.I. 1981. Cirkulyatsionnye sistemy Okhotskogo morya. Izv. TINRO. - T. 105,
13-19.
4. Kozlov, V.F. 1972. Raschet urovennoy poverhnosti v Okhotskom more. Tr. DVNIGMI, Vyp.
37, 37-43.
5. Leonov, A.K. 1960. Regional'naya okeanografiya.- ch.1 - L.: Gidro- meteoizdat, 706 S.
6. Luchin, V.A. 1982. Diagnosticheskiy raschet tsirkulyatzii vod Okhotskogo morya v letniy
period. Tr. DVNII, Vyp. 96, 69-77.
7. Makarov, S.O. 1950. Okeanograficheskie raboty. - M.: Gosud. iz-vo geograf. literatury. 277 S.
8. Moroshkin, K.V. 1966. Vodnye massy Okhotskogo morya. - M.: Nauka, 68 S.
9. Pomazanova, N.P. 1970. Poverhnostye techeniya v severnoh i vos- tochnyh promyslovyh raionah
Okhotskogo morya v letnie mesyatzy. Tr. DVNIGMI, Vyp. 30, 94-104.
10. Rumyantsev, G.V. Raspredelenie temperatury vody na poverhnosti i gidrologicheskie fronty v
promyslovyh rayionah Okhotskogo morya (po dannym avias'emok). Tr. DVNIGMI. - Vyp.45,
15-23.
11. Sarkisyan, A.S. 1977. Chislennyi analiz i prognoz morskih techeniy. - L.: Gidrometeoizdat, 183
S.
12. Shrenk, L.I. 1874. 0 techeniyah Okhotskogo, Yaponskogo i smezhnyh s nimi morei. SPb., 206
S.
13. Timofeeva, T.P. 1980. Dannye o strukture i izmenchivosti klimata. Davlenie vozducha na urovne
morya. Severnoe polusharie. - Obninsk: VNIIGMI- MCD, 207 S.
14. Tsapko, G.A. 1974. Rol' raschetnogo stoka v formirovanii osobennostey raspredeleniya
temperatury i solenosti vod ust'evogo vzmor'ya Amura. Tr. DVNIGMI, Vyp. 45, 54-60.
15. Tyuryakov, B.I. 1970. Raschetnaya skhema izmeneniya struktury deyatel'- nogo sloya
Okhotskogo morya of sezona k sezony. Tr. LGM, Vyp. 32, 94-120.
16. Veselova, L.E. 1972. 0 koeffitsiente vertikal'noy temperaturopro- vodnosti v Okhotskom more.
Tr. DVNIGMI. Vyp. 37, 29-33.
17. Veselova, L.E. 1972. Prostranstvennoe raspredelenie temperatury poverhnostnogo sloya vody
Okhotskogo morya. Tr. DVNIGMI, Vyp. 37, 13-28.
18. Veselova, L.E. 1974. K metodike Kratkosrochnogo prognoza temperat- ury vody u zapadnogo
poberezh'ya Kamchatki. Tr. DVNIGMI, Vyp. 45, S. 3-14.
19. Veselova, L.E. 1975. Osobennosti godovogo hoda temperatury vody na poverhnosti v yuzhnoi
chasti Okhotskogo morya. Tr. DVNIGMI, Vyp. 50, 38-56.
20. Veselova, L.E. and V.D. Budaeva. 1975. 0 vozmozhnosti primeneniya dinamikostatisticheskogo
metoda dlya dolgosrochnyh prognozov tempe- ratury vody v yuzhnoi chasti Okhotskogo morya.
Tr. DVNYMI, Vyp. 50, S. 57-65.
21. Vinokurova, T.T. 1964. o raspredelenii pridonnoy temratury vody u zapadnogo poberezh'ya
Kamchatki. Izv. TINRO, T. 55, 165-174.
22. Vinokurova, T.T. (1965): Ismenchivost' temperaturnyh usloviy vod v severnoy chasti Okhotskogo
morya. Isv. TINRO, T. 59, 14-26.
23. Yakunin, L.P. Otsenka elementov teplovogo balansa Okhotskogo morya s uchetom ledyanogo
pokrova. Tr. DVNIGMI, Vyp. 45, 36-45.
24. Zhdanko, M.E. 1910. 0 techeniyah v Okhotskom i Beringovom moryah. Russkoe sudohodsrvo.
Spb., 132-133.
215
25. Zyryanov, V.N. 1977. Chislenny raschet ustanovivshihsya techeniy
Okhotskogo morya
(prognosticheskaya model'). - Tr. VNII morskogo rybnogo hozyaistva i okeanografii, T. 119, 24-
30.
* - All the main references above are presented in a translated and corrected form in the Bibliography
of the Okhotsk Sea except such ones as Supranovich,1969 and Luchin, 1982b, which are not available
for foreign readers.
216
Russian hydrographic studies in the Okhotsk Sea - Historical background
Fig. 1.
Scheme of the Okhotsk Sea circulation by L. I. Shrenk (1874)
217
Fig. 2. Circulation scheme by A. K. Leonov (1960)
Fig. 3. Current scheme by K. V. Moroshikin (1966)
Table 1
Annual distribution of hydrographic observations (T/S) in the Okhotsk Sea
MONTH
Depth ! 1 ! 2 ! 3 ! 4 ! 5 ! 6 ! 7 ! 8 ! 9 ! 10 ! 11 ! 12 ! Total
0 801 1021 1184 2375 3720 7923 9545 10409 6390 4503 2269 1467 51607
259 429 408 961 2218 5318 6724 7693 4172 2896 1644 1082 33798
100 443 646 684 1017 1741 4009 4157 4103 2723 2147 1293 973 23936
185 337 303 462 1395 3228 3289 3083 1845 1471 1048 879 17525
200 240 447 492 528 1023 2638 2361 2215 1536 1190 766 644 14080
129 283 260 313 863 2343 1905 1700 1119 866 663 585 11029
500 74 106 119 115 449 1015 980 920 478 571 279 242 5348
73 96 113 108 415 953 852 740 353 455 268 243 4668
1000 39 7 48 36 155 439 320 286 132 187 167 121 1931
42 7 47 68 155 317 303 262 116 160 159 115 1751
1500 23 3 27 11 73 207 96 158 51 68 56 75 848
23 3 25 23 72 200 95 122 51 63 48 59 784
2000 10 - 7 1 46 134 27 39 14 33 30 37 378
10 - 5 2 44 122 24 37 15 33 27 29 348
3000 - - - - 17 32 8 10 2 16 4 8 97
1 17 31 8 10 1 16 5 8 97
219
System of currents and peculiarities of temperature distribution
4 37 140 445 460
155 460
62
z a
5
'2 3
60 '
3
60 y
4
4
4
44 ,10, 3
4
4
y S
ti
.S
2
5.3
2
6
a
la 5
44 .
4
' a
2C6
3 A
55 . 34`'. 55
vep
40
l76
4 4 4 ;
15
40
44 5
:T
Q
4
50
3
50
4 r}+ .3
Z 4
.7
99
i A. 3. O.4
9 j. s.3
k4.4
ti0 4 { -
:? 4 5 - 2
g 45 j. 8
- 3
4 6
1
12:.x3
3:;:
20
..59
.
3
37
140
445 450 455 760
45
Fig. 1. Position of direct current measurements
1) duirnal station; 2) number of duirnal stations at one point; 3) multiduirnal
station
220
Fig. 2. Generalized scheme of the Okhotsk Sea circulation
Russian words are names of currents:
1 - East-Sakhalin
2 - North - Okhotsk
3 - Kamchatka
4 - Compensational
5 - Yamskoe
221
14 8 150 152
154 156
50
Lb
50
49 Krusenshtern Strait
aQ
1
'
ki
48
Z
< 1
Jew
48
'
47
Strait Bussol
J
47
46 Friza Strait
45
..rte
45
148 150 152 154 156
i 2 3
a
4
4-
5
Fig. 3. Non-periodical currents in the shelf area of Kuril Islands
1) less than 10 cm/s; 2) 11-20; 3) 21-30; 4) 31-40; 5) 41-50
222
Fig. 4. Type
of the tidal currents (in 0-25 m layer)
1) complex with prevailing semiduirnal tides; 2) complex with prevailing duirnal; 3) duirnal
223
/
a) r 6)
;Q/
ti`
Il` %3
1 5
°E
4 Bi
b5
' t
l0 2
45
`;S,l1
I HOC
-14? 44-9
45D
!52 454 a6
!c 4` ::0 a52 154
Fig. 5. Distribution of tidal parameters (0-25 m layer):
a - tidal ellipse main axis direction; b - maximal velocities (knots)
Fig. 6. Temperature distribution at the Okhotsk Sea surface
a - February; b - May; c - August; d - November
225
ME
-3 -4 ®-5
Fig. 7. Annual water temperature variations
(a - surface; b - 50 m) and time of maximum (c) and minimum (d) temperature values
appearance at the surface (1 - August; 2 - August-September; 3 -
September; 4 - January -
March; 5 - February-April)
226
Fig. 8. Characteristics of the cold intermediate layer in August
(a - depth of the core in m; b - its temperature in C) and the warm intermediate layer (c -
depth of the core in m; d - its temperature in C)
227
I v1j(#rqmP1
HMSC
GC
Pices Scientific Report No.2
781
Special Issue: The Okhotsk Sea
.P5351
and Oyashio Region.
no.2
120011389570

