PICES Scientific Report No. 20 
2002 
 
 
 
 
PICES-GLOBEC INTERNATIONAL PROGRAM ON 
CLIMATE CHANGE AND CARRYING CAPACITY 
 
 
 
REPORT OF  
2001 BASS/MODEL, MONITOR and REX Workshops,  
and THE 2002 MODEL/REX Workshop 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Edited by 
Harold P. Batchelder (CCCC IP), Gordon A. McFarlane (BASS), Bernard A. Megrey (MODEL), 
David L. Mackas (MONITOR), William T. Peterson (REX) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
August 2002 
Secretariat / Publisher 
North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES) 
c/o Institute of Ocean Sciences, P.O. Box 6000, Sidney, B.C., Canada. V8L 4B2 
E-mail:  secretariat@pices.int       Home Page:  http://www.pices.int    
 
- 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 Page 
 
Executive Summary.......................................................................................................................v 
 
Report of the 2001 BASS/MODEL Workshop 
To review ecosystem models for the subarctic gyres ................................................................1 
 
Report of the 2001 MONITOR Workshop 
 To review progress in monitoring the North Pacific .................................................................9 
Sonia D. Batten 
 PICES Continuous Plankton Recorder pilot project.................................................................10 
 Phillip R. Mundy 
 GEM (Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Trustee Council`s “Gulf Ecosystem Monitoring” 
 initiative) and U.S. GOOS plans in the North Pacific ..............................................................12 
Ron McLaren and Brian O`Donnell 
 A proposal for a North Pacific Action group of the international Data Buoy 
 Cooperation Panel ................................................................................................................13 
Gilberto Gaxiola-Castrol and Sila Najera-Martinez 
 The Mexican oceanographic North Pacific program:  IMECOCAL..........................................14 
Sydney Levitus 
 Building global ocean profile and plankton databases for scientific research.............................17 
 
Report of the 2001 REX Workshop 
 On temporal variations in size-at-age for fish species in coastal areas around 
 the Pacific Rim.........................................................................................................................19 
Brian J. Pyper, Randall M. Peterman, Michael F. Lapointe and Carl J. Walters 
 Spatial patterns of covariation in size-at-age of British Columbia  
 and Alaska sockeye salmon stocks and effects of abundance and ocean temperature .................20 
R. Bruce MacFarlane, Steven Ralston, Chantell Royer and Elizabeth C. Norton 
 Influences of the 1997-1998 El Niño and 1999 La Niña on juvenile Chinook salmon  
 in the Gulf of the Farallones.................................................................................................25 
Olga S. Temnykh and Sergey L. Marchenko 
 Variability of the pink salmon sizes in relation with abundance of Okhotsk Sea stocks..............29 
Ludmila A. Chernoivanova, Alexander N. Vdoven and D.V. Antonenko 
 The characteristic growth rate of herring in Peter the Great Bay (Japan/East Sea) .....................34 
Nikolay I. Naumenko 
 Temporal variations in size-at-age of the western Bering Sea herring.......................................37 
Evelyn D. Brown 
 Effects of climate on Pacific herring, Clupea pallasii, in the northern Gulf of Alaska 
 and Prince William Sound, Alaska.........................................................................................44 
Jake Schweigert, Fritz Funk, Ken Oda and Tom Moore  
 Herring size-at-age variation in the North Pacific....................................................................47 
Ron W. Tanasichuk 
 Implications of variation in euphausiid productivity for the growth, production and 
 resilience of Pacific herring (Clupea pallasi) from the southwest coast of Vancouver Island......57 
Chikako Watanabe, Ahihiko Yatsu and Yoshiro Watanabe 
 Changes in growth with fluctuation of chub mackerel abundance in the Pacific waters off 
 central Japan from 1970 to 1997............................................................................................60 
Yoshiro Watanabe, Yoshiaki Hiyama, Chikako Watanabe and Shiro Takayana 
 Inter-decadal fluctuations in length-at-age of Hokkaido-Sakhalin herring and Japanese 
 sardine in the Sea of Japan ....................................................................................................63 
Pavel A. balykin and Alexander V. Buslov 
 Long-term variability in length of walley pollock in the western Bering Sea and 
 east Kamchtka......................................................................................................................67 
Alexander A. Bonk 
 Effect of population abundance increase on herring distribution in the western Bering Sea........69 
Sergey N. Tarasyuk 
 Survival of yellowfin sole (Limanda aspera Pallas) in the northern part of the Tatar Strait 
 (Sea of Japan) during the second half of the 20
th
 century .........................................................71 
 
Report of the 2002 MODEL/REX Workshop 
 To develop a marine ecosystem model of the North Pacific Ocean including 
 pelagic fishes............................................................................................................................77 
Summary ..................................................................................................................................77 
Workshop overview ..................................................................................................................77 
Workshop presentations ...........................................................................................................80 
Bernard A. Megrey, Kenny Rose, Francisco E. Werner, Robert A. Klumb and  
Douglas E. Hay 
  A generalized fish bioenergetics/biomass model with an application to Pacific herring ........ 80 
Robert A. Klumb 
 Review of Clupeid biology with emphasis on energetics ...................................................88 
Douglas E. Hay 
 Reflections of factors affecting size-at-age and strong year classes of herring in 
 the North Pacific ............................................................................................................94 
Shin-ichi Ito, Yutaka Kurita, Yoshioki Oozeki, Satoshi Suyama, Hiroya Sugisaki  
and  Yongjin Tian 
 Review for Pacific saury (Cololabis saira) study under the VENFISH project ....................97 
Alexander V. Leonov and Gennady A. Kantakov 
 Formalization of interactions between chemical and biological compartments in  
 the mathematical model describing the transformation of nitrogen, phosphorus,  
 silicon and carbon compounds ..............................................................................................100 
Herring group report and model results .................................................................................107 
Saury group report and model results ....................................................................................114 
Model experiments and hypotheses.........................................................................................119 
Recommendations...................................................................................................................120 
Achievements and future steps................................................................................................122 
Acknowledgements .................................................................................................................122 
References ..............................................................................................................................122 
Appendix 1 List of participants............................................................................................129 
Appendices 2-5 FORTRAN codes .......................................................................................131 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
 
This report summarizes the results of three PICES-GLOBEC Climate Change and Carrying Capacity 
(CCCC) Task Team (TT) workshops held at the PICES Tenth Annual Meeting in October 2001, in 
Victoria, British Columbia, Canada and a joint MODEL/REX workshop held in Nemuro, Japan, in 
January 2002.  The three workshops during the Annual Meeting were:  1) a 1-day joint BASS/MODEL 
workshop to review ecosystem models for the subarctic Pacific gyres, 2) a 1-day MONITOR workshop to 
review progress in monitoring the North Pacific, and 3) a 1-day REX workshop on temporal variations in 
size-at-age for fish species in coastal areas around the Pacific rim.  Each of these workshops addressed 
the core activities of these Task Teams;  moreover, they continue a trend of having joint workshops of 
multiple Task Teams, which provides opportunities to broaden the scope of the discussions and lead to 
synthesis.  This trend to multi-Task Team workshops is timely because during the coming year, and 
particularly at the PICES Eleventh Annual Meeting (Qingdao, People’s Republic of China), CCCC will 
be examining progress achieved during the past decade, documenting its successes and failures in 
answering the scientific questions posed initially, and evaluating whether the current structure of Task 
Teams and Advisory Panels is the most suitable to carry CCCC research forward into the next decade. 
 
The joint BASS/MODEL workshop focused on two ECOPATH equilibrium models describing energy 
flow through the eastern and western subarctic gyres, and explored the dynamics of energy flow in these 
two systems using ECOPATH/ECOSIM formulations.  The equilibrium models suggest that biomass in 
the western subarctic gyre (WSA) is higher than in the eastern subarctic gyre (ESA).  Biomasses of 
several species (flying squid, pomfret, chaetognaths and salmon) were higher in the WSA than in the 
ESA.  A conclusion of these ECOPATH investigations was that estimates of diet compositions for many 
of the species were poorly known.  Several recommendations regarding future research resulted from the 
workshop, including improving the quality of available input data sets (like diet).  BASS and MODEL 
plan to continue their joint work on this project by linking the ECOPATH/ECOSIM higher trophic model 
to the NEMURO model of lower trophic levels dynamically.  Since the NEMURO model is forced by 
ocean conditions (mixed layer depth, temperature, insolation, etc.), this linking of models will provide a 
method for exploring the results of various climate change scenarios on higher trophic levels in the WSA 
and ESA.  
 
The MONITOR workshop was focused on reviewing the need and capability of sustained, long-term 
monitoring of ocean and ecosystem conditions in the PICES region, especially considering the recent 
emphasis within PICES on producing a North Pacific Ecosystem Status Report.  Presentations at the 
workshop summarized some of the tools that are available now or could be put into place to assist this 
effort - including both regional networks of coastal observing systems, Continuous Plankton Recording 
(CPR) across the gyres, and data management.  Among other recommendations, MONITOR would like to 
develop a closer liaison with regional (Gulf Ecosystem Monitoring [GEM]) and international (Data Buoy 
Cooperation Panel [DBCP], Coastal Global Ocean Observing System [C-GOOS]) providers of ocean 
data, and extend CPR observations of the subarctic gyres to other ancillary data types beyond zooplankton 
biomass and species composition. 
 
The REX workshop summarized historical datasets on salmon and herring populations across the Pacific, 
with additional contributions on a few other species.  Several key themes that emerged from the workshop 
were:  1) the importance of understanding the spatial coherence and scales of size-at-age patterns, 2) the 
search for mechanistic (causal) as opposed to correlational explanations of common temporal trends 
between the environmental variables and size-at-age data, and 3) the influence of density-dependence and 
the mechanisms through which it affects size-at-age changes through time. 
 
The fourth report is the result of a joint MODEL/REX workshop that brought scientists involved in 
developing the NEMURO model together with experts on saury and herring growth.  The principal 
objective was to include a fish growth model into the lower trophic level NEMURO model.  For 
efficiency, the group focused on modeling the growth of a single fish using input data on prey abundances 
and temperature provided by the NEMURO model.  A previously published clupeid bioenergetics model 
(from the Atlantic) was adapted to two different important fish in the North Pacific, Pacific herring and 
Pacific saury.  These two species have contrasting life histories and growth rates;  however, by tuning the 
parameters of the model to each species, growth curves were obtained that match observations reasonably 
well.  A few longer term, multicohort (where each year one fish is modeled) simulations of the saury 
model indicated some interannual variability in growth as a result of environmental forcing of 
temperature and prey fields.   
 
The four Task Teams of CCCC are beginning to coordinate their activities in ways that will hopefully 
provide answers to many of the CCCC scientific questions, and to develop or coordinate an ecosystem 
monitoring network.  This network will provide information to PICES that is essential in preparing 
regularly updated North Pacific Ecosystem Status Reports.  The final recommendations from each of the 
CCCC Task Teams can be found in the PICES 2001 Annual Report. 
 
 
Harold P. Batchelder and Makoto Kashiwai 
CCCC-IP Co-Chairmen 
BASS/MODEL WORKSHOP TO REVIEW ECOSYSTEM MODELS FOR 
THE SUBARCTIC PACIFIC GYRES 
(Co-convenors:  Gordon A. McFarlane, Andrei S. Krovnin, Bernard A. Megrey and Michio 
J. Kishi) 
 
 
Workshop objectives 
 
The BASS/MODEL workshop on higher trophic 
level modeling (March 5-6, 2001, Honolulu, 
U.S.A.) recommended to convene a 1-day 
workshop to evaluate the results of the inter-
sessional workshop (for details see PICES 
Scientific Report No. 17, 2001) and initiate 
hypothesis testing using the models developed.  
 
This follow-up BASS/MODEL workshop was 
held October 5, 2001, immediately preceding the 
PICES Tenth Annual Meeting in Victoria, British 
Columbia, Canada.  The objectives of the 
workshop were to: 
 
null assess the results of the March 2001 
workshop, 
null review progress on model development and 
updated models;  and 
null begin to develop scenarios to test key 
hypotheses. 
 
Review of baseline models 
 
The two ECOPATH/ECOSIM baseline models 
developed at the March 2001 workshop on higher 
trophic level modeling should be viewed as work 
in progress.  Estimates of biomass, productivity to 
biomass, consumption rate to biomass and diet 
composition were compiled from the literature and 
from research data provided by PICES member 
countries.  In general, information available for 
1990 (or 1990-1993) was used such that the two 
models could be viewed as representative of the 
early 1990s conditions.  In total, 56 species groups 
(with three detrital groups) were included in the 
models, however some species were not common 
to both regions.  Minke whales, common dolphin, 
Japanese sardines and anchovies were present in 
the Western Subarctic Gyre (WSA) model, but not 
in the Eastern Subarctic Gyre (ESA) model.  
Conversely, elephant seals were present in the 
ESA model only.  Many of the estimates are at 
best only guesses.  Some observations were 
derived from coastal ecosystems and therefore 
may not be applicable to gyre ecosystems. 
 
In general, the total biomass estimated for the 
WSA was higher than for the ESA.  Major 
differences between the two model regions include 
higher biomasses of flying squid and Pacific 
pomfret in the ESA, higher biomass of 
chaetognaths in the WSA, and higher salmon 
biomass in the WSA (pink salmon) than in the 
ESA (sockeye salmon).  Marine mammal biomass 
estimates were identical for each region since they 
were derived from basic-scale North Pacific 
estimates.  No biomass estimates of forage fish 
and micronektonic species groups were available 
from the literature or from research survey data, so 
these were evaluated by top-down balancing of 
each model.  Biomass estimates for lower trophic 
level plankton groups were derived from outputs 
of the NEMURO model that had been calibrated 
for Ocean Station P in the ESA. 
 
Productivity values were derived from mortality 
rates.  Consumption rates were obtained from diet 
composition and laboratory descriptions of 
calories/gram for prey species.  Both production 
and consumption estimates were weighted by 
residence time for migratory species.  The 
estimates for lower trophic levels (e.g. large 
zooplankton) were taken from other ECOPATH 
models and, in some cases, from the NEMURO 
model. 
 
All information on diet composition was poor.  
Marine mammal diets were not as detailed as fish 
diets.  Salmon diets were specific and detailed 
with many stomachs sampled over large areas and 
seasons, however, only summer estimates were 
available for the WSA.  The major difference 
between the WSA and ESA were the seasonal 
differences in the diet of salmon since WSA 
included sockeye salmon in May.  Early spring 
diet estimates for the early 1990s were not 
1
available for the ESA.  Physical forcing inputs to 
the NEMURO model can be generated to produce 
phytoplankton and zooplankton outputs.  
Maximum photosynthetic rates, zooplankton 
growth efficiencies and microbial loops can be 
modified and initiated to provide various climate 
change scenarios.  These outputs can be used in 
ECOSIM. 
 
Update of ECOPATH/ECOSIM models 
 
Kerim Aydin reviewed the updated 
ECOPATH/ECOSIM baseline models.  Figures 1 
and 2 show composite images of the food webs for 
the eastern and western Pacific subarctic gyres.  
These models were initially constructed from data 
assembled at the March 2001 BASS/MODEL 
workshop and updated by including results of 
lower trophic level modeling by the MODEL Task 
Team and upper trophic level data from a wide 
range of sources on both sides of the Pacific.   
 
Future adjustments to the models based on 
additional data presented at the Victoria workshop 
will be incorporated into the final versions of these 
models and presented at an inter-sessional 
BASS/MODEL workshop to be convened in April 
2002.  This will lead to a PICES Scientific Report  
 
West 8x+ 
higher 
West 4x 
higher 
West 2x 
higher 
East 2x 
higher 
East 4x 
higher 
East 8x+ 
higher 
West and 
east same 
 
Fig. 1 A combined quantitative food web of the eastern and western Pacific subarctic gyres 
constructed from data assembled at the March 2001 BASS/MODEL workshop and presented at the 
PICES Tenth Annual Meeting.  Species in both the western and eastern gyres are shown.  The area of 
each compartment is proportional to log of average biomass density (t/km
2
), and the width of each 
connecting flow is proportional to the square root of the averaged yearly flow volume (t/km
2
/year).  
Coloration shows the ratio of west vs. east biomass density and flow volume:  where the ratio of west/east 
is higher (red) and where the ratio of east/west is higher (blue). 
2
West 8x+ 
higher 
West 4x 
higher 
West 2x 
higher 
East 2x 
higher 
East 4x 
higher 
East 8x+ 
higher 
West and 
east same 
 
Fig. 2 An enlargement of the upper trophic level flows and biomass densities shown in Figure 1.  
Minor flows (the lowest 10% (cumulative) of prey mortality and predator diet) are removed for clarity.  
See Figure 1 for explanation of coloration. 
 
 
to document the models and assess the overall 
state of knowledge of food web interactions and 
critical dynamic links in subarctic gyre 
ecosystems.  In addition, the April 2002 meeting 
will focus on the potential to incorporate dynamic 
simulations of climate into these models. 
 
This continuing synthesis highlighted some key 
areas for future research, for example, the 
exploration of dynamics of the intermediate 
trophic levels such as micronektonic squid, small 
forage fish, and mesopelagic fish (Fig. 2).  The 
biology of these species is currently poorly 
understood and yet central to the functioning of 
the subarctic food web. 
 
Another key direction for future work lies in 
developing methods to integrate gyre processes 
with boundary currents and near-shore processes.  
Specifically, concurrently examining the dynamics 
of boundary current species such as the Pacific 
sardine and Japanese anchovy in relation to the 
dynamics of the salmon-dominated subarctic gyre 
ecosystems that were simulated by these models, 
will increase our understanding of North Pacific-
wide climate systems and their interrelations with 
coastal systems. 
 
Recent improvements to NEMURO model 
 
Bernard Megrey reviewed recent progress and 
improvements on the NEMURO lower trophic 
level modelling efforts.  
3
Diagnostic calculations  
 
Several diagnostic calculations were added to the 
NEMURO model.  These included Production/ 
Biomass (P/B) ratios for phytoplankton and 
zooplankton, Food Consumption/Biomass (C/B) 
ratios for small, large and predatory zooplankton, 
and Ecotrophic Efficiency (a measure of how 
much primary production transfers up the food 
web to the zooplankton species and ultimately to 
higher trophic level species). 
 
Validation to Station P 
 
The NEMURO model was parameterized for 
Ocean Station P and output was compared to data 
collected from that site.  Results were favourable.  
NEMURO provides reasonable C/B and P/C 
ratios.  Annual primary production from the model 
(149 gC/m
2
/yr) is only 6% higher than the best 
current estimate (140 gC/m
2
/yr) by Wong et al. 
(1995).  Average chlorophyll concentration from 
the model (0.42 mg/m
3
) is only 5% higher than the 
long-term value (0.4 mg/m
3
) measured by Wong et 
al. (1995).  An f-ratio (assuming that the 
production of the large phytoplankton is primarily 
fuelled by “new” nitrogen) is in a good agreement 
with the estimate by Wong et al. (1995):  0.23 and 
0.25 respectively. 
 
Zooplankton vertical migration 
 
Results without ontogenetic migration of 
predatory zooplankton (ZP) show a large diatom 
bloom around day 73 (Fig. 3, top panel).  The 
prevailing view is that there is no spring bloom at 
Station P.  Thus the bloom is an artifact of the 
“box” nature of the model.  Adding ZP migration, 
decreases biomass of phytoplankton by a factor of 
2 (Fig. 3, bottom panel) and generates more 
reasonable diagnostics.  The estimates of 
Ecotropic Efficiency are not significantly affected. 
 
Microbial loop  
 
Inclusion of a microbial loop had only a small 
impact on the standing stocks of small and large 
zooplankton (Fig. 4).  Predatory zooplankton were 
reduced by about one half, reducing potentially 
available biomass for fish production.  These 
differences are due to the decreased net trophic 
efficiency of the system because a large portion of 
the primary production passes through a microbial  
 
 
Fig. 3 Comparison of NEMURO output with  
(bottom panel) and without (top panel) ontogenetic 
migration of large zooplankton. 
 
 
Fig. 4 Comparison of NEMURO output with and 
without the microbial loop approximation. 
4
community before entering the zooplankton 
community. 
 
Recent progress 
 
MODEL Task Team also conducted a sensitivity 
analysis and data assimilation for Station A7 and 
added carbon fluxes to the LTL model.   
 
The most recent improvements to the NEMURO 
model include: 
 
• Acquired SST time series from Station P 
1951-1988; 
• Acquired equations to permit calculation of 
light at the surface; 
• Modified primary production equations to 
explicitly include mixed layer depth (MLD) to 
permit simulation of regime shift scenarios. 
 
In addition, S. Lan Smith presented work being 
conducted in support of the NEMURO model, and 
this overview is appended as Endnote 2. 
 
Hypothesis testing scenarios 
 
The following scenarios were suggested: 
 
null Examine impact of changes in primary and 
secondary production on each gyre.  Do they 
respond similarly or differently? 
null Examine seasonality of changes in each 
system; 
null Examine the role of primary production 
increases on sockeye salmon abundance; 
null Examine role of predation in the regulation of 
population abundance: 
o shark/salmon 
o marine mammal/salmon 
null Examine role of marine birds in each gyre; 
null Examine role of forage fish in each gyre; 
null Examine species competition for prey, e.g. 
pink/sockeye salmon;  pomfret/squid, etc. 
 
Recommendations 
 
1. Convene a joint BASS/MODEL workshop in 
April 2002 to continue hypotheses testing of 
the models developed at the 2001 workshop 
and refined at the Tenth Annual Meeting; 
2. Parameterize the western gyre model, in 
particular finalize the boundary to exclude the 
transition area; 
3. Calibrate and validate the NEMURO model to 
Station A, which is more appropriate for the 
western gyre; 
4. For both the eastern and western gyre models, 
incorporate time series (from the NEMURO 
model) for light, SST, etc. to generate primary 
productivity and zooplankton time series; 
5. Hypotheses to be tested should be developed 
prior to the inter-sessional workshop and 
should focus on climate change scenarios; 
6. Complete final data synthesis (including 
marine birds and mammals) prior to the inter-
sessional workshop; 
7. Following the inter-sessional workshop; 
prepare the two baseline models for 
publication as a PICES scientific Report, 
including the results of hypotheses testing, and 
a data inventory; 
8. PICES provide a means of accessing these 
models, and other workshop products on the 
web; 
9. BASS/MODEL/REX Task Teams convene a 
joint session (with GLOBEC) at the PICES 
Eleventh Annual Meeting to examine 
“Approaches for linking basin scale models to 
coastal ecosystem models”;  
10. Given the limited data on diet of many species 
inhabiting the gyres, PICES should encourage 
researchers to collect and collate diet data for 
species in these areas and sponsor the 
development of “Diet database” which would 
be peer-reviewed and citable. 
 
References 
 
Wong, C.S., Whitney, F.A., Iseki, K., Page, J.S., 
and Zeng, J.  1995.  Analysis of trends in 
primary productivity and chlorophyll-a over 
two decades at Ocean Station P (50˚N 145˚W) 
in the Subarctic Northeast Pacific Ocean.  In 
R.J. Beamish (ed.) Climate Change and 
Northern Fish Populations.  Canadian Special 
Publication in Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 
121: 107-117. 
 
5
Endnote 1 
 
Simulating the cycling of organic matter using a nitrogen-based oceanic 
ecosystem model:  carbon to nitrogen ratios 
 
S. Lan Smith
1
, Yasuhiro Yamanaka
2
 and Michio J. Kishi
3 
1 
Frontier Research System for Global Change, Global Warming Division, 3173-25 Showa Machi, 
Kanazawa-ku, Yokahama, Kanagawa 236-0001, Japan.  E-mail:  lanimal@jamstec.go.jp 
2 
Graduate School of Environmental Earth Science, Hokkaido University, N10W5 Kita-Ku, Sapporo, 
Japan.  060-0810  E-mail: galapen@ees.hokudai.ac.jp  
3 
Hokkaido University, Graduate School of Fisheries Sciences, 3-1-1 Minato-cho, Hakkodate 041-
8611, Japan.  E-mail:  kishi@salmon.fish.hokudai.ac.jp 
 
Efforts are beginning to include oceanic ecosystem 
models in global simulations of the carbon cycle, 
to improve the representations of primary 
production and of the resulting oceanic uptake of 
carbon dioxide.  Coupling complicated ecosystem 
models with three dimensional physical models to 
obtain meaningful simulations poses several 
challenges.  Before proceeding to a three 
dimensional implementation, we undertook this 
study using a one dimensional model to address 
challenges relevant to simulating the fate of 
dissolved and particulate organic matter. 
 
We embedded a formulation for the cycling of 
dissolved organic matter (DOM) via the microbial 
food web (MFW) into a nitrogen-based oceanic 
ecosystem model [the NEMURO model developed 
by the PICES program;  see Yamanaka et al. 
(2001)].  The formulation of Anderson and 
Williams (1999) for the cycling of dissolved 
organic carbon (DOC) was converted to a 
nitrogen-based formulation including the same 
three fractions of DOM:  labile (L-), semi-labile 
(S-) and refractory (R-), as dissolved organic 
nitrogen (DON).  With this ecosystem model, 
coupled to a one dimensional physical model, we 
simulated the Hawaii Ocean Time-series Station 
ALOHA for 1997 and 1998. 
 
We compared our simulations to data for nitrate, 
silicate, DON, DOC, PON, and POC.  Despite the 
deficiencies of the physical model, the ecosystem 
model reasonably simulated the vertical 
distribution of total DON, without tuning of 
parameters for this site.  Only the sinking velocity 
of POM was reduced to 10 m per day from the 
default value of 50 m per day from NEMURO for 
the North Pacific.  This was done consistently with 
the findings of Kawamiya et al. (1997) and Hurtt 
and Armstrong (1996), that slower sinking rates 
are necessary to simulate substropical locations.  
Parameters for the ecosystem model were based 
on those of Kishi et al. (2001)’s simulation of a 
site in the northwestern Pacific, and parameters for 
the DOM model were based on those of Anderson 
and Williams (1999). 
 
While the average vertical profiles of nutrients and 
DOM were well simulated, seasonal variations 
were not well resolved by this one dimensional 
model.  The model simulated too steep a decline in 
DON with depth below the photic zone, as did 
Anderson and Williams’ model.  The simulated 
C:N ratio of DOM was also too low in the near 
surface waters.  We found that the assumption of 
Redfield stoichiometry was inconsistent with the 
data for non-refractory DOM and for POM at 
Station ALOHA.  Data from other locations also 
reveal C:N ratios higher than Redfield values.  To 
use nitrogen-based models such as this to simulate 
the carbon cycle with confidence, we must 
improve their representations of the C:N ratios of 
DOM and POM.  These issues of stoichiometry 
are also relevant to the PICES program’s goal of 
coupling lower trophic level models to models of 
fish production.  Accurate simulations of fish 
production and biomass will require correct 
stoichiometries in these models. 
 
References 
 
Anderson, T.R., and Williams, P.J.B.  1999.  
Global Biogeochemical Cycles 13 (2): 337-
349. 
6
Hurtt, G.C., and Armstrong, R.A.  1996.  Deep-
Sea Res. 43 (2-3): 653-683. 
Kawamiya, M., Kishi, M.J., Yamanaka, Y., and 
Suginohara, N.  1997.  J. Oceanogr. 53: 397-
402. 
Kishi, M.J., Motono, H., Kashiwai, M., and Tsuda, 
A.  [in press].  J. Oceanogr.  
Yamanaka, Y., Yoshie, N.A., Fujii, M., Aita-
Noguti, M., and Kishi, M.J.  [in press].  
Journal of Oceanography. 
 
 
Endnote 2 
List of participant 
 
Canada 
 
Jacqueline R. King 
Gordon A. McFarlane 
R. Ian Perry 
Marc Trudel 
 
Japan 
 
Makoto Kashiwai 
Toshio Katsukawa 
Michio J. Kishi  
Takahiro Ida 
Kohei Mizobata 
Sei-ichi Saitoh 
Hiroaki Sato 
S. Lan Smith 
Akihiko Yatsu 
Hiroshi Yoshinari 
 
Russia 
 
Natalia Klovatch 
Andrei S. Krovnin 
Alexei Orlov 
 
U.S.A. 
 
Kerim Aydin 
Patricia Livingston 
Thomas Loughlin 
Bernard A. Megrey 
Thomas C. Wainright 
Francisco E. Werner 
 
 
7
 
8
MONITOR WORKSHOP TO REVIEW PROGRESS IN MONITORING 
THE NORTH PACIFIC 
(Co-convenors David L. Mackas and Sei-Ichi Saitoh) 
 
 
A half-day workshop was convened by the 
MONITOR Task Team on the afternoon of 
October 6, 2001, immediately preceding the 
PICES Tenth Annual Meeting in Victoria, British 
Columbia, Canada.  The overall workshop goal 
was to familiarize participants with the range of 
present monitoring activities in the PICES region, 
and with both near-future and longer-term plans 
and opportunities.  
 
The group heard and discussed seven presentations 
on the March 2001 PICES/CoML/IPRC workshop 
in Honolulu, on ongoing or soon-to-begin time 
series data collection programs in the North 
Pacific, and on some of the challenges and 
opportunities in archival and analysis of historic 
time series data.  Presentation titles and topics are 
very briefly summarized in the following bulleted 
paragraphs.  Extended abstracts for some 
presentations follow. 
 
• Overview of the Workshop on “Impact of 
climate variability on observation and 
prediction of ecosystem and biodiversity 
changes in the North Pacific” (Patricia 
Livingston, Alaska Fisheries Science Center, 
NOAA, U.S.A.;  Pat.Livingston@noaa.gov) 
 
A 3-day workshop co-sponsored by PICES, the 
Census of Marine Life program (through Alfred P. 
Sloan Foundation) and the International Pacific 
Research Center, was held March 7-9, 2001, in 
Honolulu.  The workshop (proceedings published 
as PICES Scientific Report No. 18) catalogued 
existing time series observation programs in the 
North Pacific, and discussed plans for future North 
Pacific operational monitoring activities, and the 
roles of international organizations and programs 
with interests in these activities.  An important 
outcome of the meeting was a proposal for a 
regularly-updated “North Pacific Ecosystem Status 
Report”, coordinated through PICES, and perhaps 
involving the development of “Regional Analysis 
Centres” to facilitate analysis of ongoing time 
series. 
• Progress report from the PICES 
Continuous Plankton Recorder (CPR) pilot 
project (Sonia Batten, Sir Alistair Hardy 
Foundation, UK;  soba@wpo.nerc.ac.uk)  
 
This report summarized for a broader audience the 
material previously presented to the CPR Advisory 
Panel (see Endnote 1 to the MONITOR Task 
Team report in the 2001 PICES Annual Report).  
The CPR is towed behind commercial ships of 
opportunity and samples mesozooplankton 
abundance and species composition in the upper 
layer.  Group discussion focused on potential 
value-added measurements which might be 
included, e.g. ship-mounted sensors for 
temperature, salinity, fluorescence, nutrients, 
ocean color, and acoustic backscatter;  depth 
profiles of temperature and/or salinity using 
expendable probes;  visual observations of 
seabirds and marine mammals;  and collation of 
measurements along the CPR track with broader 
surrounding spatial coverage from satellites and 
drifting buoys. 
 
• Updates on GEM (Exxon Valdez Oil Spill 
Trustee Council’s “Gulf Ecosystem 
Monitoring” Initiative) and U.S. GOOS 
plans in the North Pacific (Phillip Mundy, 
Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Restoration Office, 
U.S.A.;  phil_mundy@oilspill.state.ak.us) 
 
A large endowment fund is now in place to 
support (on a permanent basis) long-term time 
series observations in the coastal ocean off Alaska.  
Requests for proposals are being issued, and 
monitoring activities, both partnered and fully-
funded, will increase steadily through the 
remainder of this decade.  GEM is a regional 
program within the larger PICES area.  GEM 
welcomes PICES expertise (and example) in the 
optimal design of the program.  U.S. GOOS is 
developing additional regional programs centered 
in the Gulf of Maine, the California Current, and 
the Gulf of Mexico. 
 
9
• A proposal for a North Pacific Action 
Group of the international WMO/IOC Data 
Buoy Cooperation Panel (Ron McLaren, 
Environment Canada;  ron.mclaren@ec.gc.ca) 
 
A network of moored and drifting buoys provides 
real-time meteorological and near-surface 
oceanographic data from various locations 
throughout the ocean.  Coverage in the oceanic 
North Pacific is very sparse.  A proposed North 
Pacific Action Group, sponsored collaboratively 
by PICES and the International Data Buoy 
Cooperation Panel, would provide a forum for 
sharing information on deployment opportunities 
and data use. 
 
• Review of Mexican oceanographic 
IMECOCAL program (Gilberto Gaxiola, 
Centro de Investigación Científica y de 
Educación Superior de Ensenada, Mexico;  
ggaxiola@cicese.mx) 
 
IMECOCAL (Investigaciones Mexicanas de la 
Corriente de California) is a new program which 
extends the spatial coverage of the present 
CalCOFI program to the southern part of the 
California Current off Baja California (roughly 22-
32ºN).  The program completes quarterly cruises, 
coordinated in time with CalCOFI surveys, and 
samples a broad range of hydrographic, planktonic 
and fisheries oceanographic variables.  Training of 
graduate students is an important component of 
the program.  Data reports and a more detailed 
program description are posted at the IMECOCAL 
web site (http://ecologia.cicese.mx/~imecocal). 
 
• Report on the August 2001 NEAR-GOOS 
Workshop (Yoshioki Oozeki, National 
Research Institute of Fisheries Science, Japan;  
oozeki@affrc.go.jp) 
 
The NEAR-GOOS Ocean Environment 
Forecasting Workshop was held August 27-31, 
2001, in Seoul, Republic of Korea.  The overall 
workshop goal was to discuss the status and need 
of a forecasting capability in the NEAR-GOOS 
region.  NEAR-GOOS obtains operational 
physical oceanographic and meteorological time 
series in the marginal seas of Northeast Asia.  
There is a strong emphasis on rapid availability of 
data, some in real time, and more detailed data as 
“delayed mode” through the Japan Oceanographic 
Data Center.  NEAR-GOOS databases are not yet 
set up to handle biological and chemical data, and 
PICES advice for practical and useful data 
collection systems for these variables would be 
useful. 
 
• Building global ocean profile and plankton 
databases for scientific research (Sydney 
Levitus, National Oceanographic Data Center, 
NOAA, U.S.A.;  Sydney.Levitus@noaa.gov) 
 
The Global Oceanographic Data Archaeology and 
Rescue (GODAR) project (historical data) and the 
IOC World Ocean Database project (new data) 
were described and evaluated for the PICES 
audience.  Quality screening methods, and 
transcription and formatting protocols are 
important issues for these large databases.  The 
presentation described some useful approaches, 
and also gave examples of applications.  
 
 
PICES Continuous Plankton Recorder pilot project 
 
Sonia D. Batten 
Sir Alistair Hardy Foundation for Ocean Science, 1, Walker Terrace, The Hoe, Plymouth, UK.  PL1 3BN  
E-mail:  soba@wpo.nerc.ac.uk 
 
Background 
 
The Continuous Plankton Recorder (CPR) is 
towed behind commercial ships of opportunity and 
samples mesozooplankton abundance and species 
composition in the surface ~10 m.  During 2000 
and 2001, a total of 12 transects were carried out 
in the North Pacific (Fig. 1).  Samples have been 
processed up to spring 2001, together with a pilot 
transect in summer 1997.  The north-south (N/S) 
10
route was operated by an oil tanker and the east-
west (E/W) route by a container vessel.  Over 95% 
of planned sampling was successfully achieved 
and some additional temperature data were 
collected on most of the north-south transects. 
 
Results summary 
 
Species distribution data through 2000 were 
presented for the north-south transect for key 
copepod species.  One significant finding was that 
the surface development duration of Neocalanus 
plumchrus copepodites varied along the transect 
by up to 5 weeks, and was probably influenced by 
temperature (Batten et al., in press).  This species 
spends only about 3 to 4 months in the surface 
waters but is probably the most important 
copepod, in terms of biomass, in the Gulf of 
Alaska in spring/early summer. 
 
The April 2000 transect was selected for a more 
intensive spatial analysis.  Instead of every fourth 
sample being processed (which is the normal 
practice), almost every sample was processed.  
Autocorrelations of abundance against distance for 
the most common taxa were carried out and 
showed that the decorrelation length scale is about 
60 km.  This analysis suggests that the current 
routine sampling resolution of the CPR (sample 
spacing of 72 km) is appropriate for the Gulf of 
Alaska.  
 
As expected, an analysis of the mesozooplankton 
community on the east-west transect revealed 
distinguishable differences in community structure 
between geographic regions such as the Bering 
Sea, Aleutian shelf and the Gulf of Alaska.  This 
result supports the idea that CPR data can be used 
to detect shifts in community composition on a 
temporal as well as a spatial basis.  With currently 
available data, interannual comparisons are 
limited, however, comparison of mesozooplankton 
abundance between the pilot north-south sampling 
in summer 1997 with the same period in 2000 
showed large changes, with zooplankton 
abundances in 1997 about 5 times higher in the 
open Gulf of Alaska.  Although interpretation 
needs to be tempered by the limited sampling 
available for 1997, the results may be related to 
the 1997/98 El Niño event. 
  
24th June-3rd July 2000
 10th-20th June 2001
2000               2001  
21
st
 –26
th
 March      22
nd
-27
th
 April   
29
th
 April-5
th
 May    20
th
-25
th
 May   
17
th
-22
nd
 June         27
th 
June-2
nd
 July  
19
th
-24
th
 July            10
th
-16
th
 August 
23
rd
-29
th
 August      21
st
-25
th
 September    
1997 
21st July-6th August 
Fig. 1 Upper panel shows the N/S transect, run 5 times in 2000 and 2001, and once in 1997.  Lower 
panel shows the E/W transect, run once in 2000 and 2001.  Symbols indicate sample positions. 
11
Group discussion 
 
The main focus of the discussion was the possible 
future enhancement of the CPR program.  Value-
added measurements were proposed which might 
be included, e.g. ship-mounted sensors for 
temperature, salinity, fluorescence, nutrients, 
ocean colour, and acoustic backscatter; depth 
profiles of temperature and/or salinity using 
expendable probes; visual observations of seabirds 
and marine mammals;  and collation of 
measurements along the CPR track with broader 
surrounding spatial coverage from satellites and 
drifting buoys. 
 
The fitting of a thermosalinograph to the vessel 
was given a high priority since much of the 
physical processes occurring in the North Pacific 
are salinity-driven.  There was also enthusiasm for 
adding sea-bird/mammal observers to the vessel as 
a potential way to obtain trophic interaction 
information (including inferences on intermediate 
levels such as squid and forage fish).  
 
There was support within the group for holding an 
inter-sessional workshop on the design and 
implementation of a possible ship-of-opportunity 
monitoring package, which might include many of 
the parameters listed above. 
 
Reference 
 
Batten, S.D., Welch, D.W., and Jonas, T. 
Latitudinal differences in the duration of 
development of Neocalanus plumchrus 
copepodites.  Fisheries Oceanography. (in 
press). 
 
 
GEM (Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Trustee Council’s “Gulf Ecosystem 
Monitoring” initiative) and U.S. GOOS plans in the North Pacific 
 
Phillip R. Mundy 
Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Restoration Office, #401-645 G Street, Anchorage, AK 99501-3451, U.S.A.   
E-mail:  phil_mundy@oilspill.state.ak.us 
 
A new endowment has been put in place by the 
Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Trustee Council to fund 
(on a permanent basis) long-term time series 
observations in the coastal ocean of the Gulf of 
Alaska.  The Gulf of Alaska Ecosystem 
Monitoring and Research Program (GEM) is one 
of three U.S. government endowments established 
within the past five years to provide for marine 
research and long-term monitoring in Alaskan 
waters.  GEM is a regional program focusing 
primarily on the northern Gulf of Alaska within 
the larger PICES area.  The first GEM invitation 
for proposals will be issued in August 2002, for 
funding in calendar year 2003, however two pilot 
projects are already underway.  The 
oceanographic mooring at station 1 of the Seward 
Line (GAK-1), and the continuous plankton 
recorder (CPR), operated on a vessel of 
opportunity between Valdez and Long Beach, are 
being evaluated on a trial basis for their abilities 
to contribute to the permanent monitoring 
program.  Recommendation of the PICES CPR 
Advisory Panel were instrumental in obtaining the 
support of GEM for the CPR project.  GEM 
welcomes, and hopes to rely upon, PICES 
expertise and recommendations in the optimal 
design and implementation of the GEM program.  
Starting in 2003, GEM monitoring activities, both 
partnered and fully-funded, will increase steadily 
through the remainder of this decade, until the 
annual income stream is fully allocated. 
 
GEM design and implementation is being closely 
coordinated with the newly constituted North 
Pacific Research Board (NPRB), which 
administers an endowment supporting marine 
research in all Alaskan waters.  NPRB has 
indicated interest in partnering with GEM on an 
extended CPR project during calendar year 2002, 
and is expected to issue an invitation for proposals 
sometime next year.  The third research 
endowment which GEM is following closely is 
the Northern Fund of the Pacific Salmon Treaty, 
which is now amassing capital, and which 
12
presently has no plans to start funding work.  The 
three funds together should contribute in excess of 
U.S. $20 million annually to research and 
monitoring in the PICES area when all are fully 
operational, about 2004. 
 
In addition to the help received from PICES, 
GEM development is being assisted by the 
steering committee of the U.S. Global Ocean 
Observing System (U.S. GOOS).  U.S. GOOS is 
providing recommendations on the basic 
components of an observing system to support 
modeling of climatic and oceanographic processes 
in the coastal environment.  The Steering 
Committee is also assisting development of other 
regional marine observing programs centered in 
the Gulf of Maine, the California Current, and the 
Gulf of Mexico.  In the long-term, U.S. GOOS 
hopes to contribute to marine research in the 
PICES region by providing the scientific basis for 
a continuing appropriation from the U.S. Congress 
for a system of ocean observing tools consisting 
of Argo profiling floats, a remotely telemetered 
drifting buoy array, coastal moorings, GPS-
capable tide gauge stations, volunteer observing 
ship transects, and data management and 
assimilation that will support oceanographic 
modeling and forecasting. 
 
 
A proposal for a North Pacific Action Group of the international Data Buoy 
Cooperation Panel  
 
Ron McLaren and Brian O'Donnell 
Meteorological Service of Canada, Pacific and Yukon Region, Environment Canada, #700-1200 W. 73
rd
 
Avenue, Vancouver, B.C. Can ada.  V6P 6H9.  Email:  ron.mclaren@ec.gc.ca 
 
Established in 1985, the Data Buoy Cooperation 
Panel (DBCP) is an official joint body of the 
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission 
(IOC) and the World Meteorological Organization 
(WMO).  The Panel consists of representatives of 
the WMO and member states of the IOC 
interested in participating in its activities.  
 
The most important task of the DBCP is to co-
ordinate drifting and moored buoy programmes at 
the international level, with a view to increase the 
number of buoys deployed and maintain high 
quality archived and real time oceanic and 
atmospheric data.  The Panel encourages the free 
exchange of data and international co-operation 
by the formation of regional and global Action 
Groups, such as the European Group on Ocean 
Stations and the International South Atlantic Buoy 
Program.  An Action Group within the DBCP is 
an independent self-funded body that maintains an 
observational buoy programme providing 
meteorological and oceanographic data for real 
time and/or research purposes in support of 
relevant WMO and IOC programs.   The goals of 
an Action Group are to provide good quality and 
timely data to users, to encourage the distribution 
of data via the GTS and to promote the exchange 
of information on buoy activities and technology. 
 
Action groups exist for the North Atlantic, South 
Atlantic, Arctic, Indian and Antarctic oceans.  The 
work of Action Groups is reflected in the number 
of buoy observations in their relevant areas of 
responsibility.  Compare with other regions, the 
North Pacific is relatively undersampled.  At the 
October 2000 meeting of the DBCP, Canada made 
a commitment to determine the level of interest 
within the scientific community currently doing 
research in the North Pacific Ocean to form an 
Action Group for this area. 
 
The demonstrated success of other Action Groups 
would indicate that the co-operative efforts of 
agencies already working in the North Pacific, 
could contribute substantially to increasing the 
number of oceanographic and meteorological 
observations over what is currently available.  
 
PICES members are encouraged to discuss the 
formation of such an Action Group with their 
colleagues within their own, or other 
oceanographic or meteorological agencies, who 
might be able to contribute to and benefit by 
13
membership in an Action Group for the North 
Pacific.  Additional information on the work of 
the Panel, as well as technical information on 
buoys and other ocean buoy programs can be 
found at the DBCP web site located at 
http://dbcp.nos.noaa.gov/dbcp/. 
 
 
The Mexican oceanographic North Pacific program:  IMECOCAL 
 
Gilberto Gaxiola-Castrol and Sila Najera-Martinez 
Centro de Investigación Científica y de Educación Superior de Ensenada (CICESE), Carr. Tijuana-
Ensenada, Km. 107, Ensenada 22800, Baja California, Mexico.  E-mail:  ggaxiola@cicese.mx 
 
120º 118º 116º 114º 112º
LONGITUDE
24
26
28
30
32
LATITUDE
ISLA
PUNTA
EUGENIA
ENSENADA
BAHIA
VIZCAINO
GUADALUPE
137.60       .50       .40      .30
130.60      .50       .40       .30
133.60
120.80       .70       .60       .50                  .30
    .60       .50       .40
100.60       .50       .40       .30
PUNTA
BAJA
103.60
107.60
113.60
117.80       .70       .60       .50                   .30
127.60
123.60
IMECOCAL  Grid
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 100 200   km
 
Fig. 2 IMECOCAL surveys station locations. 
 
In September 1997, a consortium of seven 
Mexican academic institutions began a new 
oceanographic program off Baja California 
Mexico, as named IMECOCAL (Investigaciones 
Mexicanas de la Corriente de California).  The 
IMECOCAL program was initiated with a 3-year 
grant from the Inter-American Institute of Global 
Change Research (IAI), and a four-year grant 
from the National Council of Science and 
Technology (CONACYT-Mexico).  This grant 
was extended to five more years, covering the 
oceanographic surveys at least until 2004.  Some 
funds came from the National Science Foundation 
(NSF-USA), under a joint grant with the Scripps 
Institution of Oceanography (SIO-UCSD).  
The main goal of the IMECOCAL program is to 
understand how physical processes regulate the 
changes in the pelagic ecosystem of the southern 
region of the California Current.  For that 
objective we are developing a long-term 
monitoring project to study the climatic and 
oceanographic variability effect in this region, 
maintaining core oceanographic measurements 
during the surveys, and collecting sea level and 
atmospheric data on island and land stations (Fig. 
2).  We are conducting modelling studies to 
explore plankton and small pelagic fish response 
to regional and global physical forcing as well as 
to local anthropogenic perturbations on the coastal 
areas.  Also, we are looking to develop a new 
generation of research oceanographers for the 
program, with fellowships for graduate students 
doing their thesis in physical oceanography, 
plankton, paleoecology, small pelagic fisheries, 
nutrient chemistry, primary production, and 
climate change.  
 
We followed the CalCOFI (California 
Cooperative Fisheries Investigations) sampling 
grid off Baja California, which was abandoned in 
the 1980s by U.S. marine scientists.  Quarterly 
IMECOCAL cruises are conducted using the 
CICESE R/V Francisco de Ulloa, in January, 
April, July, and October.  These cruises are 
coordinated in time with the CalCOFI surveys, in 
order to have an integrated description of the 
pelagic ecosystem of the California Current, from 
Point Conception, California, to the southern 
region of Baja California.  The core 
oceanographic observations at each station 
include CTD profiles to a 1000-meter depth to 
measure temperature, salinity, dissolved oxygen, 
and fluorescence, and 200-meter Rosette casts to 
collect water samples with 5-litre Niskin bottles.  
14
Water is analysed to determine dissolved oxygen, 
nutrients (NO
3
, NO
2
, SiO
2
, PO
4
), phytoplankton 
pigments (chlorophyll a, and phaeopigments), 
phytoplankton cell counts, particle and 
phytoplankton light absorption, and pigment 
phytoplankton composition (HPLC analysis).  
Oblique bongo net tows (505-micrometer mesh) 
are taken from the first 200-meters, using one 
cod-end to estimate zooplankton (biomass and 
group analysis), and the other for ichthyoplankton 
abundance.  In addition, 100-meter vertical 
CALVET net tows are made to capture 
macrozooplankton, including ichthyoplankton  
(fish eggs and larvae).  Casts for in situ primary 
production determinations as well as irradiance 
and radiance profiling are carried out daily at the 
mid-day stations. Also, photosynthesis-irradiance 
curves are made, to have the first systematic 
phytoplankton photosynthetic data in the southern 
California Current region.  These data are 
expected to be used, together with bio-optical and 
satellite (SeaWiFS) information to estimate 
primary production over meso- and larger-scales.  
Occasionally we using a SIMBAD to determine 
near-surface water leaving radiance, in order to 
develop local pigment algorithms for remote 
colour sensors in collaboration with colleagues at 
SIO-UCSD.  
 
 
Fig. 3 T-S diagrams in the IMECOCAL zone measured during the El Niño:  October 1997 to January 
1998 (red lines) and the La Niña:  October 1998 to January 1999 (blue lines).  Redrawn from Reginado 
Durazo. 
 
Near-surface temperature, salinity, and 
chlorophyll-fluorescence (Fig. 3) are monitored 
continuously underway, simultaneously with an 
acoustic Doppler current profiler (ADCP).  A 
CUFES (Continuous Underway Fish Egg 
Sampling) system is used between stations, and 
15
when the vertical net tows are made.  This system 
allows to enhance our understanding of the small-
scale distribution of fish eggs in this region of the 
California Current (Fig. 4).  Together with the 
CalCOFI program, we are studying the 
transboundary production and abundance small 
pelagic fish in relation to the environmental 
variability. 
 
 
Fig. 4 Distribution of sardine eggs (CUFES 
data) compared to zooplankton biomass from 
CalCOFI (Ron Lynn) and IMECOCAL (Bertha 
Lavaniegos and Timothy Baumgartner) data in 
April, 2000. 
 
In addition to the monitoring surveys, 
IMECOCAL maintains sea level pressure gauges 
at an oceanic island (Guadalupe Island, 29°N, 
118°W), and at an onshore location (San Quintin 
Bay, ~31°N).  These paired instruments permit to 
monitor the sea surface pressure gradient between 
the island and the coastal station in order to  
 
provide a measure of the along-shore mean flow 
in the region.  The instruments have been 
operating since January 1999 in collaboration with 
the Mexican Navy.  Also, meteorological stations 
are maintained at several locations along the 
Peninsula of Baja California. 
 
Preliminary information derived from our 1997-
2002 surveys is held in a database for the program 
collaborators and the international scientific 
community.  We already have important results 
from our study area; derived from the seventeen 
surveys, the three meteorological stations, and the 
two sea level gauge stations.  About 60% of the 
samples are analysed, generating twelve data 
reports, more than ten scientific contributions, and 
four MSc theses.  Fourteen graduate students are 
working on their thesis related to information 
collected on the surveys, and six scientific papers 
should be published during the next two years. 
We expect to complete the database of all the core 
data by the end of this year.  For more information 
about sharing data, please contact with our Data 
Manager (loyasa@cicese.mx), and visit our web 
site (http://www.ecologia.cicese.mx/~imecocal). 
 
IMECOCAL Collaborators 
 
Timothy Baumgarter
1
, Daniel Loya
1
, Bertha 
Lavaniegos
1
, Reginaldo Durazo
2
, Martin 
Hernandez
3
, Joaquin Garcia
1
, Yanira Green
4
, 
Tomas Campos
4
, Jose Gomez
1
, Eduardo Millan-
Nuñez
1
, Ruben Lara-Lara
1
, Carmen Bazan-
Guzman
1
, Virgilio Arenas
6
, Sergio Aguiñiga
3
, 
Rene Funes
3
, Affonso da Silveira Mascarenhas 
Jr
2
, Sergio Hernandez
5
, Salvador Lluch-Cota
5
, 
Ricardo Saldierna
3
.  
 
1
Centro de Investigación Científica y de 
Educación Superior de Ensenada (CICESE);  
2
Universidad Autónoma de Baja California 
(UABC);  
3
Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias 
del Mar (CICIMAR);  
4
Instituto Nacional de la 
Pesca (INP);  
5
Centro de Investigaciones 
Biologicas del Noroeste (CIBNOR);  
6
Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM). 
 
 
 
16
Building global ocean profile and plankton databases for scientific research 
 
Sydney Levitus 
National Oceanographic Data Center, World Data Center for Oceanography, E/OC5, #4362-1315 East 
West Highway, Silver Spring, MD 20910-3282, U.S.A.  E-mail:  Sydney.Levitus@noaa.gov 
 
Founded in the International Geophysical Year 
(IGY), the World Data Center (WDC) System was 
established to prevent the loss of valuable 
scientific data gathered during the IGY by 
providing a permanent archive for these data.  
During the past ten years, the World Data Center 
for Oceanography, Silver Spring, has expanded its 
role by including all oceanographic data received 
as part of its archive, and by leading projects to 
increase the comprehensiveness of its electronic 
database.  This presentation describes efforts at 
the WDC to develop global, comprehensive, 
integrated, scientifically quality-controlled 
electronic ocean profile-plankton databases that 
are available internationally without restriction.  A 
description of upper ocean temperature changes 
using the data from World Ocean Database 1998 
will be given. 
 
IOC Global Oceanographic Data Archaeology 
and Rescue (GODAR) project 
 
Data archaeology is the process of locating 
historical ocean data at risk of loss due to media 
decay.  In contrast, data rescue is the digitization, 
quality control, and entry of historical data into 
global, regional, national comprehensive, 
integrated, electronic databases. 
 
The GODAR project was approved in 1993 and is 
on-going.  International cooperation within the 
project continues to be excellent.  All countries 
contacted are contributing data.  Six regional 
GODAR workshops have been held worldwide 
that encompass all countries that make 
oceanographic measurements (Table 1).  These 
meetings were attended by approximately 175 
oceanographic data managers and scientists and 
have resulted in the identification of substantial 
amounts of data that are at risk of loss due to 
media decay (magnetic tape and paper). 
 
Table 1 List of GODAR meetings. 
 
GODAR I Obninsk Russia May, 1993 
GODAR II Tianjin China Mar., 1994 
GODAR III Goa India Dec., 1995 
GODAR IV Malta Apr., 1995 
GODAR V Cartagena Colombia Apr., 1996 
GODAR VI Accra Ghana Mar., 1997 
 
The International GODAR Review Meeting held 
in Silver Spring, Maryland, U.S.A., in July 1999 
concluded that the project is successful with more 
than 2 million temperature profiles, and 600,000 
plankton observations collected.  The next phase 
is to add ‘sea level’ data to the project. 
 
Current GODAR projects include MEDBLACK 
and MEDAR/MEDATLAS by European 
Community and IOC/IODE GODAR-WESTPAC 
by countries bordering the western Pacific.  The 
Japan Oceanographic Data Center takes the lead 
in the GODAR-WESTPAC project. 
 
Data collected as a result of the GODAR project 
were made available, both on-line and on CD-
ROM, as part of World Ocean Atlas 1994, World 
Ocean Database 1998, and World Ocean Database 
2001 (available March 2002). 
 
IOC World Ocean Database project 
 
The IOC World Ocean Database Project was 
approved in July 2001.  Its goal is the 
development of global and regional, 
comprehensive, integrated, scientifically quality-
controlled ocean profile and plankton databases.  
The project hopes to encourage the exchange of 
modern ocean profile and plankton data, and to 
emphasize the development of regional atlases 
and quality control procedures. 
 
 
17
 
18
 
REX WORKSHOP ON TEMPORAL VARIATIONS IN SIZE-AT-AGE FOR 
FISH SPECIES IN COASTAL AREAS AROUND THE PACIFIC RIM 
(Co-convenors:  William T. Peterson and Douglas E. Hay) 
 
 
A one-day REX Workshop on Temporal 
variations in size-at-age for fish species in coastal 
areas around the Pacific Rim was convened 
October 5, 2001, immediately preceding the 
PICES Tenth Annual Meeting in Victoria, British 
Columbia, Canada.  The workshop was very 
popular with more than 50 scientists attending.  In 
total, 11 papers were presented by speakers from 
Canada, Japan, Russia and the United States.  Four 
presentations discussed salmon size-at-age, five 
considered herring (one paper was on sardine-
herring comparison), one - sablefish and one - 
chub mackerel.  In addition, several posters 
presented data on size-at-age of other herring 
stocks as well as data for pollock and yellowfin 
flounder.   
 
The keynote paper by Nikolay Naumenko 
summarized vast amounts of data on length-at-age 
and weight-at-age for 19 populations of herring 
from the western Bering Sea.  The overall 
conclusion of his work was that herring growth is 
controlled by two main factors, food abundance 
(zooplankton biomass) and total fish biomass 
(density-dependent effects).  A similar conclusion 
was reached by other authors as well. 
 
Several general themes were common to many 
papers.  One was the need to understand better the 
spatial scales of co-variation in size-at-age for 
species of fish with populations distributed along 
great distances of the coast.  Prime candidates for 
such analysis are of course the salmonids and 
herring.  Peterman showed that there was strong 
co-variation in size-at-age time series for sockeye 
salmon from Bristol Bay and Fraser River; 
however there was even stronger co-variation at 
regional scales.  Eight Bristol Bay stocks were far 
better correlated with each other than with Fraser 
stocks; the same was true for 20 Fraser River 
stocks.  This suggests the hypothesis that similar 
stocks are more likely to occupy a similar habitat 
(i.e., feed in the same region of the ocean).  
Though no data of this type were presented for 
other salmon species, it is known from ongoing 
work (NOAA/NMFS/Northwest Fisheries Science 
Center) that coho salmon from the Columbia River 
system and coastal Oregon streams tend to spend 
their entire lives in continental shelf waters off 
Washington and Oregon state.  Also, there are 
indications that some Sacramento River chinook 
salmon reside chiefly in coastal waters off central 
California (MacFarlane).  A recommendation of 
the workshop participants was that REX scientists 
should purse analysis of co-variation and spatial 
autocorrelation of size-at-age of other salmon 
stocks and of herring stocks.  An alternate 
approach would be to use cluster analysis, as 
shown by Naumenko. 
 
The second common theme was the high degree of 
correlation between time series of size-at-age and 
various environmental (explanatory) variables.  
Temnykh showed the declining trends in size-at-
age for Okhotsk pink salmon from the 1970s 
through 1985.  However after 1985, pinks have 
gotten heavier.  This is in contrast to other North 
American pinks which continued to grow smaller 
through the 1990s.  She noted correlation between 
size-at-age of pink salmon stocks from the Sea of 
Okhotsk and sardine and zooplankton biomass.  
The period of time when pink salmon were small 
in size was the time when sardines were abundant 
and zooplankton biomass was low.  The 
simultaneous collapse of the Japanese sardine and 
increased size of pink salmon, though not 
necessarily causal, suggests the possibility of some 
common forcing mechanism related to 
zooplankton.  Positive correlations between 
zooplankton biomass and both length-at-age and 
weight-at-age were found for several herring 
populations as well including the Korf-Karaginsk 
(western Bering Sea) stock (Naumenko; Balykin 
and Buslov), Prince William Sound (Brown), and 
stocks from British Columbia (Schweigert; 
Tanasichuk).  Finally, Tarasyuk showed that 
biomass of yellowfin sole from the Tatar Strait 
(Japan/East Sea) was correlated with zooplanton 
biomass. 
 
19
 
Temporal and special changes in pattern in size-at-
age were examined relative to climate variability 
and climate change.  Good correlations were also 
found with climatic variables such as the Pacific 
Decadal Oscillation, Aleutian Low Pressure Index, 
or water temperature alone (Peterman, 
MacFarlane, Brown, Schweigert, Bonk, 
Tarasyuk).  Competition with other pelagic species 
was suggested as a possible mechanism explaining 
changes in growth of chub mackerel (Watanabe).  
Ecosystem change was implicated as a factor 
explaining stock fluctuations in Hokkaido-
Sakhalin herring whereas the co-occurring 
sardines stocks appear to be largely density 
dependent (Watanabe).  
 
Many papers demonstrated density dependence of 
size-at-age.  When population size was large, size-
at-age was small and vice versa.  Discussion at the 
workshop centered on the need to think more and 
work harder at identifying mechanisms that might 
control density dependence, with studies of the 
forage base being one of the prime candidates. 
 
Discussion was also focused on the need to make 
better use of existing samples to study size- and 
weight-at age through use of scales and otoliths to 
generate new data sets on size- and weight-at-age.   
There are many data on length and weight of 
fishes but not as much data on age and weight at 
length.  Through analysis of otoliths and scales, 
one could determine age of fishes that have 
already been measured. 
 
Finally, the workshop participants discussed the 
value of comparative studies and of course - this is 
what REX workshops are all about – providing a 
forum for discussion on differences in population 
size, growth, and life history characteristics of 
species that are distributed widely around the 
Pacific Rim.  This led to the recommendation that 
PICES scientists need to do more comparisons of 
populations that are distributed in the coastal 
zones around the basin, but also need to compare 
response of fish, nekton and zooplankton 
populations that are found within the deeper 
waters of the Kuroshio, Kuroshio Extension, 
Transition Zone and the California Current.  
Interesting, this thought arose independently of the 
inter-sessional symposium proposed on 
comparative studies of North Pacific transitional 
areas (the symposium was held April 23-25, 2002, 
in La Paz, Mexico).   
 
The following section contains extended abstracts 
of papers given at the workshop. 
 
 
Spatial patterns of covariation in size-at-age of British Columbia and Alaska 
sockeye salmon stocks and effects of abundance and ocean temperature 
 
Brian J. Pyper
1
, Randall M. Peterman
1
, Michael F. Lapointe
2
 and Carl J. Walters
3 
1
 School of Resource and Environmental Management, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, B.C., 
Canada.  V5A 1S6.  E-mail:  peterman@sfu.ca 
2
 Pacific Salmon Commission, 600-1155 Robson St., Vancouver, B.C., Canada.  V6E 1B5.  E- mail:  
lepointe@psc.org 
3
 Fisheries Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, B.C., Canada.  V6T 1Z4.  E-mail:  
c.walters@fisheries.ubc.ca 
 
Introduction 
 
Body lengths of adult Pacific sockeye salmon 
(Oncorhynchus nerka) have decreased 
significantly in recent years, reducing the 
reproductive potential of spawners and the 
economic value of harvests.  To understand the 
causes of these important trends, we pursued three 
objectives.  Firstly, we quantified the extent of 
spatial covariation among age-specific body sizes 
of numerous stocks in the Northeast Pacific.  The 
observed spatial scale of covariation could suggest 
the causes of that variation.  Secondly, we 
compared the extent of covariation among body 
size and survival rate of sockeye salmon to 
determine whether these two variables were 
influenced by similar processes.  Thirdly, we 
tested hypotheses about the relative importance of 
20
  
intraspecific competition and oceanographic 
conditions on size of adult sockeye salmon.  This 
paper summarizes material already published;  see 
Pyper et al. (1999) and Pyper and Peterman (1999) 
for details. 
 
Methods 
 
We used 72 time series of body length at a given 
adult age for 31 sockeye stocks from five 
geographically distinct regions in British 
Columbia (Fraser River and Skeena River) and 
Alaska (Upper Cook Inlet, Copper River and 
Bristol Bay).  Ages included were 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 2.2 
and 2.3 fish.  
 
Patterns of covariation.  To examine patterns of 
covariation among length-at-age data both within 
and between regions, we calculated Pearson 
product-moment correlation coefficients for 
pairwise comparisons among the 72 time series of 
lengths.  Size data were aligned to have return 
years in common (year in which they returned to 
their natal streams), because Rogers and 
Ruggerone (1993) and McKinnell (1995) suggest 
that interannual variability in body size of recruits 
is largely determined by growth in their final year 
at sea.  However, to estimate the importance of 
conditions in early ocean life, we also computed 
correlations after aligning the data series to have a 
common ocean entry year (OEY) but a different 
return year (e.g. using size data for 1.2 and 1.3 
adults). 
 
Positive autocorrelation and time trends were 
present in many of the time series of body length, 
indicating that low-frequency (i.e., slowly-
changing) variability is important.  However, such 
autocorrelation and time trends increase the 
chance that statistically significant but spurious 
correlations will occur in standard inference tests.  
Therefore, we used two approaches to examine 
correlations.  Firstly, we computed them using the 
original time series and based significance tests on 
the method recommended by Pyper and Peterman 
(1998), which adjusts degrees of freedom to 
account for autocorrelation and maintains Type I 
error rates near the specified α in the presence of 
autocorrelation.  Secondly, we first-differenced the 
time series (subtracting each data point from the 
next) to remove the low-frequency variation and 
re-computed correlations.  Comparing the results 
from these two approaches allowed us to quantify 
the potential importance of low-frequency causes 
of the positive covariation that we found.  
 
Effects of oceanographic conditions and 
intraspecific competition.  We also used principal 
components analysis (PCA) to further examine 
spatial and temporal covariation among lengths for 
1967-1997.  The PCA was done on 13 regional 
average length-at-age series, which better depicted 
the “signal” shared by given age classes and stocks 
in each region.  This method reduced patterns of 
variability shared by each age class and region to a 
few defining time series (principal components).  
Copper River data were omitted due to missing 
data. 
 
We then used the dominant principal component 
(PC1) to test hypotheses about the causes of 
variation in sockeye growth rate.  Because our 
covariation results indicated that adult body size 
was affected primarily by conditions in the last 
year of ocean life, we generated indices of 
oceanographic conditions and intraspecific 
competition during the final year at sea.  These 
indices were consistent with the area of overlap in 
ocean distributions of B.C. and Alaska sockeye, 
which roughly encompasses the Alaskan Gyre and 
is occupied by sockeye salmon from North 
America but not Asia (French et al. 1976).  We 
used total ocean abundance of maturing North 
American sockeye salmon as an index of 
intraspecific competition, based on annual adult 
recruits (catch plus escapement) summed across 
the major B.C. (Fraser, Skeena, and Nass River) 
and Alaska stocks (Copper River, Cook Inlet, and 
Bristol Bay), which together account for the vast 
majority of sockeye abundance in the Gulf of 
Alaska (see Peterman et al. 1998 for details). 
 
To reflect ocean conditions that might affect 
growth, we generated time series of annual sea-
surface temperature (SST) deviations from the 
long-term mean.  We used monthly SST data (ºC) 
on a 5-by-5 degree latitude-longitude grid across 
the area stated above of general overlap in ocean 
distributions of B.C. and Alaska sockeye (see 
Pyper and Peterman 1999 for details).  Deviations 
were computed for a given grid cell and month by 
subtracting its long-term mean SST for 1947 
21
  
through 1997.  These deviations were then 
averaged to create two time series, with each 
corresponding to a different period preceding the 
return (generally in July) of sockeye salmon to 
their rivers: 1) winter months (November through 
February), and 2) a combination of winter and 
spring months (November through June).  
Climatic forcing during winter months is thought 
to be an important determinant of ocean 
productivity in the subsequent spring and summer 
(e.g., Brodeur and Ware 1992), while in spring, 
maturing sockeye are feeding and growing at high 
rates before and during migrations back to their 
natal streams. 
 
We then used multiple regression to examine 
relationships among the dominant pattern of 
covariation for length (PC1), total sockeye 
abundance in millions of fish (A), and ocean 
temperature (SST) for either November-February 
or November-June: 
PC1 = a + b
1
A + b
2
SST + ε 
Because of positive autocorrelation in the 
residuals, we simultaneously computed maximum 
likelihood estimates of the lag-1 autocorrelation 
coefficient and regression parameters.  Due to time 
trends in the data, we first computed regressions 
using the original data and then repeated the 
regressions using detrended data (deviations from 
a linear time trend fit to each data series) to test for 
effects at shorter time scales.  
 
Results and discussion 
 
Patterns of covariation.  There was widespread 
positive covariation among the 72 body-length 
time series, aligned by return year, across ages and 
across stocks.  Of the 2,556 correlations, 91.4% 
were positive (and 43%, or 1,006, of the positive 
ones were significant at p<0.05, whereas only 3 
negative cases were significant).  There was strong 
evidence of positive covariation in age-specific 
body size among sockeye stocks even between 
distant regions, as indicated by the predominance 
of positive correlations in these comparisons (e.g., 
Bristol Bay vs. Fraser River; Fig. 1C).  However, 
there was a stronger positive covariation among 
body length of stocks within regions (e.g., among 
the 8 stocks in Bristol Bay and among the 20 in 
the Fraser River;  Fig. 1A and 1B).  Generally, the 
percent of variation in length shared by stocks in 
the same region was about twice that shared by 
stocks from different regions (see Pyper et al. 
(1999) for detailed results). 
 
 
 
Fig. 1  Histograms of correlations between 
lengths of age 1.2 sockeye:  A) among Bristol Bay 
stocks (all 28 correlations positive;  23 significant 
at p<0.05);  B) among Fraser River stocks (all 190 
correlations positive;  161 significant);  and  
C) between Bristol Bay and Fraser River stocks 
(136 of 160 correlations positive;  25 significant 
positive correlations).  Open bars represent 
negative correlations; solid bars are positive 
correlations.  Reprinted from Pyper et al. (1999). 
 
 
Correlations using first-differenced data support 
the suggestion from the PCA reported below that 
slowly changing, low-frequency patterns of 
variability, such as the declining time trends in 
body size, were important sources of covariation 
22
  
among average lengths of stocks.  After 
autocorrelation and time trends in the 72 stock-
specific length series were removed by first-
differencing, widespread positive covariation was 
still evident both within and between regions.  
However, correlations were consistently and often 
substantially lower than those computed using the 
original data.  The average of the 2,556 
correlations was reduced from 0.37 to 0.23, the 
number of negative correlations increased to 578, 
and the number of significant (p<0.05) positive 
correlations decreased to 745.  Thus, there is little 
evidence that the general patterns of covariation in 
lengths could be solely a spurious result of 
unrelated time trends;  instead, to the extent that 
the observed covariation in length-at-age of 
sockeye salmon arises from shared processes, such 
processes appear to be largely characterized by 
low-frequency patterns of variability. 
 
In contrast to the above analyses, when the body-
length time series were aligned to share the same 
ocean entry year (OEY) but to have a different 
return year (RY), the correlations among stocks 
decreased dramatically (e.g. for Bristol Bay 
stocks, the average correlation in the original data 
series decreased from 0.67 when lined up by RY 
to 0.29 when lined up by OEY).  This decrease 
was even greater when possible confounding 
effects of autocorrelation were removed from both 
analyses (see Pyper et al. 1999).  Like other 
analyses, (Rogers and Ruggerone 1993; 
McKinnell 1995), these findings imply that 
variable growth conditions during early marine life 
are not nearly as important a determinant of 
temporal variation in final sockeye body length as 
conditions during late marine life.  
 
Comparison of body size and survival rates.  We 
found weak and inconsistent correlations between 
average length and survival rate, suggesting that 
different processes drive interannual variability in 
these components of recruitment.  This conclusion 
is further supported by evidence that 
environmental processes influence these two 
variables at different spatial scales.  Whereas both 
adult body size and survival rate show strong 
positive covariation among stocks within regions, 
only body size shows strong between-region 
covariation (e.g., compare Fig. 1C here with  
 
Fig. 1C of Peterman et al. 1998).  These 
differences in spatial characteristics of covariation 
suggest that models for body size or forecasting 
annual salmon abundance (reflecting survival rates 
and changing age-at-maturity schedules) should be 
based on appropriate measures of environmental 
conditions that reflect this information about 
spatial scales.  For example, we found that large, 
basin-scale SST was significantly associated with 
variation in body size (see below), whereas Mueter 
et al. (2001) found that smaller, regional-scale 
SST was much more important in explaining 
variation in survival rates of salmon. 
 
Effects of oceanographic conditions and 
intraspecific competition.  Principal components 
analysis (PCA) of the 13 age-specific regional 
body length series defined the temporal 
characteristics of variation shared among regions.  
The PCA yielded three principal components with 
eigenvalues greater than one;  the best one 
accounted for 65% of the total variance and the 
other two combined accounted for only 19%.  The 
time series (scores) of this dominant component, 
PC1, had an obvious declining trend from 1967-
1997 (p<0.001;  linear regression with 
autocorrelated error) (Fig. 2A).  All 13 length 
series correlated strongly with PC1 (range 0.64 to 
0.89), suggesting that much of the covariation 
among lengths of Alaska and B.C. sockeye salmon 
resulted from a similar declining trend over this 
period.  
 
The multiple regression for the PC1 (reflecting 
shared variation among body size) using the 
original data was highly significant (multiple r
2
 
= 
0.71, p<< 0.001), as was the estimated slope on 
abundance (b
1
 = -0.03 ± 0.005 [±1 standard error], 
p<< 0.001) (Fig. 2B).  The slope on November-
February SST was also significant (b
2
 = -0.72 ± 
0.29, p = 0.014) (Fig. 2C).  Partial r
2
 values were 
0.56 for abundance and 0.18 for SST.  
 
The multiple regression using detrended data (to 
remove possible confounding due to time trends in 
the original data) showed similar results.  Both 
abundance and November-February SST were 
significant (b
1
 
= -0.035 ± 0.007, p << 0.001 and b
2
 
= -0.87 ± 0.31, p = 0.004).  Overall, the multiple r
2
 
= 0.54, p << 0.001, and multicollinearity was 
23
  
negligible (r = 0.04).  Partial r
2
 
values were 0.48 
for abundance and 0.23 for SST.  
 
 
 
Fig. 2  (A) Scores for the dominant principal 
component (PC1) of length-at-age data for B.C. 
and Alaska sockeye salmon -- lower values of 
PC1, for example, reflect the tendency toward 
reduced body length that is shared among these 
stocks;  (B) Total annual abundance of adult 
recruits (catch plus escapement) of the major B.C. 
and Alaska sockeye stocks;  and (C) Average 
yearly winter (November through February) sea-
surface temperature (SST) deviations in °C from 
the long-term (1947-1997) mean for those months 
(6.8°C) for the Northeast Pacific Ocean over the 
region where distributions of B.C. and Alaska 
sockeye salmon overlap.  Dotted lines are the 
fitted linear time trends used to detrend the data. 
Reprinted from Pyper and Peterman (1999). 
Because November-February and November-June 
SST data were highly correlated (r = 0.86), all 
results for the latter were similar to those for 
November-February, with the exception that 
November-June SST was not significant in either 
the multiple regression with original data (p = 
0.11) or with detrended data (p = 0.08). 
 
These results indicate that reduced adult body 
length of both B.C. and Alaska sockeye salmon 
are associated with increases in total sockeye 
abundance in the Northeast Pacific and November-
February sea-surface. 
 
Abundance and SST together account for 71% of 
the variability in the first principal component 
(PC1) of body length among the major sockeye 
stocks of the northeastern Pacific Ocean during 
1967-1997.  Furthermore, abundance appears to 
have a much greater effect on body size than 
temperature.  Its partial r
2
 
was considerably larger 
(0.56 vs. 0.18), and when data in each series were 
transformed into standard deviation units so that 
slopes were in the same units, the standardized 
slope for abundance (-0.68) was greater than the 
slope for SST (-0.27).  This indicates that for each 
standard deviation increase, abundance had about 
2.5 times the contribution to reducing adult body 
size as did November-February SST.  
 
In addition, both abundance and SST were 
significantly related to the dominant pattern of 
variability in body length at both long and short 
time scales (i.e., in the original, as well as 
detrended data).  Thus, although it is possible that 
relationships among the original data might be 
coincidental due to their co-occurring time trends 
(i.e., that some other omitted variable actually 
explains the trend in PC1), the evidence in support 
of the effects of abundance and SST was 
strengthened by their very similar slopes in both 
the original data analysis and the analysis once 
time trends were removed.  
 
Although several authors have documented 
increased secondary productivity in the 
northeastern Pacific Ocean in recent decades (e.g., 
zooplankton and squid - Brodeur and Ware 1992, 
1995), which should improve growth rates for 
sockeye salmon, abundance of sockeye recruits 
also increased (Fig. 2B).  We therefore 
24
  
hypothesize that increased food supply was more 
than offset by increased sockeye abundance, 
which resulted in greater competition and smaller 
body size in recent years. 
 
Acknowledgments 
 
We are extremely grateful to the numerous 
biologists and technicians in various management 
agencies who gathered, processed, and provided 
the time series of data analyzed here. Funding was 
provided by a grant to R.M. Peterman from the 
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research 
Council of Canada. 
 
References 
 
Brodeur, R.D., and Ware, D.M.  1992.  Long-term 
variability in zooplankton biomass in the 
subarctic Pacific Ocean.  Fisheries Oceanog. 
1: 32-38. 
Brodeur, R.D., and Ware, D.M.  1995.  Inter-
decadal variability in distribution and catch 
rates of epipelagic nekton in the Northeast 
Pacific ocean.  In R.J. Beamish (Ed.)  Climate 
change and northern fish populations.  Can. 
Spec. Publ. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 121, pp. 329-356. 
French, R., Bilton, H., Osaka, M., and Hartt, A.  
1976.  Distribution and origin of sockeye 
salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka) in offshore 
waters of the North Pacific Ocean.  INPFC 
Bulletin 34.  
McKinnell, S.  1995.  Age-specific effects of 
sockeye abundance on adult body size of 
selected British Columbia sockeye stocks.  
Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 52: 1050-1063. 
Mueter, F.J., Pyper, B.J., and Peterman, R.M.  
2001.  Effects of coastal sea surface 
temperatures on survival rates of sockeye, 
pink, and chum salmon stocks from 
Washington, British Columbia, and Alaska. 
Poster #S11-203 in Session S11: "Results of 
GLOBEC and GLOBEC-like programs," at 
the PICES Tenth Annual Meeting, Victoria, 
B.C., October, 5-13, 2001. 
Peterman, R.M., Pyper, B.J., Lapointe, M.F., 
Adkison, M.D., and Walters, C.J.  1998.  
Patterns of covariation in survival rates of 
British Columbia and Alaskan sockeye 
salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka) stocks.  Can. J. 
Fish. Aquat. Sci. 55: 2503-2517. 
Pyper, B.J., and Peterman, R.M.  1998.  
Comparison of methods to account for 
autocorrelation in correlation analyses of fish 
data.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 55: 2127-2140 
plus the erratum printed in Can. J. Fish. 
Aquat. Sci. 55: 2710. 
Pyper, B.J., and Peterman, R.M.  1999.  
Relationship among adult body length, 
abundance, and ocean temperature for British 
Columbia and Alaska sockeye salmon, 1967-
1997.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 56: 1716-1720.  
Rogers, D.E., and Ruggerone, G.T.  1993.  Factors 
affecting marine growth of Bristol Bay 
sockeye salmon.  Fisheries Research 18: 89-
103. 
Pyper, B.J., Peterman, R.M., Lapointe, M.F., and 
Walters, C.J.  1999.  Patterns of covariation in 
length and age at maturity of British Columbia 
and Alaska sockeye salmon (Oncorhynchus 
nerka) stocks.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 56: 
1046-1057. 
 
 
Influences of the 1997-1998 El Niño and 1999 La Niña on juvenile chinook 
salmon in the Gulf of the Farallones 
 
R. Bruce MacFarlane, Steven Ralston, Chantell Royer, and Elizabeth C. Norton 
NOAA Fisheries, Southwest Fisheries Science Center, Santa Cruz Laboratory, 110 Shaffer Road, Santa 
Cruz, CA 95060, U.S.A.  E-mail: Bruce.MacFarlane@noaa.gov 
 
El Niño, the warm phase of El Niño/Southern 
Oscillation (ENSO) events, has been shown to 
produce dramatic effects on marine communities.  
Alterations in physical oceanographic properties 
of the marine environment can be observed as far 
north as Alaska.  Less is known of the influences 
of La Niña, the cool phase of ENSO events that 
follows an El Niño.  During the 1982-83 El Niño, 
anomalous plankton distributions, altered fish 
community structure, and reduced fish catch 
25
  
occurred in coastal waters of southern California 
(Simpson, 1992).  Along the central California 
coast, the 1992-93 El Niño corresponded to 
delayed phytoplankton blooms, changes in the 
abundance and distribution of invertebrates, 
improved recruitment of southern fish species, but 
recruitment failure in the northerly rockfish 
species (Lenarz et al. 1995).  More recently, the 
largest decline in macrozooplankton abundance 
off central and southern California in the 50-year 
series of CalCOFI cruises was recorded during the 
1997-98 El Niño (Lynn et al. 1998). 
 
In addition to ecosystem impacts, changes in 
physiology and behavior of fishes, including 
salmon, have been noted during ENSO events.  
Poor growth and low condition, ascribed to low 
fat content, were found in adult rockfish off 
central California during 1992-93 (Lenarz et al. 
1995).  And in a study of widow (Sebastes 
entomelas) and yellowtail rockfish (S. flavidus) in 
coastal waters of central and northern California, 
Woodbury (1999) reported reduced otolith 
growth, a conservative measure of somatic growth 
history, during the 1982-83 El Niño.  Reduced 
condition and growth of sockeye salmon 
(Oncorhynchus nerka) in the Gulf of Alaska 
during the 1997-98 El Niño event were related to 
feeding on zooplankton, prey of lower caloric 
content than squid, their primary food in 1998 
following the El Niño (Kaeriyama et al. 2000).  In 
a review of El Niño effects on fisheries, Mysak 
(1986) detailed other impacts to sockeye, 
including changes in migration patterns and the 
timing of returns to streams.  Lower survival in 
juvenile coho salmon (O. kisutch) following ocean 
entry, great mortality in adult coho, and reduced 
size in both coho and chinook salmon (O. 
tshawytscha) were described off Oregon during 
the 1982-83 El Niño (Pearcy and Schoener 1987). 
 
We report here the results of a study of juvenile 
chinook salmon in the Gulf of the Farallones, an 
embayment on the central California coast.  The 
Gulf of the Farallones, a broad expanse of 
continental shelf extending from Pt. Reyes to 
Pillar Pt. out to the Farallon Islands, receives 
freshwater outflow through the Golden Gate from 
the Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers and their 
tributaries in California’s Central Valley.  It is 
also the point of ocean entry for an estimated 50-
60 million chinook salmon smolts spawned from 
four runs (fall, late fall, winter, spring) in streams 
and hatcheries in the Central Valley.  The purpose 
of the information presented here is to document 
juvenile salmon development, and how it was 
influenced by the environment in the Gulf of the 
Farallones during the 1997-98 El Niño and 1999 
La Niña. 
 
Juvenile salmon were captured by surface trawl at 
locations in the Gulf of the Farallones in June to 
October of 1998 and 1999.  El Niño was evident 
in the Gulf of the Farallones in August  1997 and 
persisted to August 1998 (Fig. 3).  By late 1998, 
La Niña was apparent and continued into spring 
2000.  Plankton samples were taken by Tucker 
Trawl at 5 m and 15-25 m below the surface to 
estimate secondary productivity and zooplankton 
composition. 
 
Relative growth for juveniles caught in 1998 and 
1999 was estimated by microstructural analysis of 
otoliths.  Growth rates and size-at-age of juvenile 
chinook salmon can be estimated by measuring 
daily otolith increment widths (Bradford and Geen 
1987).  We calculated mean otolith increment 
widths as an index for somatic growth between 
increments 160 and 260, representing the first 100 
days after leaving the estuary.  Juvenile salmon 
exited San Francisco Estuary at 160±1 days old in 
1998 and at 168±3 days old in 1999.  Growth rate 
indices for salmon caught in 1998, during the El 
Niño period, were significantly greater than for 
fish collected in 1999 (P<0.0001).  Mean growth 
rates of otolith increments were 3.37±0.03 µm in 
fish sampled in 1998 and 3.02±0.03 µm in 1999 
(Fig. 4). 
 
Whole body concentrations of triacylglycerols 
(TAG), the primary metabolically-available form 
of stored energy in salmonids and other fishes, 
differed between the two years.  Upon entering 
the Gulf of the Farallones, juvenile salmon had 
greater levels of TAG in 1999 than in 1998, 
30.5±3.1 mg/g and 11.5±1.8 mg/g wet weight, 
respectively.  However, lipid stores of salmon in 
the gulf were depleted to a greater extent in 1999.  
Juveniles collected from the gulf in 1999 had 
TAG levels of 4.4±1.4 mg/g, whereas those from 
1998 were 7.9±1.0 mg/g.  These data support 
previous research that found depleted TAG  
26
  
NOAA Weather Buoys
-4.00
-3.00
-2.00
-1.00
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
SST Anomaly  (
o
C)
Bodega Bay  (1981-96)
Halfmoon Bay  (1980-96)
San Francisco  (1982-96)
JFMA MJJAS O NDJFMAMJJAS O NDJ FMAMJ JA
1997 1998 1999
 
 
Fig. 3 Sea surface temperature anomalies from buoys at Bodega Bay, San Francisco, and Half Moon 
Bay.  Anomalies were calculated from longer-term averages shown in parentheses in the legend.  All 
three buoys were out of operation from December 1997 to mid-March 1998 when El Niño conditions 
were most evident. 
 
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
150 160 170 180 190 200 210 220 230 240 250 260 270
Increment # (days)
Mean Increment Width (um)
1998
1999
 
 
Fig. 4 Mean otolith increment widths for juvenile chinook salmon from the Gulf of the Farallones in 
1998 (solid circles) and 1999 (open triangles).  Lines represent least squares fit of daily mean increment 
widths;  solid line - 1998, dashed line - 1999.  Vertical dashed lines at 160 and 260 increments represent 
estimated first 100 days in the ocean after leaving the San Francisco Estuary. 
27
  
concentrations in juvenile salmon after exiting the 
estuary (MacFarlane and Norton, 2002). 
 
Juvenile salmon in the Gulf of the Farallones not 
only grew faster and maintained a greater TAG 
concentration during the 1998 El Niño period, 
their condition (Fulton’s K-factor) was better as 
well.  In 1998, mean K increased to 1.42±0.01 for 
gulf salmon from 1.03±0.01 at ocean entry, 
compared with a change from 1.04±0.01 at ocean 
entry to 1.32±0.01 in the gulf during 1999. 
 
Although there were differences in growth, energy 
status, and condition between the two years, 
feeding data did not resolve the disparity.  This is 
not unexpected because stomach contents reflect 
only recent feeding, whereas growth and lipid 
accumulation integrate metabolic processes over 
longer time scales.  Stomach fullness was 
estimated to be 45.5% in juveniles sampled in 
1998 and 56.7% in 1999.  In both years, fish were 
the primary food item, comprising greater than 
50% of the stomach contents volume.  Decapod 
early life stages were of secondary importance, 
especially for salmon later in the season in August 
to October. 
 
The marine environment in the Gulf of the 
Farallones differed between the two years.  From 
May through August, mean sea surface 
temperatures were about 1.0°C warmer in 1998 
and about 1.3°C cooler in 1999 than long-term 
averages (Fig. 3).  The 1997-98 El Niño was 
characterized by heavy precipitation in California 
and this was evident in freshwater outflow from 
the Central Valley.  Freshwater outflow into the 
gulf averaged 2,940 cubic meters per sec (m
3
/s) 
from January to June 1998, whereas outflow in 
1999 was much reduced during the dryer La Niña 
to 1,330 m
3
/s. 
 
The Gulf of the Farallones is buffered from large-
scale oceanic influences because it is in the 
upwelling shadow of Pt. Reyes to the north, 
bounded by the Farallon Islands and associated 
marine banks on the west, and subjected to the 
effects of freshwater outflow from San Francisco 
Bay.  Although El Niño typically produces 
enhanced poleward flow of the California Current, 
near-surface current data from an Acoustic 
Doppler Current Profiler in May and June 1998 
did not reveal such a pattern.  Currents in the gulf 
were forced by tidal circulation and persistent 
northwesterly winds, which also produced positive 
upwelling index anomalies throughout the summer 
and fall of 1998 (April - November mean monthly 
anomaly for 39°N 125°W: +44.5±25.6).  As 
expected, strong northwesterly winds during the 
summer and fall of the 1999 La Niña event 
resulted in intense upwelling with a mean April to 
November monthly index anomaly of 104.6±35.1. 
 
Biological productivity is highly variable in the 
Gulf of the Farallones region and modulated to 
varying degrees by upwelling, advection, wind-
driven and tidal circulation, and freshwater 
outflow.  Primary productivity, estimated by 
chlorophyll a concentrations in May and June, was 
similar between the two years, but the distribution 
of phytoplankton differed.  In 1998, phytoplankton 
were distributed within the gulf on the continental 
shelf whereas during the 1999 La Niña they were 
primarily off the shelf, seaward of the gulf.  
Greater nutrient-rich freshwater influx coupled 
with higher temperatures in 1998 may have 
accounted for greater primary productivity within 
the gulf during the El Niño event.  Greater 
phytoplankton biomass within the Gulf of the 
Farallones in 1998 was accompanied by greater 
secondary production.  Mean zooplankton biomass 
in the near-surface waters was 0.30±0.12 ml/m
3
 in 
May and September 1998.  In contrast, 
zooplankton mean settled volume was 0.13±0.03 
ml/m
3
 in August and October 1999. 
 
In summary, during the 1997-98 El Niño, juvenile 
salmon in the Gulf of the Farallones grew at a 
greater rate, maintained higher TAG reserves, and 
were in better condition than those during the 1999 
La Niña.  This profile may be attributed to 
somewhat higher biological  productivity in the 
gulf in 1998, due to increased nutrient input from 
freshwater inflow, and the protection afforded by 
Pt. Reyes and the Farallon Islands, which buffered 
the embayment from the full impacts of oceanic 
processes.  But, for all measures of salmon 
development the differences were not great.  The 
data do support the contention, however, that the 
1997-98 El Niño was not detrimental to juvenile 
chinook salmon development in this region during 
the early stage of the ocean phase of their life 
cycle. 
28
  
References 
 
Bradford, M.J., and Geen, G.H.  1987.  Size and 
growth of juvenile chinook salmon back-
calculated from otolith growth increments, p. 
453-461.  In  R.C. Summerfeldt and G.E. Hall 
[eds.]  The age and growth of fish.  Iowa State 
University Press, Ames, IA. 
Kaeriyama, M., Nakamura, M., Ueda, H., Anma, 
G., Takagi, S., Aydin, K.Y., Walker, R.V., and 
Myers, K.W.  2000.  Feeding ecology of 
sockeye and pink salmon in the Gulf of 
Alaska.  NPAFC Bulletin 2: 55-63. 
Lenarz, W.H., Ventresca, D.A., Graham, W.M., 
Schwing, F.W., and Chavez, F.  1995.  
Explorations of El Niño events and associated 
biological population dynamics off central 
California.  CalCOFI Report 36: 106-119. 
Lynn, R.J., Baumgartner, T., Garcia, J., Collins, 
C.A., Hayward, T.L., Hyrenbach, K.D., 
Mantyla, A.W., Murphree, T., Shankle, A., 
Schwing, F.B., Sakuma, K.M., and Tegner, 
M.J.  1998.  The state of the California 
Current, 1997-1998:  transition to El Niño 
conditions.  CalCOFI Report 39: 25-49. 
MacFarlane, R.B,. and Norton, E.C. 2002. 
Physiological ecology of juvenile chinook 
salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) at the 
southern end of their distribution, the San 
Francisco Estuary and Gulf of the Farallones, 
California.  Fishery Bulletin 100 (2) (In 
press). 
Mysak, L.A.  1986.  El Niño, interannual 
variability and fisheries in the northeast 
Pacific Ocean.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 43: 
464-497. 
Pearcy, W.G., and Schoener, A.  1987.  Changes 
in the marine biota coincident with the 1982-
1983 El Niño in the northeastern subarctic 
Pacific Ocean.  J. Geophys. Res. 92: 14,417-
14,428. 
Simpson, J.J.  1992.  Response of the Southern 
California current system to the mid-latitude 
North Pacific coastal warming events of 
1982-1983 and 1940-1941.  Fisheries 
Oceanogr. 1: 57-79. 
Woodbury, D.  1999.  Reduction of growth in 
otoliths of widow and yellowtail rockfish 
(Sebastes entomelas and S. flavidus) during 
the 1983 El Niño.  Fishery Bulletin 97: 680-
689. 
 
 
Variability of the pink salmon sizes in relation with abundance of Okhotsk 
Sea stocks 
 
Olga S. Temnykh
1
 and Sergey L. Marchenko
2 
1
 Pacific Research Fisheries Center (TINRO-center), 4, Shevchenko Alley, Vladivostok, Russia, 
690600.  E-mail: tinro@tinro.ru 
2
 MoTINRO, Magadan, Russia.  E-mail: tinro@online.magadam.su 
 
Beginning in the mid-1970s there was an increase 
in abundance of all Pacific salmon species.  It was 
shown that global climatic factors may have 
caused changes in salmon abundance in the North 
Pacific (Beamish and Bouillon 1993, Klyashtorin 
and Sidorenkov 1996, Radchenko and 
Rassadnikov 1997, Shuntov et al. 1997).  The rise 
in abundance of Asian and American stocks of 
salmon was accompanied by a decrease in the 
average size of fish, by an increase in age at 
maturity (due to the growth rate reduction during 
marine period of their life cycle), and by a  
reduction of the fecundity of females (Ishida et al. 
1993, Welch and Morris 1994; Bigler at.al. 1996).  
Nevertheless, there are some exceptions to the 
general trend of Pacific salmon productivity in 
relation to stock abundance.  For example, a 
decrease in abundance was observed for the 
Japan/East Sea pink salmon stocks (especially for 
the Primorye stock) while the average size of the 
Primorye pink salmon decreased during the 1970-
1980s (Temnykh 1998).  At the same time, 
abundant pink salmon from Sakhalin maintained a 
large size (Nagasawa 1998). 
29
  
The main objectives of this research were to: 
 
null Compare growth of pink salmon from 
“continental” (northern coast of the Okhotsk    
Sea) and “island” (Sakhalin, southern Kuril 
islands) regions during periods of high and 
low pink salmon abundance;  and 
null Determine those factors responsible for size  
differences among pink salmon stocks, 
particularly in the northern and southern 
Okhotsk Sea, during periods of low and high 
abundance from the 1970s-1990s. 
 
Materials and methods 
 
Statistical data on pink salmon catches collected 
by TINRO-Centre, SakhTINIRO, and MoTINRO, 
are used in this study.  These include the average 
size of spawners from rivers on the Okhotsk Sea 
coast of Sakhalin (north and south Sakhalin as 
well as Terpenya and Aniva bays), from Iturup Is. 
(southern Kuriles), and from the mainland rivers 
of the northern coast of the Okhotsk Sea (Gizhiga, 
Kukhtuy, and Tauy rivers) (Fig. 5). 
 
130 140 150 160 170 180
40
45
50
55
60
65
Gizhiga
Kukhtuy Tauy
N-E Sakhalin
Terpeniya Bay
Aniva Bay
S-E Sakhalin
Iturup
 
 
Fig. 5 Map of the location of Okhotsk Sea pink 
salmon regions studied. 
 
Results 
 
Catch dynamics for the Okhotsk Sea stocks of 
pink salmon 
 
Eastern Sakhalin, western Kamchatka, southern 
Kurile, and northern Okhotsk Sea stocks of pink 
salmon are highly abundant stocks within the 
Okhotsk Sea.  Following a period of low 
abundance in 1940-1960s, an increase in pink 
salmon number was observed in the Okhotsk Sea 
from the late 1970s.  From the early 1990s, the 
total odd-year pink salmon catch increased 1.8 
times when compared to the late 1970s and 1980s, 
and amounted to 62-133 thousand tons (Fig. 6).  
This was mainly due to a considerable rise of pink 
salmon abundance from the south-western 
Okhotsk Sea, particularly from eastern Sakhalin.  
During the last decade the share of those groups in 
the odd years reached 55-96% in the total number 
in the Okhotsk Sea.  
 
Total even-year pink salmon catch increased 3.4 
times when compared to the 1970-1980s, and 
amounted to 83-192 thousand tons (Fig. 6).  On 
the Sakhalin and southern Kuriles, the number of 
pink salmon increased 2.2 times, while in the 
western Kamchatka and northern Okhotsk Sea 
regions it increased 4.6 and 4.3 times, 
respectively.  Beginning in 1994, pink salmon 
from western Kamchatka was the most numerous 
among the odd-year generations (46-60% of the 
total number of the Okhotsk Sea stocks). 
 
odd-year
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
140000
160000
180000
200000
1961
1963
1965
1967
1969
1971
1973
1975
1977
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
Catch, t
West Kamchatka North coast of the Okhotsk sea Southern Kuril East Sakhalin
 
 
even-year
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
140000
160000
180000
200000
1960
1964
1968
1972
1976
1980
1984
1988
1992
1996
2000
Catch, t
West Kamchatka North coast of the Okhotsk sea Southern Kuril East Sakhalin
 
 
Fig. 6 Total annual catch of pink salmon in the 
main regions of coastal fisheries. 
 
30
  
Changes of body weight of the Okhotsk Sea 
stocks of pink salmon 
 
During the 1990s, both southern and northern pink 
salmon populations from the Okhotsk Sea were 
characterized by peculiar changes in mean size.  
Among the southern Okhotsk Sea stocks (eastern 
Sakhalin, southern Kuriles), there was a trend 
toward increasing body weight both in even-year, 
and especially in odd-year generations over the 
last decade (Fig. 7, Table 1). 
 
As for the increased abundance of pink salmon 
from the northern Okhotsk Sea coast, the average 
weight was also growing in the odd-year broods, 
that were more abundant than even-year 
generations, though it was somewhat smaller in 
the even years.  Average size changes within the 
“northern” and “southern” groups of pink salmon 
were synchronous.  The increase in both 
abundance and average size of pink salmon from 
southern and northern Okhotsk Sea stocks is 
unequivocal evidence that favorable conditions 
prevailed for fish reproduction during the late 
1980s - early 1990s. 
 
Weakening of the Aleutian Low led to 
considerable warming of the northwestern Pacific 
after 1989.  The carrying capacity for the Okhotsk 
Sea pink salmon increased.  Unlike the North 
American pink salmon, the average size of the 
Okhotsk Sea pink salmon increased during a 
period of high abundance.  We can only guess 
what was the main reason for that.  It could be due 
to increased productivity as a consequence of 
general warming in the northwestern Pacific 
and/or improvements of forage reserves at the 
expense of significant decreases in abundance of 
other plankton consumers.  In the 1980s, the total 
biomass of pelagic fishes amounted to  
 
0,8
1
1,2
1,4
1,6
1,8
2
 т
1962
1964
1966
1968
1970
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
Weight, kg
SE Sakhalin Anuva Bay South Kuril
 
0.80
0.90
1.00
1.10
1.20
1.30
1.40
1.50
1.60
1.70
1.80
1970
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
Weight, kg
Gizhiga Tauy Kukhtuy
 
 
Fig. 7 Average pink salmon weight in Sakhalin-Kuril region (top panel) and northern coast of the 
Okhotsk Sea (bottom panel). 
31
  
Table 1 Average Okhotsk Sea pink salmon catches and fish weight in the 1970-1980s and in the 1990s. 
 
    
Average weight 
kg 
Average catches 
,000 t 
Average total catches 
,000 t 
  
Region 
  
1978-
1989 1990-2000
1978-
1988 1990-2000 1978-1988 1990-2000 
Northern coast Gizhiga 1,12 1,13 
of the Sea of 
Okhotsk Tauy 1,12 1,13 
 Kukhtuy 1,27 1,18 
1,72 5,58 
Sakhalin Island Aniva Bay 1,17 1,25 
 S-E Sakhalin 1,08 1,27 
 
Terpeniya 
Bay* 1,02 1,14 
Even years  
South Kuril Islands Iturup 1,16 1,36 
21,03 48,52 
43,1 123,3 
Northern coast Gizhiga 1,09 1,3 
of the Sea of 
Okhotsk Tauy 1,3 1,41 
 Kukhtuy 1,3 1,42 
4,64 6,29 
Sakhalin Aniva Bay 1,15 1,31 
 S-E Sakhalin 1,2 1,36 
 
Terpeniya 
Bay* 1,2 1,32 
Odd years 
South Kuril Islands Iturup 1,18 1,51 
39,52 85,64 
61,9 103,5 
 
million tons in the Kuroshio Current region.  In the 
1990s, the abundance of these fishes decreased by 
7-8 times, mainly at the expense of Japanese 
sardine (Belyaev 2000).  During this period, total 
plankton consumption by pelagic fishes decreased 
by up to 20 times compared to the 1980s in Pacific 
waters of Kuril islands (Naydenko, in press). 
 
The increase in number and size of pink salmon 
from the southern Okhotsk Sea population took 
place together with the drop in abundance of 
Pacific sardine after the 1990s.  The low 
abundance and small size of pink salmon took 
place together with decrease in abundance of 
Japanese sardine after 1989.  The low abundance 
and small size of pink salmon were observed for 
stocks both in the southern Okhotsk Sea, and in 
Japan/East Sea during high abundance of Japanese 
sardine (Temnykh 1998). It is unlikely that sardine 
are a direct competitor with pink salmon.  It 
appears that a high abundance of the predator 
results in enhanced pressure on planktonic 
organisms.  A decrease in zooplankton abundance 
in the western North Pacific during the 1970 - 
1980s (Odate 1994) could be due to both climate 
and oceanological changes, and predation of 
abundant nektonic species. 
It is interesting to note that the average weight of 
pink salmon was larger in the northern Okhotsk 
Sea during the 1980s compared to the southern 
Okhotsk Sea stocks, in spite of the fact that the 
marine life period of northern stock fishes is 30-45 
days shorter than southern Okhotsk Sea stocks.  In 
winter, pink salmon from different Okhotsk Sea 
stocks dwell within the same region of the 
northwestern Pacific but these stocks are partly 
separated in time and space during migrations 
(Fig. 8).  The range of the northern Okhotsk Sea 
pink salmon is less connected with feeding areas 
of subtropical migrants in the Subarctic Front 
Zone, especially at the beginning and at the end of 
marine period of pink salmon life. 
 
During the last decade, there is some evidence that 
density-dependent factors caused the decrease in 
average weight of highly abundant pink salmon 
generations within the Okhotsk Sea.  In the 1990s, 
a permanently high weight difference was 
observed between even- and odd-year generations 
of pink salmon from rivers of the northern 
Okhotsk Sea coast, Sakhalin and Iturup (Fig. 7, 
Table 1).  In the Sakhalin-Kuril region, even-year 
pink salmon were 100-200 g lighter than odd-year.  
The average weight of eastern pink salmon is 
32
  
lower at low stock abundance in even years, 
compared to fish size observed in odd years when 
Sakhalin population number was twice higher. 
Pink salmon sizes depend on the total abundance 
in the Okhotsk Sea, but not abundance of each 
stock. 
We have suggested a hypothesis explaining the 
dynamics of fish size and stock abundance of pink 
salmon.  To develop our knowledge in this field, it 
is of primary importance to look more carefully 
into the basic parameters of carrying capacity for 
pink salmon during marine period of the life cycle. 
 
 
 
130 140 150 160 170 180
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
130 140 150 160 170 180
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
130 140 150 160 170 180
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
55 
60 
65 
May 
June 
July 
 
 
Fig. 8 Seasonal distribution of the Okhotsk Sea pink salmon and Japanese sardine in the northwestern 
Pacific.  (■) pink salmon from Sakhalin-Kuril stocks, ( ▲) pink salmon from the northern Okhotsk Sea, 
(null ) pink salmon from western Kamchatka stocks (tagging data from Ogura 1994).  The shaded area 
indicates Japanese sardine distribution during the period of high abundance in the 1970-1980s. 
 
References 
 
Beamish, R.J., and Bouillon, D.R.  1993.  Pacific 
salmon production trends in relation to 
climate.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 50: 1002-
1016. 
Bigler, B.S., Welch, D.W., and Helle, J.H.  1996. 
A review of size trends among North Pacific 
salmon (Oncorhynchus spp.).  Can. J. Fish. 
Aquat. Sci. 53: 455-465. 
Ishida, Y., Ito, S., Kaeriyama, M., McKinnell, S., 
and Nagasawa, K.  1993.  Recent changes in 
age and size of chum salmon (Oncorhynchus 
keta) in the North Pacific Ocean and possible 
causes.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 50: 290-295. 
Klyashtorin, L.B., and Sidorenkov, N.S.  1996.  
The long-term climatic changes and pelagic 
fish stock fluctuations in the Pacific.  Izv. 
TINRO. 119: 33-54 (in Russian). 
33
  
Nagasawa, K.  1998.  Long-term changes in 
climate, zooplankton biomass in the western 
North Pacific, and abundance and size of the 
East Sakhalin pink salmon. NPAFC Technical 
Report, Vancouver, Canada, pp. 35-36. 
Ogura, M.  1994.  Migratory behavior of Pacific 
salmon (Oncorhynchus spp.) in the open sea.  
Bull. Nat. Res. Inst. Far Seas Fish. 31: 1-138. 
Radchenko, V.I., and Rassadnikov, O.A.  1997. 
Long-term dynamics trends of Asian stocks of 
Pacific salmon and factors determing it.  Izv. 
TINRO 122: 72-94 (in Russian). 
Shuntov, V.P., Radchenko, V.I., Dulepova, E.P., 
and Temnykh, O.S.  1997.  Biological 
resources of the Far Eastern Russian economic 
zone: structure of pelagic and bottom 
communities, up-to-data status, tendencies of 
long-term dynamics.  Izv. TINRO 122: 3-15 
(in Russian). 
Temnykh O.S.  1998.  Primorye pink salmon 
growth at high and low abundance. NPAFC 
Technical Report, Vancouver, Canada, pp. 20-
22. 
Welch, D.W., and Morris, J.F.T.  1994.  Evidence 
for density-dependent marine growth in 
British Columbia pink salmon populations.  
NPAFC Doc. 97. 33 p.  
 
 
The characteristic growth rate of herring in Peter the Great Bay (Japan/East 
Sea) 
 
Ludmila A. Chernoivanova, Alexander N. Vdovin and D.V. Antonenko 
Pacific Research Fisheries Center (TINRO-center), 4, Shevchenko Alley, Vladivostok, Russia, 690950.  
E-mail: tinro@tinro.ru 
 
Pacific herring are subarctic species forming 
several local populations within its extensive 
natural habitat.  The Peter the Great Bay herring 
form one of most southerly groups, and are 
typically characterized by a high growth rate.  
There is no uniform opinion about the 
hierarchical status of this group, but it has the 
highest biopotential among other herring groups 
of the Japan/East Sea (Posadova 1988, Gavrilov 
1998, Rybnikova 1999). 
 
The life cycle of Peter the Great Bay herring 
occurs within the Bay and in adjacent waters in 
the northwestern part of the Japan/East Sea. 
Considering its restricted distribution and 
spawning grounds, the potential level of biomass 
of this population does not exceed 150 thousand 
tons. From 1910 till now, three peaks of high 
abundance have been observed:  in the mid 
1920s, the mid 1950s, and the late 1970s/early 
1980s.  Each rise was associated with one or 
several dominant generations (Posadova 1988).  
In the 1990s, the abundance and productivity of 
Peter the Great Bay herring have come near to 
the historical minimum, and its biomass during 
these years varied from 5 - 10 thousand tons. 
 
It is necessary to determine how the size-age 
characteristics and population structure changed 
in connection with the present depressed 
condition of Peter the Great Bay herring stocks.  
The biostatistical data from annual monitoring 
of the Peter the Great Bay herring stocks from 
1971 to 2001 were analyzed.  The data were 
collected from control catches by gill nets, 
seines and traps exposed directly on the 
spawning grounds.  The data were processed 
using standard ichthyological techniques.  The 
scales from a middle part of fish body under a 
dorsal fin were used for age interpretation.  The 
following formula (Alimov 1989) was used for 
growth rate:  
() ()
()
% 100
4343 . 0
lg lg
0 1
0 1
×
−
−
=
t t
l l
C
l
 
where C
l
  is the average speed of linear growth, 
l
0
 is length at the initial time, t
0
, and 
 
l
1
 is length 
at a later time, t
1
. 
 
The Peter the Great Bay herring are the fastest 
growing of all herring populations in the western 
Pacific (Posadova 1985).  Growth is most rapid 
during the first and second years of life.  At age 
34
  
0+, herring in Peter the Great Bay have an 
average body length of 110 mm and weight of 
9.9 g at the end of October.  The average length 
and weight of age 1+ fish are 220 mm and 100.1 
g, respectively at the end of October.  After the 
second year of life the growth rate quickly 
decreases and, after the fifth year, does not 
exceed 10 % of the increase in the first year. 
 
The relative daily linear growths of herring for 
the first year of life vary from 0.74 to 0.76% and 
appear to be constant during the periods of 
variable abundance (Table 2).  The highest 
growth rate of herring during ontogenesis is 
1.5% per day during the first six months of life 
(from May to October).  The decreasing growth 
rate after the first year of life was associated 
with the process of sexual maturation. 
 
Table 2 The relative daily linear growth (annual average, %) of Peter the Great Bay herring. 
 
Age (years) Period of 
observation 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
1999-2001 0.74 0.10 0.02 0.03 0.01 0.006 0.006 0.006
1971-1990 0.76 0.14 0.05 0.02 0.01 0.010 0.006 0.006
 
Table 3 Age structure (%) of herring catches in different parts of Peter the Great Bay in 1998-2001. 
 
Age (years) Period of 
observation 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 M 
Amurskiy Bay 
1998   62.036.0 2.0  3.9
1999  6.4 68.319.13.52.20.5  3.8
2000  4.6 35.945.413.70.4  4.2
2001  8.3 20.527.135.87.10.70.5  4.2
Pos’et Bay 
1998   26.25.54.023.628.810.0 1.6 0.36.1
1999  1.8 14.114.327.629.011.12.1  5.6
2000  5.3 13.618.121.423.214.83.1 0.5 5.6
2001 0.7 13.8 24.86.937.28.31.43.4 1.4 2.14.9
 
 
A separate population of Pacific herring comprises 
83% of genetic variability (Rybnikova 1999) 
which causes significant variability of the whole 
complex of its biological features. 
 
The high interannual variability in mean body 
length among generations in Peter the Great Bay 
was connected with the annual cohort strength.  In 
the period of high abundance during the 1970s and 
1980s, high yield generations (e.g. 1974 and 1980) 
were distinguished by low growth rates (Gavrilov 
and Posadova 1982).  That tendency was not 
shown during the last 15 years in Peter the Great 
Bay.  First of all, the alternation of weak and 
strong cohorts was disrupted (during that period 
there were no strong cohorts).  Secondly, all 
generations of herring consisted of a spawning 
part of the population on a background of a low 
reproduction level have been characterized by the 
low rate of growth from 1995 till now.  The 
average body length of fish at age two and three 
years does not reach long-term value (Fig. 9). 
 
Lower recruitment of Peter the Great Bay herring 
during the last decade has been accompanied by a 
reduction of the maximal age of spawners and 
variable age structure among sites.  In the 
northwestern part of Peter the Great Bay 
(Amurskiy Bay) fish at age of 2-4 years comprised 
more than 80% of herring catches, whereas at the 
southwestern part (Pos'et Bay) the herring were 
from 2 to 10 years of age from 1998-2000 (Table 
3).
35
  
 
 
Fig. 9 Average length of Peter the Great Bay 
herring: generations at age 2 (left panel) and age 3 
(right panel) years in 1974-1997.  Dotted lines 
show long term average values (age 2:  25.2 cm, 
age 3:  29.5). 
 
 
 
Fig. 10 The rate of maturation of herring in 
Peter the Great Bay in 1999-2001 (1) and 1978-
1990 (2). 
 
Evidently, the distortion of a complex age 
structure was consequence of the deterioration of 
reproduction conditions of Peter the Great Bay 
herring.  It is quite probable that the decrease of 
growth rate in recent years is defined not only by 
any negative factors but also high rates of 
maturity.  As was stated above, the sharp decrease 
of growth rate was caused by the maturation 
process.  From 1999-2001, some herring (mainly 
males) began to mature at 14-17 cm body length, 
and 80% were mature by 18-19 cm.  While in 
1978-1990, the bulk of the population matured at 
20-21 cm body length (Fig. 10).  Accumulation of 
slow growing and early-maturing individuals in 
the spawning part of Peter the Great Bay herring 
population during low abundance contributes to 
increased reproductive potential and, probably, is 
one of mechanisms promoting the restoration of 
abundance. 
 
References 
 
Alimov, A.F.  1989.  Introduction to the 
productional hydrobiology.  Hydrometeoizdat, 
Leningrad, 152 pp. 
Gavrilov, G. M.  1998.  Seasonal and interannual 
variability of herring distribution in waters off 
the northern Prymorye.  Izvestia TINRO-
Centre 124: 758-764. 
Gavrilov, G.M., and Posadova, V.P.  1982.  
Dynamics of Pacific herring Clupea pallasi 
pallasi Valenciennes (Clupeidae) abundance 
in Peter the Great Bay.  J. Ichthyology 22(5): 
760-772. 
Posadova, V.P.  1985.  Interannual variability in 
the spawning of herring in Peter the Great 
Bay.  In Herring of the North Pacific Ocean. 
TINRO, Vladivostok, pp. 22-29. 
Posadova, V.P.  1988.  Stock assessment of 
herring in Peter the Great Bay.  In Variability 
of ichthyofauna composition, yield year 
classes and forecasting techniques of fishes in 
the western Pacific. TINRO, Vladivostok, pp. 
64-69. 
Rybnikova, I.G. 1999. Population structure of 
Pacific herring Clupea pallasi (Valenciennes) 
in the Japan and Okhotsk seas.  Abstract of the 
Ph.D thesis (marine biology).  Vladivostok, 23 
pp. 
 
36
  
Temporal variations in size-at-age of the western Bering Sea herring 
 
Nikolay I. Naumenko 
Kamchatka Research Institute of Fisheries and Oceanography (KamchatNIRO), 18 Naberezhnaya Street., 
Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky, 683600, Russia.  E-mail: nnaumenko@kamniro.kamchatka.ru 
 
Ро сс и я
USA
Кор е я
Япо н ия
Охот ское
Б ери нго в о
Я п онское
м оре
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
Marine herring Coastal herring
3
1
2
5
4
6
8
7
Lake-lagoon herring
Great Peter Bay
Sakhalin-Hokkaido
Okhotsk
Gizhiga-Kamchatka
Korf-Karaginsk
Anadyrsk
Eastern Bering sea
RUSSIA
KOREA
U S A
Россия
Japan
Sea
Sea
of Okhotsk
Bering
Sea
JAPAN
Eastern Bering sea
Great Peter Bay
Sakhalin-Hokkaido
Okhotsk
Korean
Gizhiga-Kamchatka
Anadyrsk
Korf-Karaginsk
 
 
Fig. 11 Distribution of herring populations in the Far Eastern Seas. 
 
Pacific herring inhabiting the Russian Far East 
Seas are represented by three ecological morphs: 
marine, offshore (coastal) and lagoon-lacustrine.  
Marine herring spend their whole life in higher 
salinity ocean waters where they undergo long  
migrations.  The feeding area of this morph 
includes both  shelf and bathypelagial waters.  
Off-shore herring inhabit only the shelf seas, 
particularly inlets and bays.  This morph usually 
does not migrate long distances.  Lagoon-
lacustrine herring spend significant parts of their 
lives in brackish waters and migrate to feed in 
adjacent marine waters.  
 
Russian waters in the northwest part of the Pacific 
Ocean are inhabited by 6 marine populations and 
by 22 off-shore and lagoon-lacustrine populations 
(Fig. 11).  This ecological diversity provides 
maximum exploitation of forage resources for the 
species within the area and determines the 
extensive variability of size and growth 
parameters for this species. 
 
Current information is based on many years of the 
author’s personal observations of the growth in 
several herring populations inhabiting the Bering 
Sea and Pacific Ocean waters adjacent to 
Kamchatka:  Korf-Karaginsky Bay, Eastern 
Bering Sea, Anadyr Bay, Yuzhnaya Lagoon, 
Nepichye Lake, Kalygyr Lake and Viluy Lake.  
The data on the growth of herring in the Sea of 
Japan and in the Sea of Okhotsk have been taken 
from literature.  Forage base conditions are 
analyzed from annual standard surveys, each of 
them consisting of 7 stations sampled within 
Olyutorsky Bay in June.  
 
The data on the size-at-age of herring taken from 
19 areas within the northern part of the Pacific 
Ocean clearly indicate a significant difference in 
37
  
the growth of fish (Tables 4 and 5).  Off-shore and 
lagoon-lacustrine herring have been classified as 
moderate or slow growing (Fig. 12).  Marine 
herring are the most divergent in the growth.  For 
example, there are extremely fast-growing 
(Sakhalin-Hokkaido herring inhabiting the waters 
adjacent to Hokkaido Island and Peter the Great 
Bay herring), fast-growing (Sakhalin-Hokkaido 
herring inhabiting the waters adjacent to Sakhalin 
Island, Korf-Karaginsky Bay herring, Bristol Bay 
herring) and moderate-growing (Okhotsk Sea 
herring, Gijiga-Kamchatkan herring, Anadyr Bay 
herring, Nunivak Island herring and Norton Bay 
herring) herrings.  In general, the marine morph 
has a higher growth rate (Fig. 13). 
 
Linkage Distance
Lake Tonnai
Lake Vilui
Chaivo Bay
Lake Kalygir
Gizhiga-Kamchatka
Terpenia Bay
Lake Nerpichie
Nelson Island
Nyisk Bay
Norton Sound
Yuzhnaya Lagoon
Dekastri
Anadirsk
Okhotsk
Bristol Bay
Korf-Karaginsk
Sakhalin-Hokkaido(S)
Great Peter Bay
Sakhalin-Hokkaido(H)
01234567891 01 11 21 31 41 51 6
Linkage Distance
Lake Tonnai
Nelson Island
Nyisk Bay
Dekastri
Lake Kalygir
Norton Sound
Chaivo Bay
Anadyrsk
Yuzhnaya Lagoon
Lake Vilui
Terpenia Bay
Gizhiga-Kamchatka
Okhotsk
Lake Nerpichie
Bristol Bay
Korf-Karaginsk
Sakhalin-Hokkaido(S)
Great Peter Bay
Sakhalin-Hokkaido(H)
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450
 
Fig. 12 Cluster analysis of length-at-age (upper panel) and weight-at-age (lower panel) of different Far 
East herring populations. 
38
  
Table 4 Fork length-at-age (cm) of herring in different Far Eastern Seas. 
 
              
Pupulation Sea Area             Age                   Source 
      1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13       
       Marine herring        
Sakhalin-Hokkaido Japan Sea Hokkaido Island 15,0 22,0 26,0 29,0 30,5 32,0 33,0 34,0 34,5 35,0 35,3 35,6   1   
Sakhalin-Hokkaido Japan Sea Sakhalin Island 12,3 19,4 23,8 26,1 28,3 29,7 31,0 32,0 32,5 33,0 33,3 34,0 34,5 2,3,4,5,6  
The Great Piter Bay Japan Sea Western part 14,2 22,8 27,8 30,4 32,1 33,2 34,4 35,3 35,4 35,8 35,9 36,9 37,3 7,8,9   
Okhotsk Sea of Okhotsk North West 7,9 15,0 20,4 23,4 25,5 27,1 28,2 29,1 29,9 30,4 31,1 31,3 31,4 6,10,11,12,13,14,15,16 
Gizhiga-Kamchatka Sea of Okhotsk North East 7,5 13,5 19,2 22,6 24,8 26,6 27,8 27,9 29,7 29,8 30,1 30,4 31,3 6,17,18  
Korf-Karaginsky Bering Sea Western part 12,2 19,6 24,1 26,8 28,5 30,0 31,1 32,1 32,9 33,5 34,4 35,1 35,5 19,20,21,22  
Anadyrsky Bering Sea Gulg of Anadyr 8,2 15,6 20,7 23,3 25,0 26,6 27,9 28,9 29,7 30,8 31,4 31,8 32,2 19   
Eeastern Bering Sea Bering Sea Norton Sound 9,8 17,2 20,5 23,0 24,7 26,4 27,9 28,8 29,6        19,23   
Eeastern Bering Sea Bering Sea Nelson Island 9,1 16,2 20,9 23,6 25,9 27,5 28,7            19,23   
Eeastern Bering Sea Bering Sea Bristol Bay 10,3 19,0 22,3 24,8 27,1 29,0 30,1 31,0 31,9 32,5 32,8     19,23   
       Coastal herring        
Dekastri Japan Sea Northern part 8,3 15,2 19,6 23,2 25,1 26,6 27,5 28,5 30,0 31,3 31,8 32,5    6,24,25,26  
Nyisk Bay Sea of Okhotsk Sakhalin Island 8,9 15,7 20,2 22,5 24,5 26,6 27,9             7,27,28  
Chaivo Bay Sea of Okhotsk Sakhalin Island 8,7 15,4 20,0 22,8 24,0 25,1 28,0            7,27   
Terpenia Bay Sea of Okhotsk Sakhalin Island 9,0 15,6 20,6 22,5 24,4 25,3 27,1            27   
            Lake-lagoon herring       
Lake Vilui N-W Pacific Kamchatka 8,8 15 18,5 20,4 22,9 24 25,2 25,9 26,6 27 27,8 27,9 28,1 19   
Lake Kalygir N-W Pacific Kamchatka 8,4 14,7 19,5 22,4 24,4 25,4 26,5 27,3 28,1 27,8 28,4 29,1 29,3 19   
Lake Nerpichie N-W Pacific Kamchatka 9,1 15,4 21,4 24,5 26,3 27,3 28,2 29 29,9 30,5 31,1 31,5 32 19   
Lake Tonnai Sea of Okhotsk Sakhalin Island 8,6 14,2 17,6 20,2 21,5 22,3 23,5            29   
Yuzhnaya Lagoon Bering Sea North West 8,5 14,7 19,4 22,4 24,3 25,3 26,5 27,1 28,1 28,8 29,4 30,1 30,6 19,30     
Sources: 1. Motoda, Hirano, 1963; 2. Kaganovsky, 1954; 3. Druzhinin, 1957; 4. Pushnikova, 1981; 5. Pushnikova, 1994; 6. Materials of Soviet-Japan 
Fisheries Commission, 1969-1976;  7. Ambroz, 1931; 8. Gavrilov, Posadova, 1982; 9. Posadova, 1985; 10. Kolesnik, Khmarov, 1970;    
11. Labetsky, 1975; 12. Tyurnin, Yolkin, 1975; 13. Tyurnin, Yolkin, 1977; 14. Vyshegorodtsev, 1976; 15. Vyshegorodtsev, 1978; 16. Smirnov, 1994; 
17. Piskunov, 1954; 18. Pravotorova, 1965; 19. Our data; 20. Kachina, 1967; 21. Kachina, 1969; 22. Kachina, 1981; 23. Wespestad, 1991;  
24. Ambroz, 1930; 25. Kozlov, 1968; 26. Kozlov, Frolov, 1973; 27. Ivankova, Kozlov, 1968; 28. Gritsenko, Shilin, 1979; 29. Probatov, Frolov, 1951; 
30. Prokhorov, 1965.                   
 
 
 
Table 5 Weight-at-age (g) of different populations of herring from Far Eastern Seas. 
            
Pupulation Sea Area             Age               
      1 23 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
       Marine herring       
Sakhalin-Hokkaido Japan Sea Sakhalin Island 24 72 140 191 242 279 317 360 375 398 416       
The Great Piter Bay Japan Sea Western part 28 135 250 308 371 399 432 465 484 525 547       
Okhotsk Sea of Okhotsk North West 8 30 84 119 155 186 213 237 266 285 303 315 364  
Gizhiga-Kamchatka Sea of Okhotsk North East 8 29 80 119 151 177 206 234 256 285 295 305 323 337
Korf-Karaginsk Bering Sea Western part 12 49 109 178 245 299 341 366 404 424 452 472 510 564
Anadyrsk Bering Sea Gulf of Anadyr 7 32 67 104 139 175 223 243 272 312         
Eeastern Bering Sea  Bering Sea Norton Sound 8 46 79 134 166 210 234 281 313 348 357 373 391 405
Eeastern Bering Sea  Bering Sea Nelson Island 9 38 84 129 187 227 280 306 337 376 410 429     
Eeastern Bering Sea  Bering Sea Bristol Bay 12 62 118 174 229 283 331 376 414 445 470 492 508 523
       Coastal herring       
Dekastri Japan Sea Northern part 8 44 102 125 153 194 215 242 274 304 305 323     
Nyisk Bay Sea of Okhotsk Sakhalin Island 8 42 70 100 182 198 224              
Chaivo Bay Sea of Okhotsk Sakhalin Island 7 39 83 121 141 160 221              
Terpenia Bay Sea of Okhotsk Sakhalin Island 8 40 90 117 148 164 201              
            Lake-lagoon herring      
Lake Vilui N-W Pacific Kamchatka 8 42 80 107 145 162 184 201 218 228 248 252 255 257
Lake Kalygir N-W Pacific Kamchatka 8 39 90 140 179 205 232 258 274 287 295 320 328 359
Lake Nerpichie N-W Pacific Kamchatka 8 50 116 180 220 251 287 311 341 354 377 397 406 423
Lake Tonnai Sea of Okhotsk Sakhalin Island 7 30 57 85 102 114 132              
Yuzhnaya Lagoon Bering Sea North West 7 34 76 115 146 164 188 201 223 240 255 273 286  
Comment: sources as table 1               
 
 
39
  
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
1234567891 01 11 21 3
Age
Mean length, cm
Marine herring
Coastal herring
Lake-lagoon herring
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
1234567891 01 11 21 31 4
Age
Mean weight, g
 
 
Fig. 13 Length-at-age (left) and weight-at-age (right) of different morphs of Far East herring. 
 
The morphs differ in growth rate.  By the character 
of the length growth the populations studied can 
be clearly divided into 3 types (Fig. 14A): 
 
I. fast annual growth in the first year of life and 
rapid decrease of the growth in later years; 
II. relatively fast annual growth in two initial 
years; 
III slow growth in the first year of life and 
comparatively fast annual growth in later 
years. 
 
Hokkaido Island herring have been classified to be 
of the first type.  Most marine, all off-shore and 
some lagoon-lacustrine herring populations have 
been classified to be of second type.  Most 
lacustrine and some marine herring populations 
are classified to be of the third type. 
 
By the character of the mass growth, Far East 
herring populations have been divided into three 
types as well (Fig. 14B): 
 
I. almost similar rich annual mass growth in 
second and third years of life (Sakhalin-
Hokkaido herring inhabiting the waters 
adjacent to Hokkaido Island and Peter the 
Great Bay herring); 
II. maximum annual mass growth in the third 
year of life cycle (majority of herring 
populations in the Sea of Japan and Okhotsk 
Sea); 
III. maximum annual mass growth in the fourth 
year of life (all marine herring populations of 
Bering Sea). 
A
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
1234567
Age
Relative annual length growth, %
I
II
III
B
0
5
10
15
20
25
1234567
Age
Relative annual weight growth, %
I
II
III
 
 
Fig. 14 Relative annual growth in length (A) 
and weight (B) in Far East herring morphs.  See 
text for descriptions of each morph (I, II and III). 
 
The most obvious trait of this species is significant 
year-to-year variations in size-at-age.  For 
example, the range in the mean length of Korf- 
 
40
  
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
1929
1932
1935
1938
1941
1944
1947
1950
1953
1956
1959
1962
1965
1968
1971
1974
1977
1980
1983
1986
1989
1992
1995
Year class
Mean fork length, cm
age 4 age 5 age 6
age 7 age 8 age 9
age 10
 
Fig. 15 Mean length-at-age of Korf-Karaginsky 
herring. 
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
1929
1932
1935
1938
1941
1944
1947
1950
1953
1956
1959
1962
1965
1968
1971
1974
1977
1980
1983
1986
1989
1992
1995
Year class
Deviation, cm
age 4 age 5 age 6
age 7 age 8 age 9
age 10
 
Fig. 16 Deviations from mean length-at-age. 
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
1929
1932
1935
1938
1941
1944
1947
1950
1953
1956
1959
1962
1965
1968
1971
1974
1977
1980
1983
1986
1989
1992
1995
Year class
Mean weight, g
age 4 age 5
age 6 age 7
age 8 age 9
age 10
 
Fig. 17 Mean weight-at-age of Korf-Karaginsky 
herring. 
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
1929
1932
1935
1938
1941
1944
1947
1950
1953
1956
1959
1962
1965
1968
1971
1974
1977
1980
1983
1986
1989
1992
1995
Year class
Deviation, g 
age 4 age 5
age 6 age 7
age 8 age 9
age 10
 
Fig. 18 Deviations in mean weight-at-age. 
Karaginsky four-year-old fish is 4 cm (24.5-28.5 
cm), of 10-years-old fish - 5.1 cm (30.4-35.5 cm), 
of 13-years-old fish - 5.9 cm (31.6-37.5 cm).  The 
range in the mean mass of fish varies from 102 g 
in 4 year old fish to 227-255 g in 8-13 year old 
fish. 
 
The variation in the biological patterns of Korf-
Karaginsky herring demonstrates clear long-term 
cyclic dynamics (Figs. 15, 16, 17 and 18).  The 
size (length and mass) of mature fish in 
generations for the 1930-40s was a maximum in 
all age groups for the whole observation period;  
the patterns were at a minimum for the 1950-70s 
and again relatively high for the 1980s.  In the 
1990s the size-at-age has been decreasing 
gradually, but being above the mean for many 
years, as early in the time series (Fig. 19). 
 
-2,5
-2
-1,5
-1
-0,5
0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
1942
1947
1952
1957
1962
1967
1972
1977
1982
1987
1992
1997
Year
Deviation of mean length, cm
 
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
1939
1944
1949
1954
1959
1964
1969
1974
1979
1984
1989
1994
1999
Year
Deviation of mean weight , g
 
Fig. 19 Deviations of mean length (upper panel) 
and weight (lower panel) of age 4-10 Korf-
Karaginsky herring from multi-year value. 
 
For greater insight into the temporal pattern of the 
cycles of size variations in herring we used 
transformed data.  We estimated deviations of the 
annual length and mass growth of 4-10-years-old 
41
  
fish from the mean for many years (Figs. 20 and 
21).  There are three periods which could be seen 
clearly in the curve of the dynamics of the mean 
for 5-year periods of annual growth of mature 
herring.  
 
The first period, bounded by generations of 1930 
and 1951, was generally characterized by 
accelerated growth; the second period (1950-
1970s) was characterized by slower growth, and 
1970-1990s characterized by higher growth rates. 
Within the three twenty-year periods of high or 
low growth, there are two cycles of about 10 
years.  Thus, the growth of Korf-Karaginsky 
herring has cyclic dynamics, with the cycle 
consisting of 10 or 22-years approximately.  
 
The growth of mature herring in the west part of 
Bering Sea has been regulated by several 
circumstances.  The length of 5-10-year-old fish 
depends on the length of recruits i.e. maturating 4-
year-old fishes (Fig. 22).  The more definite length 
of recruits is, the greater is the length of mature 
fish in all older ages. 
 
Beyond doubt the growth of herring has been 
influenced by stock abundance or density factor. 
Although a reliable correlation between abundance 
of a certain generation and annual growth has not 
been observed – very abundant generations 
demonstrate evidently slower growth as compared 
to that in other generations.  The growth rate is 
very similar in generations of moderate and low 
abundance, also in general it is higher compared to 
that in abundant and highly abundant generations 
(Table 6).  Actually, biological characteristics are 
influenced much more by population condition.  
The highest growth rates are observed in the 1940s 
and the early 1950s when the abundance of mature 
fish has been moderate (Table 7). After several 
abundant generations reproduced in 1951-1956 the 
abundance of mature fish increased quickly.  To 
the late 1950s the abundance of mature fish 
reaches its’ historical maximum.  The size (length 
and mass) of 4-6 year-old fish for this period has 
been minimum for the whole period of 
observations.  Slow growth has been observed in 
the fish of old age groups. 
 
From the mid-1960s until mid-1970s the 
population underwent a depression.  Despite the  
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
1929
1932
1935
1938
1941
1944
1947
1950
1953
1956
1959
1962
1965
1968
1971
1974
1977
1980
1983
1986
1989
1992
1995
Year class
Deviation, mm
 
Fig. 20 Deviations of mean annual length 
growth of 4-10 age Korf-Karaginsky herring from 
multiyear value. 
 
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
1929
1932
1935
1938
1941
1944
1947
1950
1953
1956
1959
1962
1965
1968
1971
1974
1977
1980
1983
1986
1989
1992
1995
Year class
Deviation, g
 
Fig. 21 Deviations of mean annual weight 
growth of 4-10 age Korf-Karaginsky herring from 
multiyear value. 
 
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
38
4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
Age
Length, cm
24,1-24,5 24,6-25,0 25,1-25,
25,6-26,0 26,1-26,5 26,6-27,
27,1-27,5 27,6-28,0 28,1-28,
Start length of 4-age fishes, cm
 
 
Fig. 22 Growth of Korf-Karaginsky herring in 
dependence on start length of 4-age fishes. 
 
extremely low abundance of mature fish their 
growth stayed slow;  also the individuals older 
than 6-years-old demonstrate the minimal growth 
for the whole historical period of the observations.  
In the late 1970s and in the 1980s the number of 
mature fish has increased a little, but remained  
42
  
Table 6 Growth of Korf-Karaginsk herring in dependence from year-class strength. 
 
Age Strength of year-
class 
Length/weight 
4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Length, cm 26.3 27.4 28.6 29.9 30.8 31.2 31.5 31.8 32.0 32.4 Very strong 
Weight, g 181 202 241 273 283 303 304 328 367 378 
Length, cm 26.8 28.6 30.2 31.0 32.0 32.8 33.2 33.7 33.9 34.1 Strong 
Weight, g 192 239 273 313 355 379 401 412 414 416 
Length, cm 26.7 28.5 30.1 31.1 31.9 32.6 33.4 34.3 35.0 35.6 Average 
Weight, g 198 245 284 324 348 385 414 444 475 506 
Length, cm 27.0 28.8 30.2 31.6 32.6 33.4 34.2 35.1 36.0 36.2 Poor 
Weight, g 203 244 291 333 365 398 430 455 509 534 
 
Table 4.
Growth of Korf-Karaginsk herring in dependence from stock-size level 
 
Age Level of stock-size Length/weight 
4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 
Length, cm 25.8 27.3 28.6 30.3 31.3 32.3 33.4 33.9 34.2 - High 
Weight, g 165 195 229 270 297 327 374 376 414 - 
Length, cm 27.3 29.1 30.7 32.0 33.0 34.0 34.6 35.3 36.1 36.4 Average 
Weight, g 212 257 306 352 388 427 458 476 503 532 
Length, cm 26.9 28.8 30.2 31.3 32.1 32.7 33.1 33.7 34.4 34.9 Low 
Weight, g 209 259 300 341 364 388 405 429 473 496 
Length, cm 26.0 27.9 29.3 30.0 30.7 31.3 31.6 32.3 32.6 33.1 Depression 
Weight, g 180 220 261 277 300 335 345 352 358 365 
 
 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1951
1955
1959
1963
1967
1971
1975
1979
1983
1987
Year
Zooplankton biomass, 
mg/m
3
27
27,5
28
28,5
29
29,5
30
30,5
31
31,5
32
32,5
Mean length, cm
Zooplankton biomass
Smoothed for 5-year periods biomass
Mean length
Smoothed for 5-year periods length
y = 0,0025x + 28,813
R
2
 = 0,4435
28,5
29
29,5
30
30,5
31
31,5
32
0 200 400 600 800 1000
Zooplankton biomass, mg/m
3
Mean length, cm
 
Fig. 23 Relationship between June zooplankton 
biomass in Olutorsk Bay and mean length of age 
4-10 herring. 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1951
1954
1957
1960
1963
1966
1969
1972
1975
1978
1981
1984
1987
Year
Zooplankton biomass, 
mg/m3
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Mean weight, g
Zooplankton biomass
Smoothed for 5-year periods biomass
Mean weight
Smoothed for 5-year periods weight
y = 0,096x + 235,96
R
2
 = 0,3791
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
380
400
0 200 400 600 800 1000
Zooplankton biomass, mg/m
3
Mean weight, g
 
Fig. 24 Relationship between June zooplankton 
biomass in Olutorsk Bay and mean weight of age 
4-10 herring. 
Table 7 Table 7 Growth of Korf-Karaginsk herring in relation to stock abundance. 
43
  
low.  In the 1990s the numbers have increased  
moderately.  The size-at-age for 25 years (mid 
1960s- late 1980s) has been increased gradually.  
To the early 1990s the size of herring has been 
similar to that for the 1940s.  Thus, the most 
favorable conditions for growth of Korf-
Karaginsky herring usually have been created at a 
moderate abundance of mature fish in the 
population.  Under the extreme conditions (too 
high or too low stock abundance) individual 
growth has been slow. 
 
The most important factor determining individual 
growth is food supply.  In the 1950s - 1980s 
average zooplankton biomass in Olyutorsky Bay 
and average dimension (length and mass) of 4-10 
years-old fish demonstrate synchronic variations 
(Fig. 23 and 24).  In the periods when the biomass 
of zooplankton was increasing,  the length and the 
mass of mature herring  increased as well, and vice 
versa.  A reliable direct correlation has been found 
between these patterns.  The character of the 
correlation indicates that a zooplankton biomass 
increase of 100 mg/m
3
 corresponds to a length 
increase of 2.5 mm and to the mass increase of 10 
g in average in all age groups.  Thus, the size-at-
age variations of Korf-Karaginsky herring 
demonstrate cyclic dynamics. The stock 
abundance and forage base conditions influence 
the growth of fish considerably.   
 
 
Effects of climate on Pacific herring, Clupea pallasii, in the northern Gulf of 
Alaska and Prince William Sound, Alaska 
 
Evelyn D. Brown 
University of Alaska Fairbanks, Institute of Marine Science, P.O. Box 757220, Fairbanks, AK 99775-
7220, U.S.A.  E-mail: ebrown@lms.uaf.edu 
 
Introduction 
 
Links between trends of North Pacific fish 
populations and climatic variations are well 
documented.  One well-known example is the 
exceptional salmon production in the North Pacific 
that occurred during a period associated with an 
intensified Aleutian Low:  high levels of salmon 
production are strongly correlated with the Pacific 
Decadal Oscillation (PDO) (Mantua et al. 1997), 
with Alaskan stocks responding positively to the 
positive phases of the PDO. 
 
Pacific herring (Clupea pallasii) also appear to 
respond to climate.  A negative correlation exists 
between southern British Columbia (BC) herring 
year-class strength and warm conditions; warm 
conditions appear to increase piscivory on herring 
and reduce zooplankton food resources (Ware 
1992).  The same negative correlation was later 
reported by Hollowed and Wooster (1995) with 
higher average recruitment for Vancouver Island 
herring during cool years associated with a 
weakened winter Aleutian Low (AL).  However, 
the opposite effect occurred in northern BC and 
the Gulf of Alaska (GOA), with increased herring 
production during warm years associated with an 
intensified winter AL (Hollowed and Wooster 
1995).  Recruitment of Pacific herring in Southeast 
Alaska is positively associated with warm, wet 
climate conditions (Zebdi and Collie 1995).  This 
indicates a north-south bifurcation in climate 
response by Pacific herring populations similar to 
that observed in Pacific salmon. 
 
This study shows that the trend in abundance of 
northern GOA Pacific herring appears to be in 
phase with decadal-scale climate indices.  
Population parameters such as growth and spawn 
timing also appear to be related to climatic signals 
and may be in opposition to responses by Pacific 
herring from more southern locations.  
 
Results 
 
An index of GOA herring abundance was 
developed by combining historic fisheries catches 
with recent biomass estimate (Fig. 25).  Herring 
abundances were compared to several climate 
indices and good, positive correlations were found 
for the Atmospheric Forcing Index (AFI) and 
Aleutian Low Pressure Index (ALPI) (Beamish 
44
  
and Bouillon 1993), the Pacific Inter-Decadal 
Oscillation (PIDO) (Enfield and Mestas-Nunez 
1999) and the winter time Pacific Decadal 
Oscillation (PDO) (Mantua et al. 1997).   The 
abundance of herring in Prince William Sound 
over the period 1973-present was well-correlated 
with these indices (Fig. 26), as was the composite 
herring time series (from 1900-present) (Fig. 27).  
The common result was high population levels 
during the positive phases of the three indices. The 
positive phases correspond in general to 
intensification of the Aleutian Low, higher sea 
surface temperatures, and increased storms and 
wind stress in the GOA.  A strong Aleutian Low 
causes above-average water column stability in the 
sub-arctic Pacific, creating conditions that 
optimize primary and secondary production and 
thus may be the mechanism involved in the 
positive response of zooplankton and Pacific 
herring, as previously hypothesized for salmon. 
 
Herring size-at-age trends exhibited oscillatory 
behavior with a maximum spectral density at a 
period of 13 years for all ages (Fig. 28).  There 
was no evidence of density-dependence as plots of 
size and biomass levels were flat for each age 
examined.  The spectral peak was strongest in ages 
3-5.  The raw and smoothed (using the Hamming 
filter) size-at-age data was significantly correlated 
to peak zooplankton density lagged one year (p < 
0.05; r ≥ 0.50; Fig. 28).  Peak and average 
zooplankton biomass was significantly correlated 
to the winter PDO lagged 3 yrs (r = 0.52 and 0.65  
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
1900
1904
1908
1912
1916
1920
1924
1928
1932
1936
1940
1944
1948
1952
1956
1960
1964
1968
1972
1976
1980
1984
1988
1992
1996
Catch or Biomass (thousands of tonnes)
GOA Fishery Catches
N GOA Biomass
 
Fig. 25 The two types of fishery data used in 
this analysis.  The solid black line is total annual 
Gulf of Alaska (GOA) fishery catches.  The grey 
line represents the annual biomass estimates for 
Prince William Sound (see Brown and Funk for 
details). 
 
Fig. 26 A 4 year moving average (ma) 
transformation of the Prince William Sound 
(PWS) biomass index compared to the AFI, the 
ALPI and the winter PDO for the period of 1973 
to 1993. 
 
 
 
Fig. 27 A 5 year moving average (ma) 
transformation of the Gulf of Alaska (GOA) 
Index, created by combining catch and biomass, 
compared (upper panel) to a 5 year ma of the 
Pacific Inter-Decadal Oscillation and (lower 
panel), 5 year mas of the AFI, ALPI and winter 
PDO plotted for the period of 1902 to 1995. 
 
 
 
45
  
respectively). Size-at-age for ages 7 and 8 were 
also significantly correlated to both the PDO 
lagged 3 years (r = 0.55) and the PIDO lagged 2 
years (r = 0.61). 
 
 
 
Fig. 28 Size-at-age by weight (g) of age 3-8 
Pacific herring from PWS plotted with peak 
zooplankton density anomalies (from southwestern 
PWS) for the period of 1973 to 1999.  The top 
figure are the raw values.  The bottom figure 
shows a spectral transformation (type Hamming) 
of the size-at-age data plotted with a 4 year 
moving average transformation of the peak 
zooplankton anomalies. 
 
There is an overall downward trend in spawn 
timing from 1973 to 1999 with mean spawn dates 
approximately 7 days earlier in the late 1990s than 
in the early 1970s (Fig. 29).  Although not 
significantly correlated, there is a corresponding 
downward trend in PWS surface salinity during 
September and October, lagged 6 months from 
spawning, over the same period. There was no 
apparent relationship between spawn timing and 
either population size or climate trends.  Spawn 
timing is affected by maturity rate that is in turn 
directly affected by ocean conditions, especially 6-
9 months prior to spawning.   
 
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
1973
1975
1977
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
1997
Salinity Anomaly
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
Mean Spawn Date Anomaly
Sept-Oct Salinity Anomaly Lagged 6 mos. Mean Spawn Date Anomaly
 
Fig. 29 Surface salinity (at 20 m) anomalies 
with a 6 month lag, for the combined months of 
September and October are plotted with the mean 
date of spawning anomaly for PWS for the period 
of 1973 to 1999.  The solid lines represent 2
nd
 
order polynomial transformations of the mean 
spawn date (black) and salinity (grey).  Note that 
black line is polynomial (2
nd
 order) trend line for 
mean spawn date anomaly and the gray line is 
polynomial (2
nd
 order) trend line for PWS Sept.-
Oct. SSS anomaly 
 
Spawning areas have also shifted over the same 
time period accompanied by a trend in reduced 
recruit per spawner rates.  The implications of 
these observations are discussed more fully in 
Brown and Funk (unpublished manuscript).  
 
References 
 
Beamish, R.J., and Bouillon, D.R.  1993.  Pacific 
salmon production trends in relation to 
climate. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 50: 1002-
1016. 
Brown, E.D., and Funk, F.  Effects of climate on 
Pacific herring, Clupea pallasi, in the northern 
Gulf of Alaska and Prince William Sound, 
Alaska.  Unpublished manuscript available 
from the authors.   
Enfield, D.B., and Mestas-Nuñez, A.M.  1999. 
Multiscale variabilities in global sea surface 
temperature and their relationships with 
tropospheric climate patterns.  J. Climate 12: 
2719-2733. 
46
  
Hollowed, A.B., and Wooster, W.S.  1995. 
Decadal-scale variations in the eastern 
subarctic Pacific: II. Response of northeast 
Pacific fish stocks.  Can. Spec. Publ. Fish. 
Aquat. Sci. 121: 373-385. 
Mantua, N. J., Hare, S.R., Zhang, Y., Wallace, 
J.M., and Francis, R.C.  1997.  A Pacific 
interdecadal climate oscillation with impacts 
on salmon production. ,Bull. Am. Meteorol. 
Soc. 78: 1069-1079. 
Ware, D. M.  1992.  Climate, predators and prey: 
behaviour of a linked oscillating system.  In 
Kawasaki T., Tanaka S., Yoahiaki T., and 
Taniguchi A. (eds).  Long-term variability of 
pelagic fish populations and their 
environment.  Pergamon Press, Sendai, Japan, 
pp. 279-291. 
Zebdi, A., and Collie, J. S.  1995.  Effect of 
climate on herring (Clupea pallasi) population 
dynamics in the northeast Pacific Ocean.  Can. 
Spec. Publ. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 121: 277-290. 
 
 
Herring size-at-age variation in the North Pacific 
 
Jake Schweigert
1
, Fritz Funk
2
, Ken Oda and Tom Moore
3 
1
 Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Pacific Biological Station, Nanaimo, BC, Canada.  V9R 5K6  E-mail: 
schweigertj@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
2
 Alaska Department of Fish and Game, P.O. Box 25526, Juneau, AK 99802-5526, U.S.A.  E-mail: 
fritz_funk@fishgame.state.ak.us 
3
 California Department of Fish and Game, Belmont and Bodega Bay, California, U.S.A.  
 
Introduction 
 
Herring have been one of the more important 
components of the marine fisheries on the west 
coast of North America over the past century. 
Dramatic population fluctuations are common in 
all stocks of herring but virtually all populations 
from Alaska to California declined dramatically 
and synchronously in the late 1960s and all have 
subsequently recovered.  Despite the impacts of a 
significant harvest in most of these stocks, large 
scale environmental forcing appears to have been 
a significant factor in the observed population 
fluctuations.  However, it is unclear what 
mechanisms were involved in affecting survival 
over such a broad geographical scale.  Long time 
series of stock abundance estimates are not 
available for most of these populations. Instead, 
we investigated the available data on fish size and 
growth, reviewing trends in weight-at-age, 
condition factor, and growth increments of Pacific 
herring from Alaska to California in relation to 
environmental conditions or food supply to assess 
whether these factors may have affected herring 
survival in the North Pacific. 
Methods 
 
Pacific herring weight-at-age data were collated 
for a number of stocks in the North Pacific (Fig. 
30) ranging from the Bering Sea [Togiak] through 
the Gulf of Alaska (Kodiak], Prince William 
Sound [PWS]), SE Alaska [Sitka], British 
Columbia (Queen Charlotte Islands [QCI], Prince 
Rupert [PRD], Central Coast [CC], Strait of 
Georgia [GS], west coast of Vancouver Island 
[WCVI]), and California (San Francisco Bay 
[SFB], Tomales Bay [TB]).  Unfortunately, the 
available data is sparse in many cases and 
generally available for only limited time periods 
restricting the type and extent of statistical 
analyses possible.  The time period investigated 
for this study ranges from 1940-2000.  For some 
populations both length and weight at age data are 
available and for those we examined changes in 
condition factor.  For all populations trends in 
weight at age 4 were examined as well as trends in 
the annual growth increment at age over time.  
 
The condition factor was also calculated annually 
for each age-class in each stock following Tesch 
(1988), as: 
3
at
at
t
Length
Weight
CF = 
47
  
Spratt (1987) has previously used similar methods 
to examine growth variation in San Francisco Bay 
herring following the strong 1982-83 El Niño. 
 
The indices of environmental forcing that were 
examined included the Pacific decadal oscillation 
(PDO), atmospheric forcing index (AFI), the 
Aleutian low pressure index (ALPI), the Pacific 
circulation index (PCI) and the ENSO southern 
oscillation index (SOI).  All but the last index are 
available from http://www.pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/sci/ 
sa-mfpd/english/clm_indx1.htm. The SOI index 
was obtained from ftp://ftp.ncep.noaa.gov/pub/ 
cpc/wd52dg/data/indices/soi.  Information on 
plankton biomass is difficult to obtain since there 
have been few long-term efforts to collect these 
data.  Recently, Hare and Mantua (2000) have 
consolidated a large number of data series for the 
period 1965-1997 and we have used their results 
in this study. 
 
T ogiak B ay
Ko d i a k
Pr i n c e
William
S ound
Si t k a
Queen
Charlotte
Isla nd s
Pri n c e Ru p e rt
Central
W. C . Va n c o u v e r Is.
Georgia
St r a i t
Be r i n g
Se a
Ala ska
Br i t i sh
Colum bia
California
Sa n Fra n c i sc o
Ba y
T omales
Ba y
EBSZO O
CP Z OO
EPZO O
CCZ OO
 
 
Fig. 30 Map of the study area illustrating the 
location of data sets for the analysis. 
 
 
Results and discussion 
 
Pacific herring generally exhibit a cline in size-at-
age from south to north, with fish in the Bering 
Sea being far larger than fish from California.  
Herring also mature at later ages as one progresses 
from south to north.  Therefore, comparison of 
size, condition, and growth increment becomes 
complicated as fish trade off growth for 
reproduction once they are mature.  Consequently, 
we chose to examine trends in the average weight 
of fish at age 4 throughout the study area  
(Fig. 31).  However, this is of limited utility as an 
index of growing conditions because it represents 
an integration by the fish of growing and feeding 
conditions over the preceding four years.  Fish 
from the Bering Sea are much larger and 
demonstrate greater fluctuation in size at age 4 
than herring from any of the other areas. Sitka and 
PWS indicate a long term decline in size since the 
1940s.  It should be noted that the pre-1970 data 
from all areas represent fall reduction fisheries 
whereas recent data are from spring roe fisheries 
and so may reflect some loss of weight by fish 
over the winter period.  British Columbia stocks 
and those from Sitka show a marked increase in 
size at the time of the stock collapses in the early 
1960s with a subsequent decline in the 1970s 
which may reflect a density-dependent response 
as the populations rebuilt.  California stocks do 
not show evidence of any trends except for 
reductions in size during the 1982-83 and 1997-98 
El Niño events. 
 
The condition factor at age is presented in Figures 
32 and 33.  It represents an index of growing 
conditions for herring the previous year.  
However, it is possible that herring compensate 
for reduced food availability by growing more 
slowly in length while maintaining an average 
condition.  Thus, it may not be a good indicator of 
growing conditions in the ocean except under 
extreme circumstances such as a severe El Niño 
which disrupted normal feeding patterns.  British 
Columbia herring stocks do not show any marked 
trends in condition over time although the QCI, 
CC, and WCVI suggest a slight increase in 
condition from the 1950s through the 1990s. 
 
48
  
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
100 120 140 160 180 200
Weight at Age 4
100 120 140 160 180 200
TOGIAK
KODIAK
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
60 80 100 120 140
Weight at Age 4
60 80 100 120 140
PWS
SITKA
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
60 80 100 120 140
Weight at Age 4
60 80 100 120 140
QCI
PRD
CC
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
60 80 100 120 140
Weight at Age 4
60 80 100 120 140
GS
WCVI
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
60 80 100 120 140
Weight at Age 4
60 80 100 120 140
SF Bay
Tomales Bay
 
 
Fig. 31 Trends in weight-at-age 4 in Pacific herring from 1940-2000. 
49
  
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7
Condition at Age
QCI
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7
Condition at Age
PRD
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7
Condition at Age
CC
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7
Condition at Age
GS
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7
Condition at Age
WC
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
 
 
Fig. 32 Condition factor at age for British Columbia herring from 1940-2000. 
50
  
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7
1.1 1.3 1.5 1.7
Condition at Age
PWS
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8
Condition at Age
SITKA
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8
Condition at Age
SFB
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8
1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8
Condition at Age
TB
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
 
 
Fig. 33 Condition factor at age for Alaska and California herring from 1940-2000. 
51
  
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
-50 0 50 100
-50 0 50 100
TOGIAK
Growth Inc at Age
Age 5
Age 6
Age 7
Age 8
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
02 04 06 0
02 04 06 0
KODIAK
Growth Inc at Age
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
02 04 06 0
02 04 06 0
PWS
Growth Inc at Age
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
-20 0 20 40 60
-20 0 20 40 60
SITKA
Growth Inc at Age
 
 
Fig. 34 Trends in the growth increment at age for Alaska herring stocks from 1940-2000. 
 
52
  
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
-20 0 20 40
-20 0 20 40
QCI
Growth Inc at Age
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
-20 0 20 40
-20 0 20 40
PRD
Growth Inc at Age
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
-20 0 20 40
-20 0 20 40
CC
Growth Inc at Age
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
 
 
Fig. 35 Trends in growth increment at age for northern BC herring stocks from 1940-2000. 
53
  
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
-20 0 20 40
-20 0 20 40
GS
Growth Inc at Age
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
Age 7
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
-20 0 20 40
-20 0 20 40
WCVI
Growth Inc at Age
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
-20 0 20 40
-20 0 20 40
SFB
Growth Inc at Age
Age 2
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
-20 0 20 40
-20 0 20 40
TB
Growth Inc at Age
Age 3
Age 4
Age 5
Age 6
 
 
Fig. 36 Trends in the growth increment at age for southern BC and California herring stocks from 
1940-2000. 
54
  
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
-3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3
Winter PDO
-3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
-3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3
AFI
-3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
- 4- 202468
ALPI
- 4- 202468
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
-200 -100 0 100 200
PCI
-200 -100 0 100 200
1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
-2 -1 0 1 2
SOI
-2 -1 0 1 2
 
 
Fig. 37 Environmental indices for the North Pacific from 1940-2000. 
55
  
All stocks also indicate a small decline in 
condition in the mid- to late 1980s and again in the 
late 1990s following the two strong ENSO events.  
Results for Alaska and California are quite 
variable with Sitka and PWS suggesting a marked 
increase in condition from the 1940s through the 
1960s although this may be a function of changes 
in sampling locations.  Both California stocks 
suggest a very slight increase in condition factor 
over time with sharp declines associated with the 
1982-83 and 1997-98 ENSO events.  Spratt (1987) 
has previously reported the strong negative effects 
of the 1982-83 El Niño on San Francisco Bay 
herring condition factor and growth. 
 
The growth increments at age for Pacific herring 
stocks are presented in Figures 34-36 and are 
perhaps the best indicator of growing conditions in 
the previous year in each area.  Togiak fish show 
the largest growth increment coastwide which 
includes a marked increase in the early 1990s 
followed by a recent decline.  PWS and Sitka 
stocks do not demonstrate any long term trends in 
growth increment although there are declines in 
the mid-1980s and late 1990s which may 
correspond to El Niño effects.  British Columbia 
stocks all show a decline in growth increment 
from the early 1970s through the late 1990s.  They 
all show a marked decrease in 1997 and some in 
the mid-1980s.  The California stocks do not 
indicate any clear trend in growth increment over 
time but both show the effects of the 1982-83 El 
Niño and SFB also the 1997-98 El Niño. 
 
The environmental indices are presented in Figure 
37 and demonstrate broadly similar patterns in 
winter PDO, AFI, and ALPI based on a lowess 
smoothed trend line.  The PCI may be inversely 
related to these indices but at a different frequency 
since they are not quite in phase.  The SOI index 
appears to be inversely related to the first three 
indices.  A comparison of these indices with 
herring weight at age 4, condition factor, and 
growth increment does not indicate any strong 
correlation but there is the suggestion of a loose 
association between the trend in PDO and weight 
at age 4, condition, and perhaps growth increment 
since 1970. 
 
Figure A9 from Hare and Mantua (2000) presents 
the available zooplankton data for the North 
Pacific and indicated a generally decreasing trend 
in zooplankton biomass since the 1977 regime 
shift (see Fig. A9 in their paper).  This observation 
is consistent with the observed declining trend in 
herring growth increment in British Columbia but 
surprisingly not in California.  It is also consistent 
with the trend of declining size at age 4 in British 
Columbia and parts of Alaska.  Although not 
explicit in the plankton data, it is possible that 
changes in species composition during El Niño 
events are responsible for the marked decline in 
growth observed during these time periods so that 
overall plankton biomass remains relatively stable 
but the preferred prey items for herring decline 
markedly or are completely absent from the 
normal feeding areas. 
 
Pacific herring populations in the eastern Pacific 
have experienced significant synchronous 
fluctuations in abundance that appear to be related 
to environmental forcing.  We examined 
biological characteristics associated with changes 
in growth as a proxy for herring survival over the 
available data record.  Results indicate a complex 
interaction between density dependent effects, 
food supply, and environmental variation.  During 
the collapse of herring stocks throughout the 
Pacific in the late 1960s growth of herring 
increased dramatically, declining again as stock 
rebuilt.  During the period from 1977 to present 
growth characteristics of many stocks in British 
Columbia and Alaska have shown a decline which 
is apparently a result of declining food availability.  
Plankton availability is most probably driven by 
changing environmental conditions that have at 
least recently not been favourable for herring 
growth in British Columbia and southern Alaska.  
Superimposed on these relationships are the recent 
strong ENSO episodes which have negatively 
impacted herring growth through the area of their 
effect.  Overall, there appear to be threshold 
effects related to population density, ocean 
production and plankton availability, and sea 
surface temperature mediated by ENSO that affect 
the growth parameters of herring populations 
throughout the North Pacific.  Future studies 
should be directed at defining the thresholds and 
their effects on long-term herring production. 
56
  
References 
 
Hare, S.R., and Mantua, N.J.  2000.  Empirical 
evidence for North Pacific regime shifts in 
1977 and 1989.  Prog. Oceanography 47: 103-
145. 
Spratt, J.D.  1987.  Variation in the growth rate of 
Pacific herring from San Francisco Bay, 
California. Calif. Fish and Game 73: 132-138. 
Tesch, F.W.  1988.  Age and Growth.  In  W.E. 
Ricker [ed.]  Methods of assessment of fish 
production in fresh waters’.  IBP Handbook 
No. 3. Blackwell Scientific Publications, 
Oxford, pp. 93-123. 
 
 
Implications of variation in euphausiid productivity for the growth, 
production and resilience of Pacific herring (Clupea pallasi) from the 
southwest coast of Vancouver Island 
 
Ron W. Tanasichuk  
Pacific Biological Station, 3190 Hammond Bay Road, Nanaimo, B.C. Canada.  V9R 5K6.  E-mail: 
tanasichukr@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
This presentation includes the results of a number 
of studies which collectively suggest that the 
recent order of magnitude reduction in euphausiid 
production along the southwest coast of 
Vancouver Island depressed the productivity and 
resilience of the West Coast Vancouver Island 
(WCVI) herring (Clupea pallasi) population.  
 
We have been studying the oceanography of the 
southwest coast of Vancouver Island since 1985 to 
learn how the ocean affects fish productivity there.  
Results of diet analyses show that euphausiids are 
the dominant prey of the more abundant pelagic 
fish species and that herring feed on them 
exclusively.  We have also been monitoring the 
species and size composition of prey.  Tanasichuk 
(1999) showed that Pacific hake (Merluccius 
productus), the dominant planktivore, selects 
larger (>17 mm) euphausiids of one species 
(Thysanoessa spinifera) regardless of how 
euphausiid biomass varies.  WCVI herring select 
the same prey.  Euphausiid population biology and 
productivity along the WCVI have been monitored 
since 1991 (Tanasichuk 1998).  Figure 38 shows 
that herring and hake prey biomass has varied by 
an order of magnitude over the last 10 years.  The 
same degree of prey variation has also occurred 
for coho salmon (Oncorhynchus kisutch). 
 
The effect on herring productivity and resilience 
appears to operate through influencing growth.  
Tanasichuk (1997) examined the effect of 
variations in year-class strength and 
oceanographic conditions on the size of recruit 
herring and the growth rates of adult fish.  At that 
time, data were available to 1996 only.  He 
suggested that the 1993 year-class was an outlier 
because this year-class was the first to be 
subjected to low T. spinifera biomass over its first 
three years of life.  All subsequent year-classes 
have been outliers, over a period when T. spinifera 
biomass remained depressed (Fig. 39).  This 
dataset suggests that the compensatory population-  
 
0
100
200
300
400
0
1000
2000
3000
Year
1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1998 1997 1999 2000
>17 mm
9-12 mm
Median T. spinifera biomass (mg dry mass
.
mg
-2
)
 
 
Fig. 38 Median biomass (mg dry mass/mg
2
) of 
key prey for Pacific herring and Pacific hake (>17 
mm  T. spinifera) and coho salmon (9-12 mm  T. 
spinifera) over the summer feeding period. 
 
57
  
170
180
190
200
93
Mean standard length (mm)
0 20000 40000 60000 80000 100000
70
80
90
100
94
Parental biomass (tonnes)
Mean total mass (g)
95
96
97
98
93
94
95
96
97
98 79
77
 
 
Fig. 39 Scatterplot of mean standard length- and total mass-at-age 3 for WCVI herring.  Error bars are 
95% confidence limits.  Plot labels indicate year-class. 
 
regulating mechanism of density-dependent recruit 
size has been disrupted by low euphausiid 
biomasses since 1993.  Tanasichuk (1997) 
concluded that adult growth rates were influenced 
mainly by size at the beginning of the growth 
period.  Because adult growth rates are affected 
mostly be initial size, the effect of low euphausiid 
biomass would persist over the entire life of the 
year-class.  It appears that mortality and size-
specific surplus energy allocation to ovarian 
production have not varied.  Tanasichuk (2000) 
reported that age-specific natural mortality rates of 
adult herring vary as a function of age alone.  
Unpublished results showed that there has been no 
inter-annual variability in mass-specific ripe 
ovarian mass.   
 
Growth suppression had a large effect on ovarian 
(=egg) production, and presumably resilience, that 
is the population’s potential to increase or sustain 
biomass through recruitment.  We calculated 
ovarian production for all ages for each year since 
1982, when Fisheries and Oceans Canada started 
measuring ovarian mass.  Annual estimates of 
observed mean mass-at-age were used to calculate 
ovarian production;  this includes the observed 
mass-at-age over the time when growth appeared 
to be suppressed.  “Non-suppressed” mass-at-age 
3 was then estimated using the regression in 
Tanasichuk (1997) which describes recruit mass as 
a function of parental biomass.  These estimates of 
recruit mass, and the regressions describing 
variations in adult growth rates in mass, were used 
to estimate what the mass of older fish of a year-
class should have been in subsequent years.  
Figure 40 shows the effect of small recruit size on 
growth in subsequent years.  Figure 41 
demonstrates the effect on reduced growth on 
ovarian production.  It would have been reduced 
by 20% as a consequence of growth suppression of 
recruit fish and its effect of subsequent adult size.  
However, after considering further that reduced 
egg production in 1996-98 could have reduced the 
number of spawners produced by these year-
58
  
classes, the suppression of reproduction could 
have become compounded.  Calculations showed 
that egg production would have consequently been 
reduced by 40%, presumably a 40% reduction in 
resilience, in other words a 40% reduction in 
potential recruitment. 
 
These results have implications for evaluating 
growth in herring and the concept of the pre-
cautionary approach.  Recruit size and subsequent 
adult growth are affected by year-class strength 
and food availability during the pre-recruit phase.  
We show an effect of food which complicates the 
interpretation of size-at-age trends.  The 
precautionary approach (target- and limit reference 
points) implicitly assumes that fish population 
productivity and the ability to re-build are constant 
over time.  These results show that assumption is 
invalid. 
 
References 
 
Tanasichuk, R. W.  1997.  Influence of biomass 
and ocean climate on the growth of Pacific 
herring (Clupea pallasi) from the southwest 
coast of Vancouver Island.  Can. J. Fish. 
Aquat. Sci. 54: 2782-2788. 
Tanasichuk, R. W.  1998.  Interannual variations 
in the population biology and productivity of 
the euphausiid Thysanoessa spinifera in 
Barkley Sound, Canada, with special reference 
to the 1992 and 1993 warm ocean years.  Mar. 
Ecol. Prog.  Ser. 173: 163-180. 
Tanasichuk, R. W.  1999.  Interannual variation in 
the availability of euphausiids as prey for 
Pacific hake (Merluccius productus) along the 
southwest coast of Vancouver Island.  Fish. 
Oceanogr.  8: 150-156. 
Tanasichuk, R. W.  2000.  Age-specific natural 
mortality rates of adult Pacific herring (Clupea 
pallasi) from southern British Columbia.  Can. 
J. Fish. Aquat. Sci.  57: 2258-2266. 
 
1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2001 2002
Year
50
100
150
50
100
150
50
100
150
50
100
150
200
1993
1994
1995
1996
2000
Mean total mass (g)
 
Fig. 40 Mass-at-age trajectories for WCVI 
herring.  Dotted line – observed.  Solid line - 
estimates from growth regressions in Tanasichuk 
(1997).  Error bars are 95% confidence limits.  
Year-class is indicated in the upper right of each 
panel. 
 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
Supressed/unsupressed ovarian production
1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002
Spawning Season
 
Fig. 41 Suppression of ovarian production due 
to growth (solid circle) and growth plus 
recruitment depression (open square). 
 
59
  
Changes in growth with fluctuation of chub mackerel abundance in the 
Pacific waters off central Japan from 1970 to 1997 
 
Chikako Watanabe
1
, Akihiko Yatsu¹ and Yoshiro Watanabe
2 
¹ National Research Institute of Fisheries Science, 2-12-4 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, Japan 
236-8648.  E-mail: falconer@nrifs.affrc.go.jp;  E-mail:  yatsua@affrc.go.jp 
² Ocean Research Institute, Tokyo University, 1-15-1Minamidai, Nakano-ku, Tokyo, Japan 164-8639.  
E-mail: ywatanab@ori.u-tokyo.ac.jp 
 
Introduction 
 
Changes in growth as stock size fluctuates have 
been found in many fish populations.  Size-at-age 
of Japanese sardine (Sardinops melanostictus) has 
varied remarkably with the stock fluctuations from 
the late 1970s to the early 1990s (Wada 1989, 
Hiyama 1989, Wada et al. 1995);  these have been 
considered to be density-dependent change in fish 
size. 
 
Chub mackerel (Scomber japonicus) are one of the 
most important fish populations in Japanese 
waters.  Two stocks are recognized, the Tsushima 
Current stock and the Pacific stock.  The Tsushima 
Current stock is distributed in the East China Sea 
and the Sea of Japan, and the Pacific stock occurs 
along the Pacific coast of Japan.  The biomass of 
the Pacific stock is larger and more variable than 
that of the Tsushima Current stock.  Most of the 
catch of the Pacific stock is from the purse seine 
fishery in the waters off central and northern 
Japan.  The Pacific stock spawns from March to 
June around the Izu islands off central Japan.  
Juveniles of about 6 months of age recruit to purse 
seine and set net fisheries from August or 
September in the coastal area off northeastern 
Japan. 
 
The landings of the Pacific stock increased from 
the 1960s, to a maximum of 1.5 million tons in 
1978, and then declined to 23 thousand tons in 
1990 (Fig. 42).  Recently, good year-classes 
occurred in 1992 and 1996 (Fig. 42), but most of 
these cohorts were exploited before first 
maturation, and therefore spawning stock did not 
recover and total biomass stayed low.  With the 
drastic stock level fluctuations, size-at-age and 
maturity-at-age of the Pacific stock changed 
(Iizuka 1974, Chiba 1995).  This study describes 
long-term changes in stock size and size-at-age of 
the Pacific chub mackerel stock and investigates 
the relationship between stock size and year-class 
abundance.  
 
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995
Total biomass and catch (×10
3
 ton)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Year-class strength (×10
8
 inds
Total biomass
Catch
Year- class
strength
 
Fig. 42 Total biomass, catch and year-class 
strength of the Pacific stock of chub mackerel 
(Scomber japonicus).  Total biomass and year-
class strength were estimated by VPA. 
 
Materials and methods 
 
Data.  Length composition and age-length keys for 
1970-1997 were used to calculate mean length-at-
age for each year.  The length composition data of 
purse seine catches from September to December 
were used because total catches in these months 
were usually largest during the year.  Scales were 
used for age determination.  Length compositions 
of fish samples were applied to length 
compositions of total catches.  Length 
compositions of total catches were divided into 
age groups from 0 (6 months old) to 5 years based 
on age-length keys.  Mean fork length was 
calculated from length compositions of total 
catches for each age.  Total biomass was 
represented by sum of VPA (virtual populations 
analysis) estimated biomass of chub mackerel 
from age 0 to age 6+.  Year-class strength was 
represented by abundance in number at age 0.  
60
  
Statistical analysis.  ANOVA was used to 
determine if the mean length-at-ages 0 to 5 were 
significantly different among years.  Regression 
analysis was applied to examine the relationships 
between mean length-at-age and total biomass and 
year-class strength. 
 
Result and discussion 
 
Mean length-at-age fluctuated greatly, especially 
at age 0 and 1, ranging from 164-259 mm at age 0 
and 242-316 mm at age 1.  While the biomass of 
chub mackerel decreased from the 1970s to the 
1990s, mean lengths-at-age increased.  Figure 43 
shows the relationship between the total biomass 
and the mean length at age 0 among years.  
Regression analyses indicated significant negative 
relationships between the total biomass and the 
mean fork length-at-age of a year (Table 8, 
p<0.05).  The biomass variations explained 19-
36% of the inter-annual fluctuation of length-at-
age. 
 
Figure 44 demonstrates the relationship between 
the year-class strength and the mean length-at-age 
0.  Mean length-at-age of each year-class was 
negatively correlated with the year-class strength 
(Table 9, p<0.01).  The variability in year-class 
strength explained 25-63% of the fluctuation of 
length-at-age. 
 
The deviations of the mean fork length of a year-
class from the mean of the 28-year time series 
(1970 to 1997) were calculated for several ages.  
Figure 45 shows the relationships between 
deviation at age 0 versus deviation at age 1 and the 
deviation at age 0 versus deviation at age 4.  
Regression analysis suggested significantly  
 
positive relationships between deviations at age 0 
and ages 1 to 5, and between the deviations at age 
1 and ages 2 to 5 (Table 10), indicating that the 
trend of length-at-age 0 is consistent through the 
life time (until 5 years old). 
 
150
200
250
- 1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000 6,000
Total biomass (×10
3 
ton j
Mean length of age 0 (mm
R
2 
= 0.36
p < 0.001
 
 
Fig. 43 Relationship between the total biomass 
and the length at age 0 of Scomber japonicus. 
 
150
200
250
- 50 100 150
Year-class strength(×10
8  
inds j
Mean length of age 0  (mm
R
2 
= 0.35
p < 0.001
 
 
Fig. 44 Relationship between the year-class 
strength and the length-at-age 0 of Scomber 
japonicus. 
 
Table 8 Statistics from regression of mean 
length-at-age of chub mackerel vs. biomass. 
 
age df R R² p 
0 27 -0.60 0.36 0.001 
1 27 -0.48 0.23 0.010 
2 27 -0.53 0.28 0.004 
3 27 -0.44 0.19 0.019 
4 26 -0.47 0.22 0.013 
5 26 -0.45 0.20 0.018 
Table 9 Statistics from regression of mean 
length-at-age of each year-class vs. recruitment. 
 
age df R R² p 
0 27 -0.59 0.35 0.001 
1 27 -0.47 0.25 0.007 
2 26 -0.60 0.34 0.001 
3 25 -0.67 0.46 0.000 
4 24 -0.80 0.63 0.000 
5 23 -0.67 0.48 0.000 
61
  
0 vs 4
R
2
 = 0. 54
-50
0
50
-50 0 50
0 vs 1
R
2
 = 0. 51
-50
0
50
-50 0 50
 
Fig. 45 Relationships between the annual mean length deviation at age 0 and age 1 (left), and between 
the annual mean length deviation at age 0 and age 4 (right). 
 
Table 10 Statistics from regressions of annual 
mean length deviations at age 0 versus age 1 to 5 
and deviations at age 1 versus age 2 to 5. 
 
age R R² p 
0      1 0.71 0.52 0.001 
2 0.54 030 0.003 
3 0.54 0.29 0.005 
4 0.73 0.54 0.000 
5 0.53 0.28 0.009 
1      2 0.67 0.44 0.000 
3 0.54 0.29 0.005 
4 0.71 0.50 0.000 
5 0.54 0.29 0.007 
 
Our data confirmed that the trend in length of a 
year-class was determined during the first summer 
of life and maintained throughout the life span.  
These results are in agreement with Iizuka (1974), 
who reported on the growth of 1963-1973 year-
classes of the Pacific stock of chub mackerel and 
found that the trend of growth at age 0 was 
maintained at least until age 2.  
 
In this study, we investigated the effect of 
mackerel biomass and/or year-class strength on the 
mean length-at-age.  Year-class strength 
significantly affected size-at-age of chub 
mackerel, but it only explained 25-63% of the 
fluctuations in the mean length-at-age.  Other 
factors such as abiotic and/or biotic environment, 
sardine and spotted mackerel stocks may also 
influence the growth of chub mackerel. 
 
References 
 
Chiba. 1995. Shizuoka, Kanagawa Prefectural 
Fisheries Research Stations, Tokyo. 
Hiyama, Y.  1998.  Ecological changes in adults.  
4. Migration range and growth rate in the 
Tsushima Current area. In Y. Watanabe and T. 
Wada [eds].  Stock fluctuations and ecological 
changes of the Japanese sardine. Tokyo, pp. 
35-44. 
Iizuka, K.  1974.  The ecology of young mackerel 
in the north-eastern Sea of Japan:  Estimation 
of the population size of the 0-age group and 
the tendencies of growth patterns on 0-age 
groups.  Bull. Tohoku Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 34: 
1-16. 
Overholts, W.J.  1989.  Density-dependent growth 
in the Northwest Atlantic stock of Atlantic 
mackerel (Scomber scomburus).  J. Northw. 
Atl. Fish. Sci. 9: 115-121. 
Wada, T., Matsubara, Y., Matsumiya, Y., and 
Koizumi, N.  1995.  Influence of environment 
on stock fluctuations of Japanese sardine, 
Sardinops melanostictus.  Can. Spec. Publ. 
Fish. Aquat. Sci. 121: 387-394. 
Wada, T.  1998.  3. Migration range and growth 
rate in the Oyashio area.  In Y. Watanabe and 
T. Wada [eds].  Stock fluctuations and 
ecological changes of the Japanese sardine. 
Tokyo, pp. 27-34. 
62
  
Inter-decadal fluctuations in length-at-age of Hokkaido-Sakhalin herring and 
Japanese sardine in the Sea of Japan 
 
Yoshiro Watanabe
1
, Yoshiaki Hiyama
2
, Chikako Watanabe
3
 and ShiroTakayana
4 
1
 Ocean Research Institute, Tokyo University, 1-15-1Minamidai, Nakano-ku, Tokyo, Japan 164-8639.  
E-mail: ywatanab@ori.u-tokyo.ac.jp 
2
 Seikai National Fisheries Research Institute, Nagasaki 850-0951, Japan.  
3
 National Research Institute of Fisheries Science, 2-12-4 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, Japan 
236-8648.  E-mail: falconer@nrifs.affrc.go.jp 
4
 Hokkaido Prefectural Fisheries Experimental Station, Yoichi 012-3876, Japan.  
 
Introduction 
 
The total catch of Hokkaido spring herring 
(Clupea pallasii) in Japan peaked at 972 thousand 
tons in 1897 and tended to decline thereafter with 
steep peaks and deep troughs (Fig. 46).  Spawning 
occurred from February to May along the coasts of 
northern Japan and southern Sakhalin, within the 
Sea of Japan and partly in the Sea of Okhotsk.  
With the decline of the population, spawning 
retreated to the north and finally disappeared from 
the coasts of Hokkaido in the middle 1950s 
(Morita 1985).  After that the catches were from 
the local populations distributed in the coastal 
waters off northern Japan. 
 
The Tsushima Current subpopulation of Japanese 
sardine (Sardinops melanostictus) in the East 
China Sea and the Sea of Japan experienced a 
peak in the late 1980s, similar to the Pacific 
subpopulation of these species (Watanabe et al. 
1995).  Total catch of the subpopulation first 
exceeded 1 million tons in 1984, maintained at this 
level until 1992, then rapidly declined to 33 
thousand tons in 1998 (Fig. 47). 
 
Size-at-age of these two clupeid fishes varied 
through the years of the large population 
fluctuations.  In this paper we describe inter-
decadal variability in size-at-age of both species 
and examine correlations between size-at-age and 
population size. 
 
Materials and methods 
 
Hokkaido spring herring mature at age 3 and start 
migrating to the spawning grounds along the west 
coast of Hokkaido (Hanamura 1963).  Ages of 
about 4000 individual fishes per year caught in 
this area were determined from scales after 1910.  
Mean total length-at-age (TL) was calculated 
based on number of fish by ages and by 5 mm TL 
intervals (Kitahama, 1955).  Time series of catch-
at-age 3 and older fish from 1910-1960 reported 
by Hanamura (1963).  We used this data for 
estimating total number of fish at age 3 and older 
from 1910-1950 by VPA (virtual population 
analysis).  
 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000
Catch (ton 10
3
)
 
Fig. 46 Total catch of Hokkaido spring herring 
(Clupea pallasii) in Japan.  Data for 1887-1911 
are from Hanamura (1963);  after 1911 - from 
Catch Statistics. 
 
0
500
1000
1500
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
Catch (10
3
 ton)
 
Fig. 47 Total catch of the Tsushima Current 
subpopulation of Japanese sardine (Sardinops 
melanostictus) from 1978-1998. 
63
  
Data on catch-at-age and size-at-age of Japanese 
sardine caught by the Japanese purse seine fishery 
in the East China Sea and the Sea of Japan have 
been compiled since 1978.  Total numbers of fish-
at-age were estimated each year by VPA. 
 
Results  
 
Clupea pallasii.  VPA estimates of spawner 
abundance (>3 years) of Hokkaido spring herring 
fluctuated greatly with a maximum of 19.6 billion 
fishes in 1924 and minimum of 0.4 billion in 1937. 
Total catch in number ranged from 3.0-0.04 billion 
fishes.  The exploitation rate was estimated to be 
<30% with exceptions in the middle 1930s and the 
late 1940-early 1950s.  Year-class population at 
age 4 varied greatly from 1907-1947 (Fig. 48).  
Dominant year-classes (>5.0 billion in number at 
age 4) occurred 6 times in 1909, 1911, 1915, 1921, 
1926 and 1939.  The maximum was 9.9 billion 
fishes in 1921, and minimum was 0.029 billion in 
1933, about a 2.5 order of magnitude difference. 
 
We calculated deviations (%) of the mean TL at 
age 3 year and older for each year-class from the 
40-year mean (Fig. 49).  The coefficients of 
determination (R
2
) are summarized in Table 11.  
The deviations-at-age are positively correlated.  
The coefficients between age 3 vs 5 and 3 vs 7 
were small compared with those between age 4 vs 
6 or 4 vs 8.  Correlations of 4 year and older ages 
with age 3 were not statistically significant, but 
those of 5 year and older ages with age 4 were 
highly significant.  This implies that the TL trends 
of year-classes were fixed by age 4 at the latest.  
The mean TL at age 3 did not represent TL trend 
of a year-class.  Total catches in number at age 3  
 
accounted for about 60% of those at age 4 in the 
40 year-classes.  Only a limited proportion of age 
3 fish migrated to the coastal spawning grounds. 
 
0.0
3.0
6.0
9.0
1907
1912
1917
1922
1927
1932
1937
1942
Yearclass
Population (N 10
9
)
 
Fig. 48 Variability in year-class population at 
age 4 of Hokkaido spring herring.  
 
age 3 vs 5
R
2
=0.232
-10
0
10
-20 0 20
age 4 vs 6
R
2
=0.427
-10
0
10
-10 0 10
age 4 vs 8
R
2
=0.495
-10
0
10
-10 0 10
age 3 vs 7
R
2
=0.111
-10
0
10
-20 0 20 7
 
Fig. 49 Correlations of deviations (from the 40-
year mean) of the mean TL-at-age in each year-
class of Hokkaido spring herring. 
 
 
Table 11 Coefficients of determination of TL deviations from the 40-year mean across ages (* P<0.01, 
** P<0.001). 
 
 Age 4 Age 5 Age 6 Age 7 Age 8 Age 9 
Age 3 0.323 0.232 0.127 0.111 0.103 0.068 
Age 4  **0.747 **0.427 **0.465 **0.495 **0.531 
Age 5   **0.573 **0.431 **0.573 **0.533 
Age 6    **0.509 **0.559 *0.505 
Age 7     **0.601 *0.457 
 
64
  
TL-at-age 4 varied from 25.5 in 1925 to 30.3 in 
1944 with the average of 28.2±1.0 cm (Fig. 50).  
TL was not necessarily smaller than the long-term 
mean for the 6 dominant year-classes.  It tended to 
be larger than the mean in the early 1910s, smaller 
in the 1920s, and recovered in the early 1930s.  A 
similar TL trend was found at age 5 (40 year mean 
was 30.0 cm). 
 
TL-at-age 4 was not correlated with the year-class 
size in number at age 4.  The coefficient of 
determination was 0.068, indicating that only a 
small amount of the TL variability was explained 
by year-class strength (Fig. 51). 
 
TL-at-age 4 was correlated significantly (P < 0.05) 
with the mean spawning population in years when 
a given year-class was at age 1 to 4.  About 17% 
of the inter-annual variability in the mean TL of 
year-classes at age 4 could be explained by the 
size of the spawning population (R
2
=0.165).  The 
variability in size-at-age of the herring inhabiting 
the Sea of Japan and Sea of Okhotsk is considered 
to be determined in a density independent manner. 
 
Sardinops melanostictus.  For Japanese sardine, 
year-class abundance at age 2 varied greatly 
during the 20 year study from 1976-1996 (Fig. 
52).  The population was <20 billion fishes in the 
1970s.  Strong year-classes (>30 billion) occurred 
consecutively in 1980-82 and 1984-87.  
Abundance reduced dramatically in 1988 year-
class and further declined to 1995.  The maximum 
and minimum year-class strengths were 77.3 and 
1.4 billion in number at age 2, about a 1.7 order of 
magnitude difference.  Strong year-classes >50 
billion occurred consecutively in the 1980s.  
Deviations (%) of the mean TL at age 3 of year-
classes from the 20-year mean were correlated 
with those at age 2, but not with age 1 (Fig. 53).  
The inter-annual trend in TL-at-age of each were 
fixed by age 2 at the latest in sardine.  Age 1 
sardines of the Tsushima Current subpopulation 
are not fully recruited to the Japanese purse seine 
fishery and do not represent size-at-age or strength 
of the year-classes. 
 
Body length (BL) at age 2 of the sardine was >180 
mm in the 1970s.  It remarkably declined to 169 
mm in 1980 and remained smaller than 170 mm 
until 1988.  Then BL recovered to the 1970s level 
of around 180 mm (Fig. 54).  Similar BL trend 
was found in size-at-age 3.  The interannual 
fluctuation in BL corresponded inversely with the 
fluctuation in year-class size (Fig. 54). 
 
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
1907
1912
1917
1922
1927
1932
1937
1942
Yearclass
TL (cm)
 
 
Fig. 50 Inter-decadal variations in TL-at-age 4 
and age 5 of Hokkaido spring herring.  
 
y = -0.102x + 28.5
R
2
 = 0.0683
24
26
28
30
32
0.0 3.0 6.0 9.0
Population (N 10
9
)
Mean TL (cm)
 
 
Fig. 51 Relationship between TL and year-
classes size at age 4 of Hokkaido spring herring. 
 
0
30
60
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
Yearclass
Population (N 10
9
)
 
 
Fig. 52 Variability in year-class population at 
age 4 of Japanese sardine. 
 
65
  
age 1 vs 2
R
2
 = 0.125
-10
0
10
-20 0 20
age 1 vs 3
R
2
 = 0.0646
-12
0
12
-20 0 20
age 2 vs 3
R
2
 = 0.761
-10
0
10
-10 10
age 2 vs 4
R
2
 = 0.742
-10
0
10
-10 10
 
 
Fig. 53 Correlations of deviations from long 
term mean TL (20 years) among year-classes of 
Japanese sardine, by age. 
 
150
170
190
1975
1977
1979
1981
1983
1985
1987
1989
1991
1993
1995
Yearclass
BL (mm)
 
 
Fig. 54 Inter-decadal variations of BL-at-age 2 
and 3 of Japanese sardine. 
 
BL-at-age 2 was significantly (P<0.001) correlated 
with the year-class size in number at age 2 (Fig. 
55).  The coefficient of determination indicated 
that 60% of the BL variability can be explained by 
year-class strength.  BL-at-age 2 was significantly 
(P<0.001) correlated with the total population at 
age 2.  The coefficient of determination was 0.587.  
The variability in BL-at-age of the sardine 
inhabiting in the temperate Sea of Japan and the 
East China Sea is considered to be determined in a 
density-dependent manner.  
y = -0.302x + 181
R
2
 = 0.600
140
160
180
03 06 0
Population (N 10
9
)
Mean BL (mm)
 
 
Fig. 55 Correlation of the mean BL with 
population of year-classes at age 2 of Japanese 
sardine. 
 
Discussion 
 
The fluctuations in year-class strengths were 
greater in the herring (2.5 orders) than in the 
sardine (1.7 orders) during the years studied.  This 
may be related to the differences in the magnitude 
of inter-annual variability of ocean environment 
between the subarctic and temperate waters. 
 
Size-at-age of herring and sardine varied about ±4 
or 5% in the years studied. Growth of sardine up 
to 2 years old is considered to be largely 
determined through density-dependent processes 
such as competition for food, while that of the 
herring up to 4 years old was independent from the 
density of the population. Two factors may be 
responsible for the difference in the growth 
determining processes in herring and sardine.  
 
The maximum year-class strength of the Tsushima 
Current subpopulation of the sardine was as large 
as 77.3 billion in 1987. The total population 
reached 370 billion in 1987. In the Hokkaido 
spring herring, the maximum year-class was 9.8 
billion in 1921 and the total spawning population 
reached 19.6 billion in 1924. The population size 
of sardine was more than 10 times larger than 
herring. Comparison in migration ranges of 
sardine in the East China Sea and the Sea of Japan 
and of herring in the Sea of Japan and the Sea of 
Okhotsk are required, but the large population size 
of sardine seems to be a potential factor of 
density-dependent determination of size-at-age. 
66
  
Another potential factor is the difference in 
biological productivity between the temperate and 
subarctic waters in the Sea of Japan and the Sea of 
Okhotsk. The Tsushima Current is derived from 
the warm Kuroshio Current and its productivity is 
considered to be lower than subarctic waters 
inhabited by the herring. Carrying capacity of the 
subarctic waters in the Sea of Japan and the Sea of 
Okhotsk may be sufficiently greater than the total 
food requirement of the herring population and 
competition for food may not be realized in these 
waters.  
 
References 
 
Hanamura, N.  1963.  A study on the method of 
prediction of the Hokkaido spring herring 
resources.  Bull Hokkaido Reg. Fish. Res. 
Lab. 26: 1-66. 
Kitahama, H.  1955.  Data on the total length 
compositions of Hokkaido spring herring.  
Hokkaido Pref. Fish. Exp. Stn., Yoichi, pp 46. 
Morita, S.  1985.  History of the herring fishery 
and review of artificial propagation techniques 
for herring in Japan.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 
42 (Suppl 1): 222-229. 
Watanabe, Y., Zenitani, H., and Kimura, R.  1995.  
Population decline of the Japanese sardine 
Sardinops melanostictus owing to recruitment 
failures.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 52: 1609-
1616.
 
 
Long-term variability in length of walleye pollock in the western Bering Sea 
and east Kamchatka 
 
Pavel A. Balykin and Alexander V. Buslov 
Kamchatka Fisheries and Oceanography Research Institute (KamchatNIRO), 18 Naberezhnaya Street, 
Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky, Russia  683600.  E-mail:  kamniro@mail.kamchatka.ru 
 
The mean body length of walleye pollock 
yearlings from the western Bering Sea increases 
when the area of the ice cover is reduced.  The 
average length of 2 to 6-year-old walleye pollock 
varies in relation to the dynamics of total stock 
biomass and environment.  The biomass of 
walleye pollock is lower when the area of ice 
cover in the Bering Sea exceeds 700,000 km
2
.  
When the area of ice cover is reduced, the total 
stock abundance of walleye pollock increases and 
the average length of 2 to 6-year-old fish 
decreases.  A reliable relationship has been 
observed between condition factor and the growth 
of fish, indicating that the growth of walleye 
pollock is dependent on the forage base.  Currently 
the biomass of walleye pollock in the western 
Bering Sea is very poor, therefore the growth in 
length is not dependent on the environment and 
total stock biomass. 
 
The average length of 2 to 6-year-old walleye 
pollock in the Pacific Ocean waters adjacent to 
Kamchatka has changed in relation to the biomass 
of total stock and the abundance of generations.  
When the biomass has been high, the growth has 
been slow and vice versa.  The environmental 
factors do not affect the growth of walleye pollock 
to the east of Kamchatka. 
 
2
2,1
2,2
2,3
2,4
2,5
12
12,5
13
1
5
4
5
6
7
8
1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989
2
3
4
 
Fig. 56 Variation of natural logarithms of 
average length of walleye pollock yearlings (1), 
walleye pollock (2), Pacific herring (3), 
mesoplankton biomass (4), and area of ice cover 
(5) in the western Bering Sea. 
67
  
Figure 56 shows changes in the length of walleye 
pollock yearlings, the biomass of mesoplankton 
and ice cover in the Bering Sea for the period from 
1973-1990.  The reduction of the ice cover area in 
the Bering Sea leads to the growth of total stock 
and an increase in average length of fish (Fig. 57). 
 
Comparison of 2 to 6-year-old walleye pollock 
from the western Bering Sea and eastern 
Kamchatka waters indicates that variability in  
 
 
0
1000
2000
3000
542 590 660 701 728
Ice cover, x1000 km
2
Biomass, x1000 t
34
35
36
37
38
Length, cm
1
2
 
Fig. 57 Relationship between total biomass of 
walleye pollock (bars) and length of 4-year-old 
fish (dots) and ice conditions. 
 
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
1978 1981 1984 1987 1990 1993 1996 1999
6
5
4
3
2
A
 
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
1973 1976 1979 1982 1985 1988 1991 1994 1997 2000
2
3
4
5
6
B
 
Fig. 58 Long-term dynamics of average length 
of 2 to 6-year-old walleye pollock:  (A) western 
Bering Sea and (B) eastern Kamchatka. 
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996
0,5
0,6
0,7
0,8
1
2
deviation
 
 
Fig. 59 Long-term dynamics of (1) average 
condition factor in 3 to 6-year-old walleye pollock 
and (2) averaged deviations in length from the 
long-term mean of these age groups. 
 
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
1973 1976 1979 1982 1985 1988 1991 1994 1997 2000
35
37
39
41
43
45
47
49
1
2
3
Biomass, x1000 tons
Lenght, cm
 
 
Fig. 60 Long-term dynamics of total biomass of 
east Kamchatka walleye pollock (1), average 
length of 6-year-old fish (2) and average length of 
5-year-old fish (3). 
 
-0,05
-0,04
-0,03
-0,02
-0,01
0
0,01
0,02
0,03
0,04
66 , 577 , 588 , 59
Deviation*
Ln of abundance of generation in 2 years-old fish 
 
 
Fig. 61 Relationship between generation 
growth rate and abundance in the periods of high 
and intermediate stock abundance of the east 
Kamchatka walleye pollock, shown as the 
deviation from the average specific growth rate.  
68
  
body length among nearby age groups is similar 
(Fig. 58).  For the period 1980-1997, the condition 
factor is related to linear growth of fish (Fig. 59).  
For the east Kamchatka stock, changes in growth 
of 5-6-year-old walleye pollock are inversely 
related to the total biomass of species (Fig. 60).  
For the periods of high and intermediate stocks the 
growth rate of the east Kamchatka walleye pollock 
depends inversely on cohort abundance (Fig. 61). 
 
 
Effect of population abundance increase on herring distribution in the 
western Bering Sea 
 
Alexander A. Bonk 
Kamchatka Fisheries and Oceanography Research Institute (KamchatNIRO), 18 Naberezhnaya Street, 
Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky, Russia.  683600.  E-mail:  kamniro@mail.kamchatka.ru 
 
The last two decades have been important for the 
development of the Korf-Karaginsky Pacific 
herring population.  After a long period of low 
abundance in the 1980s, the population has been 
growing dynamically since 1990, reaching a 
maximum in 1997, and then started to decline 
again (Fig. 62). 
 
The annual distribution and migratory behavior of 
the Pacific herring during are determined by 
hydrology and the stock abundance fluctuations.  
The time period and the distance of the Pacific 
herring feeding migration are now significantly 
different from those when stock abundance was 
low. 
 
During periods of low abundance, the feeding 
migration of the mature part of the stock occurred 
in Anastasiya and Dezhneva bays (Fig. 63A).  
Herring returned to Olytorsky Bay for winter 
before October 10
th
.  This period was 
characterized by relatively stable conditions 
providing sufficient feeding for the Korf-
Karaginsky herring.  From the 1980s until the 
mid-1990s positive changes were observed in the 
Bering Sea.  These included:  1) warming of the 
upper 200 m which resulted in an increase of the 
forage zooplankton abundance, and 2) decrease in 
the stock abundance of walleye pollock, the 
nearest competitor of herring for food.  Thus 
during the 1980s and early 1990s, when the 
herring abundance was low, the feeding conditions 
for the Pacific herring became favorable.  In 1993, 
conditions were optimal for the production of an 
abundant generation (Fig. 64).  In 1997, the  
 
 
Fig. 62 The stock abundance dynamics of the 
Korf-Karaginsky herring in the western Bering 
Sea. 
 
 
Fig. 63 The Korf-Kagarinsky herring 
distribution during the feeding migration:  (A) low 
stock abundance and (B) high abundance. 
69
  
4+ generation was the only one that recruited to 
the commercial fishery;  in the last 40 years, it had 
the highest abundance and biomass, 4,230x10
6
 
fishes or 1,240x10
3
 tons, respectively (Fig. 62). 
 
 
Fig. 64 Year-class abundance of age 4+ 
generations of the Korf-Kagarinsky herring in the 
western Bering Sea by brood year. 
 
The increase in abundance of the fishery-size 
individuals in the Korf-Karaginsky herring 
population took place simultaneously with water 
cooling in the region.  The indicators of that were:  
(1) a general decrease in the mixed water layer 
thermal capacity, and (2) extension of the ice 
cover in the Bering Sea since 1998.  Cold water 
masses dominated on the shelf, providing poor 
conditions for the forage base.  High abundance of 
the Korf-Karaginsky herring and poor food supply 
caused intensification of intra-specific competition 
for food.  Unable to completely fulfil their food 
requirements, herring had to enlarge the area of 
feeding. 
 
In 1998-2000, herring used marine bathypelagial 
in the Olytorsky-Navarinsky zone instead of the 
shelf zone for feeding until mid-October.  In 
August and September, the echosounder tracks of 
herring shoals were discovered at the depth of 
340-400 m.  At the same time, local shoals of 
feeding herring were found in the eastern part of 
Olytorsky Bay (Fig. 63B).  From the second half 
of October, fish shoals were distributed at depths 
of 80-150 m, on both sides of Olytorsky Cape 
(Fig. 65), however, these shoals were not stable.  
Herring migrated actively westward in small 
shoals, along the edge of the warmer and more 
saline Pacific waters, where trophic activity was 
high.  During the daytime fish were distributed 
near the bottom, and at night they created thick 
shoals in the water column. 
 
 
Fig. 65 Distribution of the Korf-Kagarinsky 
herring in the western Bering Sea, in October-
November. 
 
 
Fig. 66 The area of wintering of the the Korf-
Kagarinsky herring in the western Bering Sea. 
 
The transformation from summer to winter 
conditions in Olyorsky Bay has been normally 
completed in November.  This transformation 
results in the quick cooling of the offshore waters.  
In 1998-2000, stable, favorable temperature 
conditions in November occurred at depths of 150-
200 m, in the central and western parts of the bay.  
Therefore, the herring stocks formed at these 
depths.  Their behavior at that time was similar to 
70
  
their behavior in October.  Following the arrival of 
cold water, herring migrated westward, forming 
non-mobile stocks at the depth of 180-250 m 
between the Cape of Goven and the Cape of 
Golenischev in December (Fig. 66). 
 
Since 1993, there has been no single abundant 
cohort produced by the population.  Due to natural 
mortality, and fishing, the stock abundance of the 
Korf-Karaginsky herring has decreased.  
Moreover, at the present time, hydrological 
conditions can hardly provide the required 
biomass of forage zooplankton.  This should 
prolong the feeding period until mid October and 
expand the feeding area. 
 
 
Survival of yellowfin sole (Limanda aspera Pallas) in the northern part of the 
Tatar Strait (Sea of Japan) during the second half of the 20
th
 century 
 
Sergey N. Tarasyuk  
Sakhalin Research Institute of Fisheries and Oceanography, 196 Komsomolskaya Street, Yuzhno-
Sakhalinsk, Russia 693023.  E-mail:  taras@sakhniro.ru 
 
The northern part of the Tatar Strait is one of the 
traditional areas where yellowfin sole (Limanda 
aspera Pallas) dominate, averaging 60% of 
flounder abundance.  The commercial fishery of 
flounder stocks began in 1943.  In 1944, their 
catch reached the historical maximum – 10.1 
thousand tons, but during the following year it 
reduced up to 7.4 thousand tons, and a catch per 
unit of effort (CPUE) decreased almost 2 times.  
Since 1945, the fishery ceased and until the 
beginning of the 1950s, the flounder catch did not 
exceed 0.1 – 1.0 thousand tons a year.  Regular 
scientific research on this species was not 
conducted until 1956.  Nevertheless, the data 
collected on the size composition of flounder 
catches during 1946, and some similar data since 
1956, indicated overfishing in the mid-1940s 
(Tarasyuk, 1994A).  After the 1950s, catch varied 
from 5.45 thousand tons in 1955 to 0.35 thousand 
tons in 1979.  In the last ten years of the century, 
the catch constituted 0.4 – 2.0 thousand tons per 
year.   
 
Age structure of the yellowfin sole population is 
characterized by an extended age distribution.  
Fish at age 4 to 18 occur in catches.  Age-7 
yellowfin sole are usually a modal age group, as 
their average long-term age value is 8.8.  Body 
weights of yellowfin sole change according to the 
equation of allometric growth.  A coefficient of 
allometry exponent in the equation is 3.1315, and 
the scale coefficient is 0.0073 when body weight 
is measured in grams and length (AC) in cm.  
Yellowfin sole from the shelf zone of western 
Sakhalin cease annual increments at age 8-9+.  
The instantaneous natural mortality rates vary by 
age decreasing from 0.22 to 0.12 beginning in age-
4 to age-6-8 individuals, respectively, and then 
gradually increasing to 0.60 at age 15.  The broods 
become fully available to the fishery beginning at  
age 8.  
 
Methods 
 
Data on the age structure of catches, annual 
catches, catch per unit of effort, natural mortality 
by age, rate of maturation, and average body 
weight by age during the period of 1956-2000 
were processed using a method of virtual 
populations (VPA), with the help of program 
developed at the Fishery Laboratory Lowestoft 
(Darby and Flatman 1994).  The Louric-Shepherd 
method was used for adjusting fishing mortality 
coefficients (Pope and Shepherd 1985).   
 
Further processing of VPA results was done to 
reveal the causes determining brood year 
abundances.  The abundance estimates of broods 
at age 4 were used as the index of recruitment.  A 
cohort survival rate at age 4 was estimated as a 
quotient between the number of age 4 fish 
obtained from the VPA method, and the number at 
age 0.  The spawning stock was calculated as the 
total number of the age groups taking into account 
the rate of maturation, less a year catch, since the 
fishery in this region is the most intensive before 
71
  
the beginning of spawning.  The number at age 0, 
or a start number of generation was determined 
from the number of spawners in the year of 
reproduction, considering the fecundity and age, 
and assuming under equal sex ratio from the 
catches.   
 
Results 
 
The biomass of the commercial part of the stock 
calculated by VPA changed significantly during 
the period of observation.  In 1956, it constituted 
13.9 thousand tons, reduced to the minimum 2.8 – 
3.1 thousand tons in 1971 – 1975, and then began 
to increase to the maximum 19.2 thousand tons in 
1991 – 1992.  At the end of the century yellowfin 
sole stock reduced a little (Fig. 67).  The 
commercial stock varied by 6.9 from 1956-2000.  
Spawning stock also varied within the wide limits:  
from the minimum 11.7 million fish in 1970 to 
68.8 million fish in 1996, a factor of 5.8.  The 
cohort size at age 4 varied from 6.09 million to 
30.62 million fish in the 1962 and 1989 brood 
years, respectively, a factor of 5.0. 
 
A potential population fecundity or cohort strength 
at age 0 varied from 4.0 to 25.4 trillion eggs 
according to changes in spawning stock and its age 
structure.  Survival from age 0 to 4 averaged one 
individual from 3,000 eggs.  This index ranged 
widely, up to 7.5. 
 
Figure 68 shows the stock recruitment relationship 
and the estimated Ricker’s model.  A correlation 
coefficient with the amount of spawning stock was 
significant (0.79, p<0.05) for abundance of broods.  
The portion of the explained dispersion after 
calculating the coefficients of non-linear 
regression for the Ricker’s model was 63.08%.  
 
The survival rate for generations was well-
correlated with the numbers of age group 0;  the 
correlation coefficient was  0.61 (p < 0.05).  Use 
of the equation of exponential growth 
approximated the relationship between those 
indices, with 37.16% dispersion explained.  Based 
on the estimated curve, survival practically does 
not change at the initial number of brood more 
than 7 million individuals, and keeps at a stable 
level providing a minimum survival for 
population.  Reduction in the number of eggs laid 
brings about a sharp increase in survival, varying 
about twofold (Fig. 69).  This suggests a density 
dependent mortality. 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
1956 1961 1966 1971 1976 1981 1986 1991 1996
Years of generation
Stock biomass, thou.  tones
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Number of  age-4, millions
Stock biomass
Number of age-4
 
Fig. 67 Dynamics of biomass of the spawning 
stock and number of broods at age 4 from this 
stock generation for the Tatar Strait yellowfin sole 
population. 
 
Model: Ricker model
y=x*exp((0.001671564)*(1-x/(0.1107065)))
 Spawning stock number (millions) 
Recruitment (millions)
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
32
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65
 
Fig. 68 Ricker’s “stock-recruitment” model fit 
to the 1956-1992 observed data. 
 
Model: Exponential growth 
y=14.83736+exp(7.389005+(-1.182823)*x)
Number of 0-age group, trillions
Survival rate, *10^-6
6
10
14
18
22
26
30
34
4681 01 21 41 61 82 02 2
 
Fig. 69 Exponential model of the relation 
between survival rate and number of broods at age 
0. 
 
72
  
-0,6
-0,4
-0,2
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1956
1959
1962
1965
1968
1971
1974
1977
1980
1983
1986
1989
1992
Years
Residuals 
 
Fig. 70 Dynamics of standardized residuals of 
the survival rate regression by the birth years of 
broods. 
 
The observed deviations from the exponential 
growth curve have causes other than the initial 
density of a population.  The standardized 
residuals indicated a maximum of survival appears 
from 1974 to 1984, and low survival from the mid-
1950s through the mid-1960s, 1985 through 1992 
is characterized as slightly less than average. 
 
A temporal series of the regression residuals on 
fish density demonstrates the potential climatic 
causes affecting a survival.  According to the data 
of coastal hydrometeorological stations (Kholmsk 
GMS), a maximum heating of the surface water in 
the northern part of the Sea of Japan occurred in 
the early to mid 1970s, whereas the 1980s were 
characterized as cold years.  Nevertheless, 
temperature conditions in the coastal zone may 
non-adequately characterize biota during early 
stages of the yellowfin sole ontogenesis when a 
brood abundance is formed.  The longest 
oceanographic time-series observations in Tatar 
Strait are standard transects:  Antonovsky and 
Cape Slepikovsky.  The temperature regime in this 
region strongly depends upon the Tsushima 
Current.  Its strengthening during the autumn in a 
warm year forms a stable water column until the 
beginning of winter.  This is evident in the 
dynamics of May temperature in the layer 50-100 
m (Kantakov 2000;  Fig. 71).  The layer 
temperature, smoothed by a 5 point moving 
averages, has decreased from the mid-1970s to the 
late 1980s, whereas the mid-1950s to the mid-
1970s was characterized by higher temperatures.  
A correlation of initial estimates of the layer 
temperature with the regression residuals, the 
index of survival, appeared to be significant with a 
correlation coefficient of -0.48.  A reconstructed 
zooplankton biomass time series for the 
southwestern Sakhalin coast has shown that 
maximum zooplankton biomass observed in cold 
years, and low plankton biomass occurred in warm 
years (Kantakov 2000;  Fig. 71). 
 
Maximum of atmospheric activity also occurred in 
the 1950s, when the greatest number of tropical 
typhoons moved through the region, whereas in 
the 1970s, the number of typhoons was minimum 
(Fig. 72).  The correlation coefficient was -0.50 
(Tarasyuk 1994 B). 
 
Discussion 
 
The noted relationships demonstrate the influence 
of climatic factors on the abundance of yellowfin 
sole generations.  To understand the mechanism of 
these relationships, we review the ecology of 
yellowfin sole spawning.  They spawn in the 
northern part of the Sea of Japan in July-August, at 
the depths less than 50 m.  Eggs are spawned in 
batches (Fadeev 1957, Ivankov et al. 1972).  
Spawned eggs are relatively small, their diameter 
is 0.8 – 0.9 mm.  Embryos and larvae develop in 
the upper 50-m of water column at temperatures 
from 8 to 19ºC (Pertseva- Ostroumova 1961).  At 
the length of 16 - 27 mm, larvae settle on the 
bottom (Nikolotova 1975).  The planktonic stage 
is about a one month, and on the whole, taking 
into account the duration of spawning, may 
continue up to 4 months (Tarasyuk 1994B).  The 
peculiarity of yellowfin sole reproduction is the 
timing of their aggregations at plankton stages of 
development to small areas with circulation that 
prevents the larvae from flowing out of favorable 
sites (Moiseev 1952).  Plankton and nektobenthic 
crustaceans at juvenile stages of development form 
the basic food for planktotrophic larvae 
(Nikolotova 1975).  Evidently, a long stay in the 
upper water column, their peculiarities of feeding, 
and concentration in a limited area create a special 
vulnerability of yellowfin sole at early stages of 
ontogenesis to the negative affects of environment, 
and also a high mortality as a result of intra-
population competition.  
73
  
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1924
1926
1928
1930
1932
1934
1936
1938
1940
1942
1944
1946
1948
1950
1952
1954
1956
1958
1960
1962
1964
1966
1968
1970
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
Температура, гр. С
 
85
95
105
115
125
135
145
155
165
175
185
195
205
215
1924
1927
1930
1933
1936
1939
1942
1945
1948
1951
1954
1957
1960
1963
1966
1969
1972
1975
1978
1981
1984
1987
1990
1993
1996
1999
 
Fig. 71 Dynamics of the May temperature in the 50-100 m layer along the transects Antonovsky and 
Cape Slepikovsky (top panel) and autumn biomass of the net zooplankton (bottom panel).  Zooplankton 
biomass is in units of mg wet weight per cubic meter.  (Source:  Kantakov 2000). 
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1956 1960 1964 1968 1972 1976 1980 1984 1988 1992 1996
Years
Number of typhoons
 
Fig. 72 Frequency of tropic typhoons moving 
through the area of Sakhalin Island. 
 
Comparing these relationships with the 
peculiarities of reproduction of yellowfin sole, we 
conclude that the negative influence of the initial  
cohort abundance upon their survival is realized 
through the deterioration of feeding conditions 
under the increased density of larval aggregations, 
diet selectivity, and limited resources of food 
fields.  The influence of tropical typhoons (more 
than 80 % of them occur in June-August) (Eremin 
and Tretyakova 1980) may result both in the 
negative impact of hydrodynamic wave on the 
embryos survival at the sensitive stages of 
development, and in their impact on the small-
scale circulation systems, causing the appearance 
of cold deep water masses on the surface and 
carrying eggs and larvae out of zones favorable for 
inhabitation.  In the cold year periods, zooplankton 
biomass in the northern Sea of Japan increases, 
and that reduces the level of intra-population 
competition for food.  In turn, this favorably 
affects the larval survival.  
 
74
  
References 
 
Darby, C.D. and Flatman, S.  1994.  Virtual 
Population Analysis:  Version 3.1 
(Windows/DOS) User Guide. Info.  Tech. 
Ser., MAFF Direct, Fish. Res., Lowestoft, (1): 
85 pp. 
Eremin, P.G. and Tretyakova, E.I.  1980.  To a 
question about the cyclicity of typhoons above 
Sakhalin Region.  Information Letter No. 1/90. 
Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk, SakhUGCS, pp. 31– 45 
(in Russian). 
Fadeev, N.S.  1957.  On the type of spawning and 
fecundity for some commercial Sakhalin 
flounders.  Zoological Journal 36(12): 18-41 
(in Russian). 
Ivankov, V.I., Ivankova, Z.G., and Volkova, T.D. 
1972.  Types and terms of spawning for 
flounders from Peter the Great Bay.  Scientific 
Notes of DVGU 60: 49-61 (in Russian). 
Kantakov, G.A.  2000.  Oceanographic 
Retrospective Analysis of the Zooplankton 
Population Inhabitation Conditions at the 
Southwest Sakhalin in 20
th
 Century.  In 15
th
 
International Symposium on Okhotsk Sea & 
Sea Ice. Okhotsk Sea & Cold Ocean Research, 
pp. 384-390. 
Moiseev, P.A.  1952.  Some specific features of 
the bottom and near-bottom fish distribution in 
the Far East seas.  Izv. TINRO 27: 129 – 137 
(in Russian). 
Nikolotova, L.A.  1975.  Larval feeding of the 
west Kamchatka flounders.  Izv. TINRO 97: 
51-61 (in Russian). 
Pertseva-Ostroumova, T.A.  1961.  A spawning 
and developing patterns of the Far East 
flounders. M.: AS USSR Publishers. 484 pp. 
(in Russian). 
Pope, J.G. and Shepherd, J.G.  1985.  A 
comparison of the performance of various 
methods for tuning VPA’s using effort data.  J. 
Cons. Int. Explor. Mer. 42: 129-151. 
Tarasyuk, S.N.  1994 А.  Results of modeling 
biological indices of the yellowfin flounder 
from the western Sakhalin waters during the 
initial period of fishery.  In “Fishery 
researches in Sakhalin-Kuril region and 
adjoining areas”. Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk, 
Sakhalin Region Book Publishers, pp. 33-38 
(in Russian). 
Tarasyuk S.N.  1994B.  On the possible causes 
providing the abundant broods of yllowfin 
flounder.  In “Fishery researches in Sakhalin-
Kuril region and adjoining areas”. Yuzhno-
Sakhalinsk, Sakhalin Region Book Publishers, 
pp. 23-32 (in Russian). 
 
75
  
 
76
MODEL/REX WORKSHOP TO DEVELOP A MARINE ECOSYSTEM 
MODEL OF THE NORTH PACIFIC OCEAN INCLUDING PELAGIC 
FISHES  
(Co-conveners:  Bernard A. Megrey and Michio J. Kishi)
 
 
Summary
 
A 4-day MODEL/REX workshop made several 
significant achievements:  
1. Assembled an international team of marine 
biologists, fisheries biologists, and physical 
oceanographers who collectively achieved a 
consensus on the structure and function of a 
PICES Climate Change and Carrying Capacity 
(CCCC) prototype lower trophic level (LTL) 
ecosystem model for the North Pacific Ocean 
that included pelagic fishes, and named it 
“NEMURO.FISH”; 
2. Developed a computer simulation model of 
fish bioenergetics and growth;  
3. Coupled the fish model to the NEMURO 
lower trophic level model; 
4. Adapted the fish bioenergetics model to 
Pacific herring (Clupea harengus pallasi) in 
the eastern North Pacific, and Pacific saury 
(Cololabis saira) in the western North Pacific; 
5. Made recommendations for future modeling 
activities.  
 
The significance of these achievements will 
ultimately be evaluated by how well the CCCC 
Program effectively utilizes and embraces these 
models as a basis of future modeling activity.
 
 
1.0 Workshop overview
 
Introduction 
 
The North Pacific Marine Science Organization 
(PICES) organizes and promotes an international 
science program, CCCC, in the temperate and 
subarctic regions of the North Pacific Ocean.  
Ecosystem modeling is one of five key research 
activities defined by the CCCC Implementation 
Panel.  The PICES CCCC MODEL Task Team is 
given the role to encourage, facilitate and 
coordinate modeling activities within the member 
nations with respect to the goals and objectives of 
the PICES-CCCC Program.  At the 2000 Nemuro 
Workshop, the MODEL Task Team developed 
NEMURO, a lower trophic level marine 
ecosystem model.  NEMURO has been 
internationally recognized, and recently, the Max 
Planck Institute has adopted the use of NEMURO.  
 
At PICES IX in Hokkodate, the REX and MODEL 
Task Teams met and agreed it would be useful to  
extend NEMURO to include higher trophic level 
components.  Based on some presentations there, 
we agreed to try Pacific herring as a candidate 
higher trophic level species and plans began for a 
joint workshop.  Dr. Michio Kishi prepared a 
proposal to the Heiwa-Nakajima foundation of 
Japan to help fund attendance to the workshop.  
The proposal was successful and planning began 
to hold the next workshop in Nemuro, Japan in 
2002. 
 
Goals and objectives of the Workshop 
 
The goals of the 2002 Nemuro PICES workshop 
were to (1) develop a bioenergetics-based fish 
model for Pacific herring (Clupea harengus 
pallasi) and Pacific saury (Cololabis saira) and (2) 
to couple this model with output from the 
NEMURO lower trophic level model developed at 
the 2000 Nemuro PICES workshop.   
 
77
Organizing Committee, participants, sponsors 
and venue 
 
Drs. Michio J. Kishi, Bernard A. Megrey and 
Francisco E. Werner organized the meeting.  Drs. 
Megrey and. Kishi served as workshop co-
chairmen.  The Heiwa-Nakajima foundation of 
Japan, PICES, and the city of Nemuro provided 
financial support and access to excellent meeting 
rooms in the City Hall.  The Nemuro Support 
Committee supplied local logistical support.  
 
The venue was set at the Multi Purpose Hall, a 
large octagon-shaped room, in the Nemuro City 
Cultural Center.  The hall had a local area network 
which included a server workstation, laser and 
color printers, and another personal computer 
connected to the Internet.  A classroom style table 
was arranged in the center of the room for the 
plenary session.  A set of LCD projectors and 
screens and AC power outlets for participants’ 
laptop computers were available and were 
arranged in each work area to make group work 
more effective.  
 
Twenty six scientists from China, Korea, Russia, 
Japan, Canada and the United States (Fig. 1) 
convened in Nemuro, Japan, between January 25 
and January 27, 2002, to participate in a modeling 
workshop focused on developing a coupled lower 
trophic level-higher trophic level model of the 
marine ecosystem.  Most scientists arrived with 
their own laptop computers.  Participants 
(Appendix 1) consisted of plankton scientists, 
modelers, and individuals with biological 
knowledge of herring and saury.  Key regional 
data sets were also provided by many workshop 
participants.  The workshop was continued at the 
Frontier Research System for Global Change 
(FRSGC) facilities in Yokohama on January 29, 
2002. 
 
 
Fig. 1  Nemuro Workshop participants.  Left to right –Top Row: Douglas Hay, Tomokazu Aiki, 
Masakatsu Inada, Daiki Mukai, Lan S. Smith, Vadim V. Navrotsky, Alexander V. Leonov, Francisco E. 
Werner, Robert A. Klumb, Bernard A. Megrey, Toshio Katsukawa, Takeshi Okunishi, Yasuhiro 
Yamanaka, Tomonori Azumaya. Bottom Row: Chul-hoon Hong, Sanae Chiba, Yuri I. Zuenko, Daji 
Huang, Masahiko Fujii, Kazuaki Tadokoro, Shin-ichi Ito, Shoichi Hamaya (Nemuro City Supporter), 
Michio J. Kishi, Makoto B. Kashiwai. 
78
Workshop schedule 
 
Date:  January 25
th
-29
th
, 2002 
Venue:  Nemuro City Culture Center* (25-27 Jan. 
2002), FRSGC (28,29 Jan. 2002) 
Conveners:  Michio J. Kishi (Hokkaido 
University), Bernard A. Megrey (NOAA), 
Francisco E. Werner (University of North 
Carolina) 
Workshop Co-Chairmen:  M. Kishi and B. 
Megrey 
 
Agenda 
 
January 25
th
, Friday  
18:00 Opening ceremony 
19:00 Welcome reception  
 
January 26
th
, Saturday 
09:00-09:10 Remarks by M. J. Kishi 
09:10-09:30 Review of NEMURO (North 
Pacific Ecosystem Model for 
Understanding Regional 
Oceanography) developed by 
PICES MODEL Task Team in 
2000 (Michio Kishi) 
09:30-10:30 Review of NEMURO FORTRAN 
code (Yasuhiro Yamanaka) 
10:30-11:00  Fish bioenergetics/biom ass 
modeling:  an application to 
Pacific herring (Bernard Megrey) 
10:30-11:00 Review of NEMURO FORTRAN 
code  (Yasuhiro Yamanaka) 
11:00-11:30 Review of Clupeid biology with 
emphasis on energetics (Robert 
Klumb)  
11:30-12:00 Analysis of change in Pacific 
herring distributions (Douglas 
Hay) 
12:00-13:00 Lunch 
13:00-13:30 Review of Pacific saury 
(Cololabis saira) study under 
VENFISH  (Shin-ichi Ito) 
13:30-17:00 Grouping of scientists (“team 
herring” and “team saury”) 
 
January 27
th
, Sunday 
09:00-12:00 Continue working in teams 
12:00-13:00 Lunch 
13:00-15:30 Discussion on the results and 
modification of model 
15:40-16:00 Closing ceremony 
16:30- Press conference (Megrey, Kishi, 
Werner) 
18:30-20:30 Farewell party by Nemuro city (at 
hotel) 
 
January 28
th
, Monday 
Move to Frontier Research System for Global 
Climate Change 
 
January 29
th
, Tuesday 
09:00-12:00 Discussion on the results of new 
model and future strategy 
12:00-13:00 Lunch 
13:00-17:00 Seminar at FRSGC 
13:00-13:30 Zuenko 
13:30-14:00 Navrotsky 
14:00-14:30 Huang 
14:30-15:00 Klumb 
15:00-15:30 Hong 
15:30-16:00 Tea break 
16:00-16:30 5-minute speech of Japanese 
participants 
16:30-17:00 Discussion of future work 
 
Workshop activity 
 
After an opening ceremony with the people of 
Nemuro and a welcome party held the day before, 
the participants convened at the venue to start the 
workshop.   
 
On the first day, the workshop officially opened 
with a welcome to all who had endured a long 
journey to come back to Nemuro.  In the morning 
session, individual presentations were made on the 
NEMURO LTL model, a review of the 
FORTRAN program to execute NEMURO, the 
proposed fish bioenergetics model, and 
presentations on herring and saury biology as 
outlined in the agenda.  During the afternoon 
session, the workshop participants split into two 
groups, to adapt the generalized fish bioenergetics 
model for Pacific herring (“team herring”) and 
Pacific saury (“team saury”).  
 
The second day was taken up primarily with the 
two working groups dealing with their specific 
tasks.  Results of the Pacific herring and saury 
79
applications were presented for discussion in the 
afternoon.  Also on the second day the coupled 
lower trophic level-higher trophic level model was 
named NEMURO.FISH (North Pacific Ecosystem 
Model for Understanding Regional 
Oceanography.For Including Saury and Herring).  
Robert Klumb suggested the name. 
 
The participants received closing remarks from the 
vice-chairman of the Nemuro Supporting 
Committee where appreciation was extended to 
have brought into being such a productive 
workshop. These feelings were amplified during a 
Sayonara Party, which was full of warm 
hospitality by the people of Nemuro city.   
 
The third session was held at the Frontier Research 
System for Global Change in Yokohama.  The 
group discussed the structure and organization of 
the final report, made writing assignments, 
generated a list of workshop recommendations, 
discussed where the MODEL Task Team should 
be going next, and the possibility of holding future 
workshops.  Several individual seminars were 
presented by workshop participants dealing with 
their personal research topics. 
 
 
2.0 Workshop presentations 
 
This section contains abstracts, extended abstracts, 
or fully prepared reports and workshop summaries 
given at the workshop.  The reports that follow are 
organized by authors, according to the schedule  
provided in the agenda.  The authors whose last 
name is in underline and bold font made the 
presentation.  Model versions referenced in these 
reports are described in Megrey et al. (2000).
 
 
2.1 A generalized fish bioenergetics/biomass model with an application to 
Pacific herring 
 
Bernard A. Megrey
1
, Kenny Rose
2
, Francisco E. Werner
3
, Robert A. Klumb
4
 and Douglas Hay
5 
1
 National Marine Fisheries Service, Alaska Fisheries Science Center, 7600 Sand Point Way NE, 
Seattle, WA 98115, U.S.A.  E-mail:  bern.megrey@noaa.gov 
2
 Coastal Fisheries Institute and Departm ent of Oceanography and Coastal Sciences, Wetlands 
Resources Building, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, U.S.A.  E-mail: 
karose@lsu.edu   
3
 Marine Sciences Department, CB # 3300, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3300, 
U.S.A.  E-mail:  cisco@unc.edu  
4 
Department of Natural Resource, Cornell Biological Field Station, Cornell University, 900
 Shackelton Point Road, Bridgeport, NY 13030, U.S.A.  E-mail:  rak11@cornell.edu  
5 
Pacific Biological Station, Fisheries and Oceans Canada, 3190 Hammond Bay Rd, Pacific Biological 
Station, Nanaimo, British Columbia, Canada V9R 5K6.  E-mail:  hayd@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca  
 
We chose to use bioenergetics/biomass modeling 
to represent fish growth because (1) the theory is 
based on the Law of Thermodynamics, (2) outputs 
must equal inputs, ie., the energetic budget must 
balance (Law of Conservation of Mass), (3) terms 
in the equations are simple to biologically 
interpret, (4) fish physiological terms are well 
known and in general can be directly measured, 
and (5) this modeling approach allows users to 
focus on important external regulators such as 
temperature and diet composition.  Model 
formulation and parameters for Pacific herring 
followed the approach used by Rudstam (1988) for 
Atlantic herring (Clupea harengus). 
 
The growth rate of an individual Pacific herring 
(non reproductive) is calculated as weight 
increment per unit of weight per time and is 
defined by: 
 
80
(2.1.1) [] W
CAL
CAL
E F S R C
dt
dW
f
z
⋅ ⋅ + + + − = ) ( 
 
where C is consumption (g prey·g fish
-1
·d
-1
), E is 
excretion or losses of nitrogenous excretory wastes 
(g prey·g fish
-1
·d
-1
), F is egestion or losses due to 
feces (g prey·g fish
-1
·d
-1
), R is respiration or losses 
through metabolism (g prey·g fish
-1
·d
-1
), S is 
specific dynamic action or losses due to energy 
costs of digesting food (g prey·g fish
-1
·d
-1
), W is 
the weight of the fish (g wet weight), t is time 
(days) CAL
z
 is the caloric equivalent of 
zooplankton (cal·g zooplankton
-1
), and CAL
f
 is the 
caloric equivalent of fish (cal·g fish
-1
).  Note that 
(2.1.1) does not include energetic costs of 
reproduction (spawning).  
 
If we define CAL
z
 as calories·g zooplankton
-1
  
 
22 . 617
18 . 4
1 2580
= ⋅ =
joules
cal
zoop gram
joules
CAL
z
  
 
and CAL
f
 as calories·g fish
-1
  
 
68 . 1323
18 . 4
1 5533
= ⋅ =
joules
cal
fish gram
joules
CAL
f
  
 
then once the change in weight from 2.1.1 is 
computed in terms of g zooplankton·g fish
-1
·d
-1
, we 
can multiply it by the weight of the fish (W, g) to 
get g zooplankton·d
-1
, and finally convert g 
zooplankton·d
-1
 to g fish·d
-1
 by multiplying the 
change in weight (dW/dt) by the ratio CAL
z
/CAL
f
. 
 
In the simulations described in this report, 
equation 2.1.1 was solved using an Euler 
numerical integration routine using a dt=0.01. 
 
The formulation of the individual processes 
represented by the terms in equation 2.1.1 is 
described individually below.  Consumption and 
respiration are nonlinear functions of fish weight 
and water temperature.   
 
In addition to the physiological parameters, the 
model requires information about caloric content 
of herring (which can change seasonally), caloric 
content of the prey, diet composition, prey 
densities, and water temperatures. 
 
Consumption 
 
Consumption is estimated as the proportion of 
maximum daily ration for herring at a particular 
mass and temperature.  Maximum daily 
consumption rate (g of prey per g body mass of 
herring per day) is estimated using an allometric 
function of mass from ad libitum feeding 
experiments conducted at the optimum 
temperature. 
 
The basic form of the consumption function is  
 
(2.1.2) ) (T f p C C
C MAX
⋅ ⋅ = 
(2.1.3) 
C
b
C MAX
W a C ⋅ =  
 
where C is the specific consumption rate (g prey·g 
fish
-1
·d
-1
), C
MAX
 is the maximum specific feeding 
rate (g prey·g fish
-1
·d
-1
), p is the proportion of 
maximum consumption, f
C
(T ) is a temperature 
dependence function for consumption, T is water 
temperature (ºC), W is herring mass (g wet 
weight), a
c
 is the intercept of the allometric mass 
function (for a 1 g fish at 0°C), and b
c
 is the slope 
of the allometric mass function.  The subscript C 
on the parameters refers to the consumption 
process. 
 
In equation (2.1.2), the maximum specific feeding 
rate is modified by a water temperature 
dependence function described below and an 
additional proportionality constant that accounts 
for ecological constraints on the maximum feeding 
rate.  The p can range from 0 to 1, with 0 
representing no feeding and 1 indicating the fish is 
feeding at its maximum rate, based on its body 
mass and water temperature.  The lower panel of 
figure 2.1.1 shows the relationship between fish 
weight and consumption from equation 2.1.3. 
 
Temperature dependence for cool and cold 
water species (Thornton and Lessem 1978) 
 
The Thornton and Lessem description of 
temperature dependence is essentially the product  
81
of two sigmoid curves:  one curve is fit to the 
increasing portion of the temperature dependence 
function (gcta), and the other to the decreasing 
portion (gctb).  Four temperatures and percentages 
are needed.  We used two sets of parameters, one 
for herring ages ≤1 year old, and one set for 
herring > 1 years old.  
 
As an example, parameters for the second set are 
xk1=0.1, xk2=0.98, xk3=0.98, xk4=0.01, te1=1.0, 
te2=13.0, te3=15.0, and te4=23.0.  For the 
increasing part of the curve, te1 is the lower 
temperature at which the temperature dependence 
is a small fraction (xk1) of the maximum rate, and 
te2 is the water temperature corresponding to a 
large fraction (xk2) of the maximum consumption 
rate.  For the decreasing portion of the curve, te3 is 
the water temperature ( ≥ te2) at which dependence 
is a fraction (xk3) of the maximum, and te4 is the 
temperature at which dependence is some reduced 
fraction (xk4) of the maximum rate. 
 
The temperature dependence model is given by 
 
(2.1.4) gctb gcta T f
C
⋅ = ) (  
 
where T is water temperature (ºC) 
 
() 1 2
1
5
te te
tt
−
=
 
()
()
⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢
⎣
⎡
⋅
−
⋅ ⋅ =
1 02 . 0
1 0 . 1
2 ln 5 5
xk
xk
xk tt t
 
() [] 1 5
4
te T t
e t
− ⋅
=
 
() 3 4
1
7
te te
tt
−
=
 
()
()
⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢
⎣
⎡
⋅
−
⋅ ⋅ =
4 02 . 0
4 0 . 1
3 ln 7 7
xk
xk
xk tt t
 
() [] T te t
e t
− ⋅
=
4 7
6
 
()
() () 0 . 1 4 1 0 . 1
4 1
− ⋅ +
⋅
=
t xk
t xk
gcta
 
()
() () 0 . 1 6 4 0 . 1
6 4
− ⋅ +
⋅
=
t xk
t xk
gctb
 
 
Figure 2.1.2 shows an example of the Thornton 
and Lessem (1978) temperature adjustment  
function for a theoretical set of parameters.  The 
upper panel of Figure 2.1.1 shows the Thornton 
and Lessem temperature adjustment function over 
a typical temperature range, and Figure 2.1.3 
shows the flexibility of this curve by adjusting te2 
for a range of temperatures.  Finally, Figure 2.1.4 
shows the multi-dimensional relationship between 
consumption, body mass and water temperature 
from equation 2.1.2. 
 
 
 
Fig. 2.1.1 Relationship between consumption 
and temperature from equation 2.1.4 (upper panel) 
and consumption and weight from equation 2.1.3 
(lower panel). 
 
(1, 0.1)
(13,0 .98) (22, 0.98) 
(27, 0.01)
4 temp – F of T 
pairs define the 
functional 
relationship 
te1, xk1 
te2, xk2 te3, xk3 
te4, xk4 
 
 
Fig. 2.1.2 Example of the Thornton and 
Lessem (1978) temperature adjustment curve for a 
theoretical set of parameters. 
82
9
18 
15 
12 
 
 
Fig. 2.1.3 Example of the Thornton and 
Lessem (1978) temperature adjustment curve from 
Figure 2.1.2 as a result of changing te2 from 9, 12, 
15, 18. 
 
 
 
Fig. 2.1.4 Plot of the consumption, temperature 
and weight relationships from equation 2.1.2. 
 
Respiration 
 
The respiration or metabolic rate is dependent on 
body weight, ambient temperature and activity 
(swimming speed).  Total metabolic rate is 
estimated by adding the costs of respiration to the 
costs of digestion, specific dynamic action (SDA). 
 
Metabolism is modeled as  
 
(2.1.5) 258 . 5 ) ( ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ = activity T f W a R
R
b
R
R
 
(2.1.6) () F C SDA S − ⋅ = 
 
where R is resting respiration (i.e. standard 
metabolism) in (g O
2
·g fish
-1
·d
-1
), W is wet weight 
in g, f
R
(T) is the temperature dependence function 
for respiration, T is temperature in ºC, a
R
 is the 
intercept of the allometric mass function and 
represents the weight specific oxygen 
consumption rate of a 1 g fish (g O
2
·g fish
-1
·d
-1
) at 
0ºC and no activity, b
R
 is the slope of the 
allometric mass function for standard metabolism, 
activity is the activity multiplier, S is the specific 
dynamic action, SDA is the proportion of 
assimilated energy lost to specific dynamic action, 
C is the specific consumption rate 
(g prey·g fish
-1
·d
-1
) and F is the specific egestion 
rate (g prey·g fish
-1
·d
-1
).  The subscript R on the 
parameters refers to the respiration process.  The 
coefficient 5.258 converts g O
2
·g fish
-1
·d
-1
 into  
g prey·g fish
-1
·d
-1
 using the conversion 
 
(2.1.7) 
) ( / 258 . 5
18 . 4
1 2580
18 . 4
1 13560
2
2
O g zoop g
joules
cal
zoop g
joules
joules
cal
gO
joules
=
⎟
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎜
⎝
⎛
⋅ ÷
⎟
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎜
⎝
⎛
⋅
 
 
The temperature dependence function for 
respiration is a simple exponential relationship 
given by 
 
(2.1.8) 
() T c
R
R
e T f
⋅
= ) (  
 
where c
R
 approximates the Q
10
 (the rate at which 
the function increases over relatively low water 
temperatures). 
 
Activity is a power function of body weight 
conditioned on water temperature and is given by 
 
(2.1.9) 
() U d
R
e activity
⋅
=  
 
where U is swimming speed in cm·s
-1
 and d
R
 is a 
coefficient relating swimming speed to 
metabolism.  Swimming speed is calculated as a 
function of body weight and temperature using 
 
(2.1.10) 
() T c b
A
A A
e W a U
⋅
⋅ ⋅ =  
 
where a
A=
 3.9, b
A
 = 0.13 and c
A
=0.149 if T <9.0 °C 
and a
A=
 15.0, b
A
 = 0.13 and c
A
=0.0.      if T ≥9.0 °C 
 
Figure 2.1.5 shows the three dimensional 
relationship between respiration, water 
temperature and fish weight. 
 
83
 
 
Fig. 2.1.5 Relationship between standard 
respiration, weight and temperature from equation 
2.1.5. 
 
Egestion and excretion 
 
Egestion (F, fecal waste) and excretion (E, 
nitrogenous waste) can be computed as a constant 
proportion of consumption. 
 
(2.1.11) C a F
F
⋅ = 
(2.1.12) () F C a E
E
− ⋅ = 
 
where a
F
 and a
E
 are constant proportions of 
consumption for egestion and excretion 
respectively.  The subscript F and E on the 
parameters refers to the egestion and excretion 
process. 
 
Multispecies feeding functional response 
 
In most cases realized consumption is calculated 
by adjusting C
MAX
 from equation 2.1.2 by p, and 
this would be sufficient if there were only one 
prey type by using a Type II functional response 
equation (Fig. 2.1.6).  When there are multiple 
prey types, realized consumption depends on prey 
densities, vulnerability of each prey item to 
herring (the predator), and half-saturation 
constants governing the rate of herring saturation.  
A Type II functional response equation for 
multiple prey types (after Rose et al. 1999) is used 
to compute realized daily consumption of each 
herring i ( C
r
, g prey·g fish
-1
·d
-1
) and the 
consumption of each prey type j  
 
(C
j
, g prey·g fish
-1
·d
-1
) using 
(2.1.13) 
∑
=
=
n
j
j r
C C
1
 
(2.1.14) 
∑
=
⋅
+
⋅
⋅
=
n
k ik
ik ik
ij
ij ij
MAX
j
K
v PD
K
v PD
C
C
1
1
  
 
where C
MAX
 , which is dependent on the weight of 
an individual fish and water temperature, is the 
consumption rate (g prey·g fish
-1
·d
-1
) of individual 
herring i from equation 2.1.3, PD
ij
 is the density of 
prey type j (g wet weight/m
3
), v
ij
 is the 
vulnerability of prey type j to herring i 
(dimensionless), and K
ij
 is the half saturation 
constant (g wet weight/m
3
) for individual herring i 
feeding on prey type k ( k=1, 2, … j, … n).  
Because the herring model is tracking one fish, 
there is only one predator. 
 
A total of three prey types are represented in the 
current fish model, microzooplankton, copepods 
and euphausids.  The prey densities are read in 
from the NEMURO model (µmole N/liter) and 
converted to g wet weight/m
3 
using the conversion 
 
3
3 6
0 . 1
2 . 0
1
07 . 0
1 0 . 1 14
m
liters e
weight dry g
weight wet g
weight dry N g
weight dry g
g
g e
N mole
N g
⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅
−
µ µ µ 
 
In Figure 2.1.7, the time-dependent solution to the 
NEMURO model for the three prey groups at the 
Station P location is shown.  These data were used 
to drive herring consumption using the multiple 
species functional response model. 
 
In the situation when there are multiple prey types, 
Figure 2.1.6 becomes more difficult to graphically 
represent.  Figures 2.1.8 to 2.1.11 represent 
equations 2.1.13 and 2.1.14 for various parameter 
values.   
 
In Figure 2.1.8, we represent fish consumption of 
three prey types from the NEMURO LTL model 
(small zooplankton, large zooplankton and 
predatory zooplankton) as stacked bars, where the 
height of the bar is cumulative consumption from 
equation 2.1.13, and the colored segments within a 
bar represent the consumption of each prey type. 
84
x b
x a
+
⋅
= FR
100
10
=
=
b
a
 
 
Fig. 2.1.6 Type II functional response 
describing the theoretical relationship between 
available food density and feeding rate when there 
is just one prey type. 
 
 
 
Fig. 2.1.7 NEMURO model output showing 
time-dependent dynamics of small, large and 
predatory zooplankton. 
 
The parameters at the left of the figure were used 
in equations 2.1.13 and 2.1.14.  For each panel 
within a figure, the vulnerability of one prey type 
was changed from 0 to 1, while keeping all other 
parameters the same and assigning the 
vulnerability parameter for the remaining two prey 
type to 1.0.  For example, in the top panel of 
Figure 2.1.8, the vulnerability parameter for small 
zooplankton was varied from 0.0 to 1.0, while 
keeping the vulnerability parameter for large 
zooplankton and predatory zooplankton equal to 
1.0 and using the parameters at the left of the 
figure in equations 2.1.13 and 2.1.14.  In the 
middle panel, just the vulnerability for large 
zooplankton was varied from 0.0 to 1.0, while 
holding the vulnerabilities for small zooplankton 
and predatory zooplankton at 1.0.  In the bottom 
panel, only the vulnerability for predatory 
zooplankton was varied from 0.0 to 1.0. 
 
These results show that, for the prey whose 
vulnerability is changing (let us call it the target 
prey type), the contribution of the target prey type 
to total consumption ranges from 0.0 at 0.0 
vulnerability, gradually increases as vulnerability 
increases, until a vulnerability of 1.0, where its 
contribution to total consumption is exactly one 
third.  Also total consumption gradually increases 
as the proportion of the target prey type increases 
with increasing vulnerability to the predator.   
 
Also note that the right-most bar in each panel is 
the same (height and contribution of each prey 
type) when vulnerability is 1.0 for all prey types. 
 
Using Figure 2.1.8 as a base case, Figure 2.1.9 
shows the change when the half saturation 
constant for large zooplankton (K
2
) is changed 
from 100.0 to 10.0.  Now each panel in Figure 
2.1.9 is similar to the corresponding panel in 
Figure 2.1.8 (the base case), except that large 
zooplankton make up the bulk of total 
consumption regardless of which prey types 
vulnerability is changed. 
 
Now using Figure 2.1.9 as a base case, Figure 
2.1.10 shows the change when the density of 
predatory zooplankton (PD
3
) is changed from 2.0 
to 4.8.  Now each panel in Figure 2.1.10 is similar 
to the corresponding panel in Figure 2.1.9, except 
that the contribution of predatory zooplankton to 
total consumption is higher in each case.  Also, the 
height of each bar (total consumption) is higher in 
Figure 2.1.10 compared to Figure 2.1.19. 
 
Figure 2.1.11 shows the results of the mutispecies 
feeding functional response for the parameter 
values used in the herring application. 
85
 
 
Fig. 2.1.8 An example of the mutispecies 
functional response formulation (equations 2.1.13 
and 2.1.14) for three prey groups, varying the 
vulnerability of the target prey group one at a time. 
 
 
 
Fig. 2.1.9 An example of the multispecies 
functional response formulation (equations 2.1.13 
and 2.1.14) for three prey groups, varying the 
vulnerability of the target prey group one at a time, 
and changing the half saturation constant for prey 
group 2 (K
2
) from 100.0 to 10.0. 
 
Linking a fish bioenergetics model to the 
NEMURO LTL model 
 
The NEMURO LTL model and the fish 
bioenergetics model were developed 
independently.  Linking the two models involves 
paying close attention and reconciling two 
important differences:  1) the way the two models  
 
 
 
Fig.2.1.10 An example of the multispecies 
functional response formulation (equations 2.1.13 
and 2.1.14) for three prey groups, varying the 
vulnerability of the target prey group one at a time, 
changing the half saturation constant for prey 
group 2 (K
2
) from 100.0 to 10.0, and changing the 
density of prey group 3 (PD
3
) from 2.0 to 4.8. 
 
 
 
Fig. 2.1.11 An example of the multispecies 
functional response formulation (equations 2.1.13 
and 2.1.14) for three prey groups, varying the 
vulnerability of the target prey group one at a time 
using the parameters in the herring model.  
 
 
account for time, and 2) the way NEMURO 
generates phytoplankton and zooplankton densities 
(mole N/liter), and the way the fish 
bioenergeticsmodel expects phytoplankton and 
zooplankton densities (µmole N/liter).  These 
differences are presented in Table 2.1.1. 
Reconciling these differences requires the use of 
several conversion coefficients, which can be seen 
in the code presented in Appendices 4 and 5. 
 
PD
1
=2.0 
PD
2
=2.0 
PD
3
=2.0 
C
MAX
=2.5 
  
K
1
=100.0 
K
2
=100.0 
K
3
=100.0 
 
PD
1
=2.0 
PD
2
=2.0 
PD
3
=4.8 
C
MAX
=2.5 
  
K
1
=100.0 
K
2
=10.0 
K
3
=100.0 
 
PD
1
=2.0 
PD
2
=2.0 
PD
3
=2.0 
C
MAX
=2.5 
  
K
1
=100.0 
K
2
=10.0 
K
3
=100.0 
 
PD
1
=1.8 
PD
2
=0.8 
PD
3
=4.8 
C
MAX
=2.5 
  
K
1
=100.0 
K
2
=10.0 
K
3
=100.0 
86
Table 2.1.1 Ways in which NEMURO and the 
fish bioenergetics model account for time and LTL 
densities. 
 
Model Time LTL Density 
NEMURO seconds mole N/liter 
Fish Bioenergetics day µ mole N/liter 
 
Linking the fish bioenergetics model to NEMURO 
can be done in two ways.  In a static linkage (Fig 
2.1.12), the NEMURO model is run and a time 
series of small, large and predatory zooplankton 
abundances are stored in an output file and used as 
an input file for the fish bioenergetics model 
where they influence the consumption term of the 
bioenergetics governing equation 2.1.1.  The 
models are run sequentially and there is no 
feedback between the two models.  
 
In the dynamic linkage (Fig 2.1.13), the models 
are run simultaneously, the zooplankton prey 
groups contribute to the consumption term of the 
fish bioenergetics governing equation 2.1.1, the 
ZOOS, ZOOL, and ZOOP state variables of 
NEMURO are reduced by the amount eaten by 
herring, fish excretion waste is added to the 
nitrogen pool of NEMURO, and fish egestion 
waste is added to the DOM pool of NEMURO.  
Fish Model 
NEMURO Large 
Zooplankton 
NEMURO Predatory 
Zooplankton 
NEMURO Small 
Zooplankton 
[] ) (
1
E F SDA R C
dt
dW
W
+ + + − =
Run NEMURO, 
save output file of 
Small, Lg and Pred 
Zoop and use to 
drive fish model 
 
 
Fig. 2.1.12 Example of a static linkage between 
NEMURO and the bioenergetics fish model. 
Fish Model 
NEMURO PON
NEMURO NH4 
NEMURO Large 
Zooplankton 
NEMURO Predatory 
Zooplankton 
NEMURO Small 
Zooplankton 
[] ) (
1
E F SDA R C
dt
dW
W
+ + + − =
 
 
Fig. 2.1.13 Example of a dynamic linkage 
between NEMURO and the bioenergetics fish 
model..
 
Table 2.1.2 Summary of parameter values used in the generalized herring bioenergetics model from 
Rudstam (1988). 
Symbol  Parameter description      Value 
Consumption, C
MAX
 
a
C
  Intercept for C
MAX
 at (te1+te3)/2     0.642 
b
C
  coefficient for C
MAX
 versus weight    -0.256 
te1  Temperature for xk1 (in ºC)     1
a
  1
b
   
te2  Temperature for xk2 (in ºC)     15
a
 13
b 
 
te3  Temperature for xk3 (in ºC)     17
a
 15
a  
 
te4  Temperature for xk4 (in ºC)     25
a
 23
b 
 
xk1  Proportion of C
MAX
 at te1     0.10 
xk2  Proportion of C
MAX
 at te2     0.98 
xk3  Proportion of C
MAX
 at te3     0.98 
xk4  Proportion of C
MAX
 at te4     0.01 
 
Metabolism, R  
a
R
  Intercept for R       0.0033 
b
R
  Coefficient for R versus weight     -0.227 
c
R  
Coefficient for R versus temperature    0.0548 
d
R  
Coefficient for R versus swimming speed   0.03 
S  Coefficient for Specific Dynamic Action    0.175 
87
Table 2.1.2 (cont.) 
 
Symbol  Parameter description      Value 
Swimming Speed, U 
a
A
  Intercept U (< 9 ºC) (in cm/s)     3.9 
a
A
  Intercept U ( ≥ 9 ºC) (in cm/s)     15.0 
b
A
   Coefficient U versus weight     0.13 
c
A
   Coefficient U versus temperature (< 9 ºC)   0.149 
c
A
   Coefficient U versus temperature ( ≥ 9 ºC)   0.0 
 
Egestion and Excretion, F and E 
a
F
  Proportion of consumed food egested    0.16 
a
E
  Proportion of consumed food excreted    0.10 
 
a - values for age 0 and 1herring 
b - values for age 2 and older herring 
 
 
2.2 Review of Clupeid biology with emphasis on energetics 
 
Robert A. Klumb  
 
Department of Natural Resources, Cornell Biological Field Station, Cornell University, 900 Shackelton 
Point Road, Bridgeport, NY 13030, U.S.A.  E-mail:  rak11@cornell.edu  
 
The general bioenergetics model based on the Law 
of Thermodynamics balances all consumed energy 
as follows:  G = C – R – F – U, where G=growth, 
C=consumption, R=metabolism (respiration), 
F=egestion, and U=excretion.  Consumed energy 
is first allocated to costs of metabolism and waste 
losses with the remainder available for somatic 
growth.  Energy lost by the gametes released 
during spawning can also be included.  Formulas 
and parameters provided below for the individual 
components in the bioenergetics model follow the 
terminology and symbols used in Hansen et al. 
(1997).  Energy equivalent conversion factors for 
oxygen consumption, carbohydrates, fats, and 
protein can be found in Elliott and Davison 
(1975), with additional comments on the 
oxycalorific coefficient found in Brett (1985). 
 
Consumption 
 
Consumption (C) = C
max
*P-value*f(T) and 
C
max
=CA*W
CB 
 
Consumption (g prey·g
-1
·d
-1
), is generally modeled 
as an allometric (power) function of weight. 
 
Maximum consumption rates are determined in 
laboratory experiments by feeding fish a known 
(by weight) ad libitum ration and then subtracting 
uneaten food after a specified time interval.  For 
adult alewife Alosa pseudoharengus, the specific 
slope for weight dependence on maximum 
consumption was -0.3 (Stewart and Binkowski 
1986), a value intermediate to that found in studies 
of larval and juvenile clupeids (De Silva and 
Balbontin 1974; Theilacker 1987).  The specific 
weight-dependent slope (CB) for maximum 
consumption of northern anchovy Engraulis 
mordax larvae (wet weight < 0.001 g) re-
calculated from data in Theilacker (1987) was 
-0.367, while the slope for Atlantic herring (wet 
weight 8 – 15 g) was -0.256 (De Silva and 
Balbontin 1974).  Rudstam (1988) used the slope 
and intercept derived by De Silva and Balbontin 
(1974) in the bioenergetics model for adult 
Atlantic herring Clupea harengus consumption.  
Due to a lack of data for larval and juvenile fishes, 
the same relations for maximum consumption of 
adult herring and alewives were applied to age-0 
fish by Arrhenius (1998a) and Klumb et al. (in 
review), respectively. 
 
88
The “P-value” in the bioenergetics model refers to 
the proportion of maximum consumption.  This 
value is used to fit the bioenergetics model to 
observed growth or can be set constant to check 
resultant growth potential in varied environments. 
 
Temperature dependence of consumption is 
usually modeled as simple or modified exponential 
functions (Hansen et al. 1997).  For cool- and 
cold-water species, the temperature dependence of 
consumption is generally modeled using a curve 
proposed by Thorton and Lessem (1978), which 
modified the logistic equation.  This function is 
the product of two intersecting sigmoid curves 
(one ascending and one descending) forming a 
“humped” curve across the entire temperature 
range inhabited by a given species.   
 
Required parameters include the approximate 
temperatures for optimum consumption, and the 
high and low temperatures where consumption is 
dramatically reduced (~98%) compared to 
maximum consumption.  Any temperatures 
derived from laboratory or field data showing 
maximum or reduced consumption levels can be 
used.  If specific data relating consumption and 
temperature are lacking, the optimum of 
consumption is generally equated to the fish’s 
thermal optimum for growth (Beitinger and 
Magnuson 1979), and the temperatures where 
consumption is dramatically reduced are derived 
from the thermal tolerances (survival limits) of a 
species. 
 
Metabolism/respiration 
 
Total metabolism = Respiration + specific 
dynamic action (SDA) 
 
where 
 
Respiration (R) = RA*W
RB
 * f(T)*Activity and 
f(T) = e
RQ*T 
 
Metabolism of fishes is determined by measuring 
oxygen consumption at various temperatures over 
a known time period, and generally modeled as an 
allometric function of weight and an exponential 
function of temperature.  Brett and Groves (1979) 
distinguished three types of metabolism in fishes: 
standard, routine and active.  By definition, 
standard metabolism is the minimum energy 
requirements needed by a fish at rest (also known 
as basal metabolism), and it is this metabolic state 
that is used in bioenergetics models.  Measuring 
standard metabolism is difficult and requires use 
of anesthetized fish or fish with movements 
confined by small respirometers.  Routine 
metabolism includes normal spontaneous activity, 
while active metabolism includes the cost for 
activity above the spontaneous activity level.  
Winberg (1956) stated that active metabolism was 
approximately twice standard metabolism (i.e. the 
“Winberg multiplier” of 2).  However, Ware 
(1975) indicated active metabolism could range 
from 2 to 3 times standard rates.  Bioenergetics 
models generally use allometric function 
parameters derived for standard metabolism 
multiplied by a temperature function and an 
activity factor to estimate total respiration costs. 
 
Respiration (g oxygen·g
-1
·d
-1
) of adult fishes 
generally scales negatively with weight (i.e. 
negative slope), and ranges from -0.25 to -0.15 on 
a weight specific basis (Winberg 1956).  For 
clupeids, slopes of the metabolism-weight 
relations ranged from -0.19 to -0.28 for Atlantic 
menhaden Brevoortia tyrannus (Hettler 1976),  
-0.215 for alewife (Stewart and Binkowski 1986), 
and -0.227 for Atlantic herring (De Silva and 
Balbontin 1974).  Rudstam (1988) used -0.227 in 
the adult Atlantic herring bioenergetics model, and 
this value was also applied to age-0 herring (Kerr 
and Dickie 1985;  Arrhenius 1998a).  The slope 
for the metabolism-weight relation of Maurolicus 
muelleri, a mesopelagic planktivore, was -0.15 
(Ikeda 1996). 
 
The relation of respiration to weight of fishes has 
been found to change ontogentically, with 
isometric (mass independent) relations for larvae 
switching to negative allometries in adults (Post 
and Lee 1996).  However, the variability of slopes 
found in the review of 31 species by Post and Lee 
(1996) highlighted the need to derive weight-
metabolism relations for the larvae of individual 
species.  The final weight-metabolism relation 
derived likely depends on the range of fish sizes 
used.  Studies of larval fishes encompassing 
greater than three orders of magnitude in weight 
documented isometric relations between 
metabolism and weight for Clupeidae (Klumb et 
89
al., in review), Cyprinidae (Kamler 1972), and 
Scombridae (Giguère et al. 1988). 
 
Specific dynamic action (SDA) 
 
SDA = SDA*(C – F) 
 
Specific dynamic action, or more appropriately 
termed “apparent specific dynamic action” and 
also known as the “heat increment”, is the energy 
allocated to the digestive processes of food, 
principally deamination of proteins but also 
includes energy costs of absorption, transportation 
and deposition of food (Beamish 1974).  Oxygen 
consumption by fasting and fed fish in flow-
through respirometers (where the fish is subjected 
to a known level of activity, i.e., forced to swim 
against a known current) is required to measure 
SDA (Beamish and Trippel 1990).  Beamish and 
Trippel (1990) found that SDA increased with 
meal size and body weight but declined with 
weight at fixed rations.  However, in most 
bioenergetic models, SDA is considered a constant 
proportion of ingested energy with values for adult 
fish ranging from 10-29% (reviewed by Beamish 
and Trippel 1990).  The SDA parameter in 
bioenergetics models is generally borrowed from 
non-related species because proper measurement 
requires strict laboratory experiments using 
specialized equipment.  For adult alewife (Stewart 
and Binkowski 1986) and adult Atlantic herring 
(Rudstam 1988), SDA was assumed to be 17.5% 
based on data for aholehole Kuhlia sandvicensis 
(Muir and Niimi 1972).  Arrhenius (1998a) 
lowered SDA to 15% for age-0 Atlantic herring.  
Larval clupeids have been found to assimilate food 
more efficiently than adults (Kiørboe et al. 1987).  
In energetic terms, Kiørboe et al. (1987) estimated 
SDA for larval Atlantic herring to be 10% of 
assimilated rations, and Limburg (1994) calculated 
the mean SDA for American shad Alosa 
sapidissima juveniles to be 13%. 
 
Activity 
 
Activity = e
RTO*VEL
,  
where VEL = RK1*W
RK4 
for T ≥ RTL 
or VEL = ACT*W
RK4
*e
BACT*T
 when T < RTL 
 
The energetic cost of activity is generally 
considered a multiple of standard metabolism.  A 
simple constant, i.e. the “activity multiplier = 2” of 
Winberg (1956), can be used to accord increased 
(aerobic) metabolic costs due to swimming.  
Exponential functions have been used to model 
activity costs of adult alewife (Stewart and 
Binkowski 1986) and Atlantic herring (Rudstam 
1988).  The exponential model is composed of 
three components: 1) VEL which is the weight 
dependence of swimming speed (cm/s), 2) the 
temperature (T) dependence of swimming speed 
(BACT), and 3) the relation of respiration to 
swimming speed (RTO).  The parameter ACT is 
the intercept (cm/s) for a 1-g fish at 0°C.  
Swimming speed can change from temperature 
dependence to independence (at T = RTL).  
Swimming speeds of Atlantic herring were only 
dependent on weight at temperatures > 9°C 
(Rudstam 1988), and alewife swimming speeds 
were independent at > 15°C. (Stewart and 
Binkowski 1986)  
 
The coefficient for swimming speed dependence 
of metabolism (RTO) used in the adult alewife 
model was assumed constant (RTO = 0.03) and 
based on data in Muir and Niimi (1972).  Data for 
Cape anchovy E. capensis found that coefficients 
before, during, and after feeding ranged from 0.01 
to 0.04 (James and Probyn 1989).  A coefficient 
relating respiration and swimming speed of 0.03 
has also been reported for adult menhaden (Durbin 
et al. 1981), and the coefficient for adult 
coregonids was 0.02 (Dabrowski 1985).  However, 
the coefficient relating respiration rate to 
swimming speed increased substantially in larval 
coregonids (Dabrowski 1986) and cyprinids 
(Kaufmann 1990);  therefore, a constant relating 
metabolic cost to swimming speed is inappropriate 
for early life stages.  Using an exponential activity 
function and a constant relating swimming speed 
to oxygen consumption resulted in essentially no 
energetic costs for the activity of YOY alewife 
(Klumb et al., in review). 
 
How to best model the activity costs of larval fish 
is uncertain since existing data from the few 
studies relating metabolism and swimming speeds 
at early life stages are equivocal.  Because the 
slope of metabolism versus swimming speed 
varied with body size, Dabrowski et al. (1988) 
found active metabolic rates of coregonids to be  
5 - 50 times standard metabolism.  A size-effect on 
90
the slope for the metabolism-swimming speed 
relation also existed for larvae of two cyprinid 
species (Kaufmann 1990);  however, ratios of 
routine metabolism to standard metabolism were 
low (< 1.5) and essentially flat from 0.005 - 0.300 
g (wet weight).  In Kaufmann’s (1990) study, 
ratios of active to routine metabolism (i.e., the 
factorial scope) ranged from 2 - 4.  These 
contrasting results may lie in the function chosen 
to describe the metabolism-swimming speed 
relation, i.e., exponential (Dabrowski 1986; 
Dabrowski et al. 1988) or allometric (Kaufmann 
1990).  However, using an exponential model, 
Wieser and Forstner (1986) found the ratios of 
active to routine metabolism for larvae of three 
cyprinid species ranged from 1 - 4 and were 
independent of weight (0.01 - 0.3 g wet) and 
temperature (12 - 24°C).  Activity rates of fishes 
can also vary widely with growth rate and food 
density (Ware 1975), while laboratory 
measurements of metabolism during activity may 
be higher than actual costs in the wild, since larvae 
are also passively moved by water currents.  
Klumb et al. (in review) used routine metabolism 
parameters without an activity multiplier in a 
bioenergetics model for age-0 alewife. 
 
Clupeids have pronounced changes in activity 
patterns possibly due to circadian rhythms (Katz 
1978; Batty 1987).  Clupeids do not swim in 
schools during darkness (Limburg 1994).  
Accuracy of bioenergetic estimates of herring 
consumption were improved when including diel 
feeding cycles (Arrhenius 1998a). 
 
Egestion 
 
Egestion (F) = FA*C 
 
Egestion is modeled as a constant proportion of 
consumption.  Assimilation efficiency (in terms of 
energy) of adult menhaden ranged from 86 to 92% 
(Durbin and Durbin 1981).  In the adult alewife 
(Stewart and Binkowski 1986) and Atlantic 
herring models (Rudstam 1988), egestion was 
assumed to be 16% of consumption.   
 
Data for egestion processes and models are not 
common; most extensive studies have been done 
for brown trout Salmo trutta (Elliot 1976a, 1976b).  
Egestion has been found to be a function of 
temperature and ration (Elliott 1976a).  However, 
Stewart and Binkowski (1986) found small 
changes in estimated consumption when making 
the simplified assumption of egestion being a 
constant proportion of consumption in the 
bioenergetics model for alewife. 
 
The proportion of consumption egested has been 
found to be low in larval and juvenile clupeids 
(Kiørboe et al. 1987; Limburg 1994).  Arrhenius 
(1998) used 16%, the value from the adult Atlantic 
herring (Rudstam 1988) and alewife (Stewart and 
Binkowski 1986) models for the proportion of 
assimilated ration egested by larval Atlantic 
herring.  Both Kiørboe et al. (1987) and Limburg 
(1994) found the percentage of food egested was 
10% (by mass).  However, Klumpp and von 
Westernhagen (1996) found egestion for Atlantic 
herring larvae age 8 - 33 days averaged 17.6% 
(range 13.4 - 25.6%) of ration (Artemia sp. 
nauplii) energy content.   
 
Based on the above three studies on larval and 
juvenile clupeids (Kiørboe et al. 1987; Limburg 
1994; Klumpp and von Westernhagen 1996), 
Klumb et al. (in review) chose 0.125 as a first 
approximation for the proportion of consumption 
egested by larval and juvenile alewife.  
 
Excretion 
 
Excretion (U) = UA*(C – F) 
 
Excretion is modeled as a constant proportion of 
assimilation (consumption minus egestion).  In the 
adult alewife (Stewart and Binkowski 1986) and 
Atlantic herring models (Rudstam 1988), excretion 
was assumed to be 10% of assimilation based on 
rates measured for brown trout (Elliott 1976b). 
 
Few studies on larval fish excretion have been 
conducted.  For three species, Blennius pavo, 
plaice Pleuronectes platesssa, and Atlantic 
herring, Klumpp and von Westernhagen (1996) 
found the mean percent of the assimilated ration 
excreted was 6.0, 6.6 and 10.7%, respectively.  
Due to high mortality for Atlantic herring larvae in 
Klumpp and von Westernhagen’s study, Klumb et 
al. (in review) used the average value of 7.8% for 
all three species as a first approximation of the 
91
percent of assimilation excreted by larval and 
juvenile alewife. 
 
Data requirements 
 
There are four data requirements for the 
bioenergetics model: 1) diet (in proportions of 
prey types), 2) energy density of the predator fish, 
3) energy density of the prey, and 4) water 
temperatures.  The bioenergetics model is an 
individual based model but can incorporate 
populations by multiplying mean weight by 
population number. 
 
Diet 
 
Diet information was summarized by Douglas E. 
Hay (Pacific Biological Station, Fisheries and 
Oceans Canada) based on recent observations 
(Hay and McCarter 2001, and older literature such 
as Wailes 1936).  Depending on the population, 
herring diets can be simple or complicated.  The 
simple story is that herring eat mainly copepod 
eggs and nauplii as larvae, copepod adults and 
nauplii as juveniles and euphausiids as adults.  
This over-simplified` story gets messy when the 
smaller, non-migratory marginal populations are 
examined because they appear to eat a wider 
variety of taxa.  Herring feed intensely in the 
summer months but they also eat during winter.  In 
all areas, winter diets, although small in relation to 
total annual consumption, may be more variable 
than summer diets.  Perhaps the main point to 
emphasize, however, is that in southern British 
Columbia, most herring feed in shelf waters where 
the main food items are euphausiids.  Atlantic 
herring and sprat Sprattus sprattus diets consisted 
of 70 - 73% copepods, 12 - 14% Oikopleura, and 9 
- 12% cladocerans (De Silva 1973). 
 
Adult clupeids feed by filtering or particulate 
feeding (Blaxter and Hunter 1982;  Janssen 1976).   
Janssen (1976) found for alewives that the filter 
feeding mode displayed by large alewives (total 
lengths > 170 mm) was not size-selective, while 
particulate feeders (total lengths 50 - 115 mm) 
selected zooplankton > 1.0 mm.  Transition of 
larvae to adult body morphology and feeding 
modes occurs at metamorphosis (~35 mm) after 
gill rakers and the upper and lower jaws become 
developed (Blaxter and Hunter 1982).  Although 
activity of clupeids may be lower at night (Katz 
1978), filter feeders can still feed in darkness 
(Hettler 1976; Janssen and Brandt 1980; Grabe 
1996). 
 
Feeding activity of larval herring has been found 
to be dependent on densities of copepod nauplii 
(Munk and Kiorboe 1985) with success a function 
of prey size (Hunter and Blaxter 1982).  Atlantic 
herring (length 25 mm) larvae were able to 
consume prey sizes ≥ 1.0 mm (Sherman and 
Honey 1971, cited in Hunter and Blaxter 1982).  
Foraging behavior of Altantic herring larvae 
changed with prey size and was related to larval 
length by the equation:  prey length = 0.027*larval 
length (Munk 1992), and attack success was 
directly related to relative prey size.  Fiksen and 
Folkford (1999) included the mouth size of herring 
larvae, perception (visual field and reaction 
distance), light intensity, and the length, width and 
density of plankton prey when modeling encounter 
rates and probabilities of successful strikes. 
 
Energy density of predator and prey 
 
Energy density, also called caloric content and 
energy content, in bioenergetics models is used in 
terms of wet weight.  Dry-weight data are 
customarily converted (approximated) to wet 
weight assuming dry weight is 10 - 20% of total 
weight.  Hartman and Brandt (1995) provided 
many equations for estimating energy density from 
the percent dry weight of various marine and 
freshwater fish species.  Assuming constant 
energy densities or using values that are too high 
or low can greatly affect bioenergetics model 
consumption estimates (Stewart and Binkowski 
1986). 
 
Energy density (ED) of clupeids has been found to 
vary seasonally, peaking in fall and declining 
through winter (Arrhenius and Hansson 1996; 
Flath and Diana 1985;  Paul et al. 1998).  Age-0 
EDs are lower than older fish (Arrhenius and 
Hansson 1996; Flath and Diana 1985;  Paul et al. 
1998).  For age-1 alewife in Lake Michigan, ED in 
June and July was 4520 J·g
-1
, increased in August 
and September to 4729 and 5440, respectively, 
then declined to 4729 in April, and 4436 by May 
(Flath and Diana 1985).  For age-0 Atlantic 
herring, Arrhenius and Hansson (1996) found ED 
92
increased from 2600 J·g
-1
 in mid-July to 4500 J·g
-1
 
in October.  The ED of age-0 Baltic Sea sprat 
increased from 4000 J·g
-1
 in August to 
approximately 5250 J·g
-1
 by December (Arrhenius 
1998b).  October ED of alewife was 5020 J·g
-1
 
(Flath and Diana 1985). 
 
Higher energy densities were found for Pacific 
herring off Alaska (Paul et al. 1998;  Foy and Paul 
1999) compared to Great Lakes alewives and 
Baltic Sea clupeids.  Age 2+ Pacific herring had 
EDs in fall that ranged from 9400 to 10200 J·g
-1
 
and declined over winter to 5200 to 6300 J·g
-1
 by 
spring.  Females had higher energy densities in 
both seasons than males by 200 - 400 J·g
-1
.  Age-0 
herring had EDs of 5700 J·g
-1
 in fall which 
declined to 4400 J·g
-1
 by the following spring 
(Paul et al. 1998).  Equations to predict ED from 
standard length of juveniles by month are provided 
in Paul and Paul (1998a).  The ED for age-0 
captive fasting herring declined 23 J·g
-1
·d
-1
 from 
December to the end of January (Paul and Paul 
1998b). 
 
Energy densities of freshwater and marine 
invertebrates can be found in Cummins and 
Wuycheck (1971), while good tables of the caloric 
content of marine invertebrates (with references) 
are presented in Foy and Norcross (1999) and Foy 
and Paul (1999).  Laurence (1976) provides energy 
densities for marine calanoid copepods in the 
Atlantic.  Like fish, the energy density for 
invertebrates has been found to vary seasonally. 
 
 
Table 2.2.1 Energy densities (jouls/gram) for 
main food items of Pacific herring. 
 
Food Item J·g
-1
 
Copepoda 2580 
Euphausiids (per gram wet weight) 5020 
Fish eggs (per gram wet weight) 4520 
 
Table 2.2.2 Existing bioenergetic models. 
 
Reference Comments 
General models 
Winberg 1956 extensive early work but reference not that accessible 
Kitchell et al. 1974 results of International Biological Program (IBP) workshops and first 
paper of the “Wisconsin” bioenergetics model – applied to bluegill sunfish 
(Lepomis macrochirus) in terms of mass balance 
Elliott 1976b; 1979 general review of energetics resulting from his extensive work with brown 
trout (Salmo trutta) 
 
Stewart et al. 1983 changed the Kitchell et al. 1974 model from mass to energy balance, for 
lake trout (Salvelinus namaycush) 
Clupeid bioenergetics models 
Rudstam 1988 Adult Atlantic herring (Clupea harengus) 
Kerr and Dickie 1985 Age-0 Atlantic herring 
Arrhenius 1998 Age-0 Atlantic herring 
Fiksen and Folkford 1999 Larval Atlantic herring– Individual based model, which includes 
metabolism, ingestion, prey encounter success, and multiple prey 
functional response 
Stewart and Binkowski 
1986 
Adult alewife (Alosa pseudoharengus) 
Hewett and Stewart 1989 Age-0 alewife: (only temperatures for the consumption component 
differed from the adult model) 
Klumb et al. In review Age-0 alewife 
Durbin and Durbin 1983 Adult menhaden (Breoortia tyrannus):– in terms of energy and Nitrogen 
93
2.3 Reflections of factors affecting size-at-age and strong year classes of 
herring in the North Pacific 
 
Douglas E. Hay 
Pacific Biological Station, Fisheries and Oceans Canada, 3190 Hammond Bay Road, Nanaimo, British 
Columbia, Canada V9R 5K6.  E-mail:  hayd@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
One approach to the investigation of linkages 
between oceanographic process and subsequent 
impacts on marine fish populations, is 
retrospective analyses of age-specific growth rates 
(size-at-age) from archive collections of scales or 
otoliths.  This approach can be linked to 
independent observations on (1) temporal 
variation in abundance, (2) synchrony or 
asynchrony of year-class strength among different 
populations, or different species, and (3) habitat 
requirements of life history stages (eggs, larvae, 
juveniles, adults) that have different spatial and 
trophic characteristics.  
 
Widespread geographic synchrony sometimes 
occurs in Pacific herring (Hollowed and Wooster 
1995, Hay et al. 2001).  An exceptionally strong 
year-class occurred in 1977 over a broad and 
geographic range (Fig. 2.3.1).  It was strong in 
northern BC, parts of south-eastern and central 
Alaska and the Bering Sea (Hollowed and 
Wooster 1995).  This 1977 year-class developed in 
different populations with different spawning 
times, with a range of about 3 months from the 
earliest to the latest mean spawning time.  Pacific 
herring spawn in shallow, inshore inter-and 
subtidal waters.  In many areas of the Pacific coast 
of North America, spawn deposition is monitored 
and quantified annually.  Spawn deposition was 
not exceptional in 1977.  Therefore, it follows that 
in 1977, survival from eggs to the juvenile and 
recruit stage, between 1977 and 1980, was 
relatively higher (or mortality was lower) than 
most other years.  It also follows that the factor(s) 
that promoted the strong year-class were widely 
distributed in space and time.    
 
Retrospective analysis of archived herring scales 
(Fig. 2.3.2) from northern BC populations, 
indicates that individuals of the 1977 year-class 
were of normal size, or slightly larger than normal, 
relative to samples from other years (Fig. 2.3.3).   
 
After age 4, the relative size-at-age of individuals 
in the 1977 year-class declined, and was smaller 
than normal, which indicates that growth rate 
declined in older individuals.  This retrospective 
analysis of growth from scale analysis was 
corroborated by analyses of catch-sampling data, 
collected routinely for the last 70 years.  The size-
at-age of 3-year-old members of the 1977 year-
class was normal in most areas in 1980, but size-
at-age of older individuals (e.g. age 6 fish 
collected in 1983) was smaller than normal (Fig. 
2.3.4).   
 
A strong 1977 year-class also occurred in several 
other species, including blackcod and lingcod 
(Hollowed and Wooster 1995).  Climate-related 
changes, but not necessarily increases in 
abundance, also occurred in other marine species 
including salmonids (Beamish et al. 1999) and 
pollock Theragra chalcogrammus (Ohtani and 
Azumaya 1995).  Further, there are periods when 
there has been synchrony of strong year-classes 
among different species in the North Pacific 
(Hollowed et al. 1987), which is evidence of 
environmental influence on the production of year-
class strength.    
 
The habitats occupied by age 1 and 2 herring are 
mainly inshore (Haegele 1997), whereas most of 
the older age groups (age 3 and older) tend to 
occupy shelf waters.  During intensive summer 
feeding periods, juvenile herring are found mainly 
in shallow, nearshore waters of less that 50 m.   In 
general, age 1 juveniles occur in shallower waters, 
closer to shore, than age 2 herring.  In general, 
herring form shoals of similar-sized individuals so 
the two larger age groups do not mix, although 
both age groups of juveniles occur in the same 
vicinities, herring juveniles are widely dispersed 
through all BC coastal waters. 
 
Over the last 70 years in British Columbia (BC), 
herring stomachs have been examined by different 
94
people, in different years, at different places and at 
different herring life history stages.  Wailes (1936) 
summarized the food of young herring mainly in 
the first summer of life.  At very young stages, 
eggs (ova) and nauplii from various invertebrates 
are most important.  Copepod nauplii seem to 
dominate the food but food composition varied 
with location.  The youngest juveniles (age 1) fed 
mainly on copepods.  Older, larger juveniles took 
various zooplankton, with euphausiids being 
common.  More recent work examined gut data 
from herring juveniles in Georgia Strait, BC, 
Hecate Strait and Prince William Sound Alaska 
(Haegele 1997, Foy and Norcross 1999, Hay and 
McCarter 2001).  In general the main food for 
herring at ages 1 and 2 is copepods.  Therefore if 
the abundant 1977 year-class ate mainly copepods 
at ages 1 and 2, then copepods must have been 
abundant in nearshore northern waters, both in 
1977 and 1978.  From our present understanding 
of herring life history, there is little opportunity for 
trophic interaction (i.e. direct density-dependent 
competition for food) between age-classes:  either 
among juveniles (ages 1 versus age 2) or between 
juveniles versus adults (age 3+ and older).  In BC 
waters, probably the first opportunity for direct 
interaction occurs during the third winter of life, at 
age 2+, when (BC) herring start to mature sexually 
and join the adult stock.  At this time, however, 
winter feeding is minimal and growth is slight.   
 
The observations above can be summarized as 
follows.  In 1977, and some other years, we see 
that strong year-classes can develop over broad 
areas of time and space.  They develop in years 
when spawn deposition is normal, and sometimes 
even lower than normal.  Further, sometimes they 
can be synchronous over broad areas of time and 
space.  Synchrony may develop in other species.  
Retrospective analysis of herring scales indicates 
superior juvenile growth among strong cohorts, 
but decreased growth during older adult stages (in 
1977).  Strong year-classes can arise in years of 
normal or modest spawn deposition.  These 
observations indicate that survival, between the 
egg and recruit stages, is enhanced.  Such 
enhanced survival must occur during the juvenile 
stages that consume mainly copepods in nearshore 
habitats.  Therefore strong year-classes may 
develop as a consequence of changes in these 
habitats.    
If lower mortality of early life history stages is 
part of the explanation for the formation of the 
1977 year-class - or other year classes, why did 
this happen?  Presumably it must reflect decreases 
in mortality by starvation, disease or predation?  In 
1977, starvation seems unlikely, because juvenile 
growth was enhanced compared to other years.  
We have no evidence to suggest that disease 
routinely limits survival.  Rather, outbreaks seem 
episodic, and this could explain years with 
exceptionally bad year-classes, but not the reverse.  
A decrease in predation, between the egg/larval 
stages and pre-recruit stage could occur if there 
were (i) fewer predators, or (ii) if the predators 
‘switched’ or decreased predation on herring for a 
different prey species.  Were predation rates on 
juvenile herring lower in 1977 and 1978?  We 
have no data on this, but we observe that some 
common herring predators (lingcod and blackcod 
and some piscivorous salmon) also had strong 
1977 year-classes.  Therefore it seems improbable 
that there was a decrease in the potential 
community of herring predators between 1977 and 
1980.   
 
From the observations and reasoning above, we 
conclude that the most parsimonious explanation 
for the development of the strong 1977 year-class 
was a general decrease in predation of juveniles 
because the main herring predators had alternate 
prey.  Such a reduction in predation could occur 
through predator switching during early life 
history stages - specifically, predators of herring 
chose to feed on an alternate food source.  If this 
alternate food source was an unusually abundant 
supply of copepods, available both to the juveniles 
of herring and their predators, this could explain 
our observations.  Specifically if predators 
preferentially switched to copepods, instead of 
herring juveniles, the consequence of a substantial 
increase in copepod availability would be both 
enhance survival and growth of juvenile herring.  
 
If the cause(s) of the strong 1977 year-class was 
similar in all geographic areas where it occurred, 
from northern BC to the Bering Sea, and if the 
cause was from decreased predation associated 
with availability of an alternate food source, then 
clearly the factors which promoted this alternate 
food source were widespread.  There have been  
 
95
Alaska
BC
 
 
Fig. 2.3.1 Approximate locations of the strong 
1977 year-class, indicated by arrows.  Red arrows 
with dark outlines show locations where the 1977 
year-class made up 70% or more of the spawning 
population as age 3 in 1980, or age 4 in 1981.  
Plain red and yellow arrows show populations 
where the 1977 year-class represented over 50% 
and 40% of the populations, respectively.       
 
Focus
Annulus 1
Annulus 2
a b c
Edge
 
 
Fig. 2.3.2 A herring scale, showing the focus 
(start of growth) and the first and second annuli. 
Retrospective indices of age-specific growth rates 
during the first year (green bar a) and second year 
(yellow bar b) was determined by direct 
measurement of scales.  
some suggestions (Hollowed and Wooster 1992; 
Polovina et al. 1995) that there can be such 
linkages between offshore oceanographic changes 
and changes in productivity or food abundance on 
shelf and inshore waters, resulting from mid-gyre 
changes, but these are not well understood.  If 
there were such a relationship, the impact of an 
 
92 90 88 85 82 80 79 77 75 74 71 70 67
4
3
2
1
Year-class
Focus to annulus1 (mm)
Age 5 only 1977 year class
annulus 1
annulus 2
 
 
Fig. 2.3.3 Retrospective analyses of scale 
growth of 5-year-old-herring from archived 
collections of scales from northern BC.  Scale 
growth, corresponding to juveniles at age 1 (blue 
rectangles) and age 2 (red rectangles), as estimated 
from comparison of focus:  annuli distances, was 
normal in the 1977 year-class.  The 1977 year-
class is shown in yellow.  The boxes and vertical 
lines represent the range and 95% confidence 
limits about the mean.    
 
Age 2
Age 5
Age 6
Age 8
Age 3
Age 4
Age 7 
97
96
95
94
93
92
91
90
89
88
87
86
85
84
83
82
81
80
79
78
77
76
75
74
73
72
71
65
64
63
62
61
60
59
58
57
56
55
54
53
52
51
250
200
150
Year
Median (mm) length at age
1977 year- class
 
 
Fig. 2.3.4 Comparison of the size-at-age of the 
1977 year-class with those of other years from 
catch sampling data collected in northern BC.  The 
1977 year-class (large dark circles) was normal (or 
slightly larger than normal at age 2).  Thereafter, 
the relative size-at-age, relative to previous year-
classes, decreased until age 8. 
96
abundant production of zooplantion, specifically 
copepods, could explain both enhanced growth 
and year-class survival in herring and other 
species.  There is a precedent for assuming that an 
abundant source of an alternate zooplankton prey 
species can reduce predation on herring.  Ware 
and McFarlane (1995) showed that increased 
euphausiid production resulted in a decreased hake 
predation on adult herring off the west coast of 
Vancouver Island.  Similar mechanisms 
mightoperate at the juvenile stages, so factors 
promoting a strong year-class of herring might 
also support strong year-classes of other species, 
leading to synchrony between unrelated species 
such as such as blackcod and lingcod.  Again, the 
answer is a tentative yes.  Both of these species 
have early life stages (first several years of life) in 
nearshore waters. 
 
 
2.4 Review for Pacific saury (Cololabis saira) study under the VENFISH project 
 
Shin-ichi Ito
1
, Yutaka Kurita
1
, Yoshioki Oozeki
2
, Satoshi Suyama
3
, Hiroya Sugisaki
1
, Yongjun 
Tian
2
 
1 
Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute, 3-27-5 Shinhamacho, Shiogama, Miyagi 985-0001, 
Japan.  E-mail:  goito@affrc.go.jp, sugisaki@mgy.affrc.go.jp 
2 
National Research Institute of Fisheries Science, 2-12-4 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, 
Kanagawa 236-8648, Japan.  E-mail:  oozeki@affrc.go.jp 
3 
Hachinohe Branch, Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute, Same, Hachinohe, Aomori 031-
0841, Japan.  E-mail:  suyama@myg.affrc.go.jp 
 
VENFISH (Comprehensive study of the Variation 
of the oceanic ENvironment and FISH populations 
in the northwestern Pacific) project was started in 
April 1997 and will end in March 2002.  This 
project has been supported by Japan Agriculture 
Forest Fisheries Agency.  The aim of this project 
is clarification of bottom-up control process for 
Pacific saury and walleye pollock in the 
Northwestern Pacific.  More than 20 scientists 
from National Fisheries Research Centers at 
Hokkaido, Tohoku, Yokohama and Shimizu, and 
Hokkaido University and Tohoku University 
joined this project. 
 
The VENFISH team is composed of 5 teams and 
there are primary production, zooplankton and fish 
teams.  The fish team is composed of Pacific saury 
and walleye pollock groups.  Between these three 
teams there is a plankton ecosystem model team 
and a fish population model team.  In this report 
we will note our studies of saury, which is only 
one portion of this project. 
 
The main target area of the VENFISH project is 
east of 160ºE in the northwestern Pacific, and in 
that region there is a warm Kuroshio current and a 
cold Oyashio current.  Between these two western 
boundary currents, there is a mixed water region,  
and in that area many eddies are detached from the 
Kuroshio and Oyashio and make very complicated 
environments.  The saury spawning starts in the 
mixed water region in autumn, moves to the 
Kuroshio area in winter, and moves back to the 
mixed water region in spring (Fig. 2.4.1) (Odate 
1977; Watanabe and Lo 1989; Watanabe et al. 
1997).  Juveniles are advected to the Kuroshio 
extension region, then grow and migrate to the 
Oyashio region through the mixed water region for 
feeding.  After sufficient feeding they migrate 
back to the Kuroshio region for spawning.  On the 
southward migration, they are fished in the 
Japanese coastal zone.  We will briefly report the 
new findings for Pacific saury in the later sections. 
 
Feeding habitat 
 
The feeding habitat of Pacific saury (Cololabis 
saira) changes according to the life stage and the 
location.  Larvae smaller than 15 mm mainly feeds 
on Oncea and Oitona sp. (Nakata and Koyama 
2002), whereas larvae and juvenile larger than 15 
mm prefer Calanus sp.  Young saury which 
migrate to the mixed water region mainly feed on 
Euphausia pacifica.  In the Oyashio region they 
feed mainly on Euphausia pacifica and 
Neocalanus cristatus and the ration becomes the 
97
maximum in this season.  On the way of their 
backward migration, they feed Euphausia pacifica 
and Sagitta elegans, but the ration decreases to the 
minimum.  In the spawning area they feed on 
calanoid copepods and the ration is higher than in 
autumn (Sugisaki and Kurita, in preparation; 
Kurita and Sugisaki, in preparation). 
 
30
35
40
45
130 135 140 145 150 155 160 165
Kuroshio Extension
Oyashio Front
spawning ground
in winter
spawning ground
in spring & autumn
Mixed water region
Migration
Migration
Feeding ground
in summer
Fishing ground
in autumn
 
 
Fig. 2.4.1 Schematic picture of Pacific saury 
(Cololabis saira) life history.  Spawning starts in 
September and continues until June, shifting 
location from the mixed water region and 
Kuroshio region.  The main spawning season is 
winter.  Juveniles are advected to the Kuroshio 
extension region and migrate to the Oyashio 
region through the mixed region for feeding.  
After sufficient feeding they migrate back to the 
Kuroshio region for spawning.  On the southward 
migration, they are fished in the Japanese coastal 
zone. 
 
Spawning density 
 
Kurita and Sugisaki (in preparation) surveyed the 
seasonal change of the saury distribution and the 
ratio of mature stage in the three regions.  In early 
autumn, half of the saury occur in the Oyashio 
region and they are immature.  In winter almost all 
of the saury are in the Kuroshio and they are 
mature.  In spring, half of the saury exist in the 
Kuroshio and most of them are mature. But the 
other half occurs in the mixed water region and 
only about 70% of them are mature.  These results 
show that the most important area is the Kuroshio 
region and the most important season is winter for 
the saury spawning. 
 
Kurita and Sugisaki (in preparation) estimated the 
spawning interval and batch fecundity.  Using 
these values and ratio of mature saury to the total, 
they estimated the spawning density for each 
season.  Their result showed that the most 
important season for spawning is winter. 
 
Larvae and juvenile 
 
Many studies have been done about larval and 
juvenile saury (Watanabe et al. 1997; Oozeki and 
Watanabe 2000; Oozeki and Watanabe, in 
preparation).  Using widely sampled field data, 
Watanabe et al. (1997) and Oozeki and Watanabe 
(2000) estimated the production of hatched larvae 
in each season since 1990 to 1997.  The average 
value for 8 years showed the highest value in 
autumn and the lowest value in spring.  They also 
estimated the growth rate and mortality of larvae 
and production of juveniles.  Growth rate showed 
a maximum in autumn and a minimum in spring.  
Mortality was highest in autumn and lowest in 
spring.  As a result, the production of surviving 
juveniles showed a maximum in spring and a 
minimum in autumn.  But the fluctuation of 
juvenile production in spring is very high and 
stable in winter.  Watanabe et al. (1997) suggested 
that the stable winter juvenile might contribute to 
stable recruitment and middle size saury landings 
in autumn.  Also Watanabe and Lo (1989) pointed 
out that winter was the most active spawning 
season using larval catch data during 1973-1986. 
 
Oozeki and Watanabe (2000) conducted 
laboratory incubation experiments on saury eggs.  
They reared same age larvae at three different 
temperatures and observed growth rate.  This was 
done for three different age larvae (9, 20, 30 days) 
and the dependency of growth rate on age was also 
tested.  The result showed that the growth rate 
increased linearly with temperature and also 
increased with age.  Analysis of the otolith 
increment and the knob length of the larvae 
showed the possibility of the estimation of growth 
rate of saury juveniles from the otolith field data.  
Then, they estimated the instantaneous growth rate 
from otolith field data and analyzed the 
relationship between the recent growth rate and 
oceanic environments (Oozeki and Watanabe: in 
preparation).  Their result showed that the SST 
and food density affected larval growth during the 
early stages, and SST and chlorophyll become 
more important in the later stage. 
98
Growth rate of adults 
 
Suyama et al. (in preparation) analyzed the 
presence of a hyaline zone in the otoliths of 
Pacific saury.  Usually the size decomposition is 
done by knob length, but sometimes it is difficult 
to divide them only from body length information.  
On the other hand, the otoliths of large size saury 
have the hyaline zone whereas the small and 
middle sizes do not.  They analyzed the existence 
the hyaline zone and found out that the large and 
middle size cohort can be decomposed by the 
boundary of 50% existence ration of hyaline zone.  
Using this definition they decomposed the large 
and middle cohort and analyzed the inter-annual 
variability in the growth of each cohort.  The 
middle size fluctuated between 264 and 286 mm, 
and the large size fluctuated between 303 and 314 
mm, and the fluctuation was larger in the middle 
size. 
 
For example, the growth increment of the large 
and middle cohort from July to November 1999, 
was 11.3 and 19.3 mm respectively.  On the other 
hand, they increased to 12.5 and 31.3 mm 
respectively in 2000.  This result suggests that the 
growth rate of the large size cohort is more stably 
estimated compared to the middle size cohort. 
 
Growth rate between juvenile and large size  
 
Using the hyaline zone information from the 
otolith it is possible to estimate the growth rate of 
young and adult saury, but the growth rate 
between juvenile and young saury is very difficult 
to estimate because of the existence of the hyaline 
zone.  We cannot count the increment of the 
otolith because the increment is unclear in the 
hyaline zone.  So, we cannot determine the age of 
adult saury. 
 
For this problem, Kurita (personal 
communication) developed a new method to 
estimate the hatch date from the age at which the 
otolith increment width reached a second 
maximum.  It became possible to estimate the age 
of saury using this method even if there is a 
hyaline zone.  He estimated the hatch date of the 
large size saury and developed a new scenario of 
the life history of Pacific saury combined with the 
information of the growth of the saury with no 
hyaline zone.  According to his scenario, saury 
which are born in the earlier season spawn in the 
first winter and also in the second winter.  But the 
later spawned saury do not spawn in the first year 
and spawn in the second year. 
 
Energy for migration and spawning  
 
Kurita (personal communication) analyzed 
seasonal variation of lipid and protein content in 
30 cm knob length saury.  The protein content did 
not vary much but lipid variation showed very 
large variability.  The average lipid content is 
about 40 g in summer.  In winter, which is the 
active spawning season, mature saury contained 
little neutral lipid.  Moreover, protein seemed to be 
utilized as energy sources because the sum of 
protein and water content was constant.  From this 
result he concluded that saury need to feed in 
order to spawn eggs in the Kuroshio region.   
 
Thus, the environment may be very important for 
the saury reproduction in the Kuroshio region.  
From the energy balance between the food nutrient 
and egg production, he estimated that about 35.6% 
of total assimilated energy was used for winter egg 
production in the Kuroshio. 
 
Population dynamics model for Pacific saury 
 
Tian et al. (2002b) analyzed the interannual 
variability of the saury stock using a population 
dynamics model.  In his model there are two 
cohorts.  One is a cohort spawned during autumn - 
winter and the other is spawned during winter - 
spring.  The life span of the saury was assumed to 
be two years, and as a result the large size saury 
included both cohorts.  The governing equations 
were growth rate, population, fishing effort and 
reproduction equations.  In the population 
dynamics the mortality included environmental 
effects.  As environment factors they adapted SST 
in the Kuroshio Extension zone (KE SST) and SOI 
(Southern Oscillation Index) according to the 
result of Tian et al. (2000a).  
 
The results showed that the effect of KE SST was 
important to the longer-period variability, and the 
SOI effect was important to both the longer-period 
and inter-annual variability. 
 
99
Conclusion 
 
Under the VENFISH project, much has been 
learned about Pacific saury and a new life history 
of the saury was proposed.  But information about 
the time between the juvenile and small saury 
stages are still limited.  In the future more study is 
needed on these stages. 
A population dynamics model was constructed 
under VENFISH and the effect of KE SST and 
SOI was tested.  But in that model the 
environment influenced only mortality.  In the 
future we should include the environmental 
influence on production and clarify the bottom-up 
control mechanism of Pacific saury. 
 
 
2.5 Formalization of interactions between chemical and biological 
compartments in the mathematical model describing the transformation of 
nitrogen, phosphorus, silicon and carbon compounds 
 
Alexander V. Leonov
1
 and Gennady A. Kantakov
2
 
1 
Institute of Oceanology, Russian Academy of Sciences, 36 Nakhimovsky Ave., Moscow, 117851, 
Russia.  E-mail:  leonov@sio.rssi.ru  
2 
Sakhalin Research Institute of Fisheries and Oceanography, 196 Komsomolskaya St., Yuzhno-
Sakhalinsk, 693023, Russia.  E-mail:  okhotsk@sakhniro.ru  
 
In the significant part of the ecological models 
used for studying the joint dynamics of the 
microorganism biomasses and biogenic substance 
concentrations in the natural waters, several most 
important biological functions are formalized.   
 
They are connected with the consumption of 
biogenic substances (UP) by microorganisms, 
excretion of the metabolic products (L) by them, 
the microorganism mortality (S) and grazing (G) 
by microorganisms of higher trophic levels.  The 
change of the microorganism biomass in the 
course of time (dB/dt) in the ecological models, as 
a rule, is represented by the following structural 
equation: 
 
(2.5.1) dB / dt = (UP - L - S) * B  -  G * В
*
   
 
here B* is the biomass of microorganisms from 
the higher trophic level, and due to grazing they 
have an influence on the development and activity 
of the considered microorganism group B;  UP, L, 
S, and G are specific rates of the biogenic 
substance consumption, the metabolic product 
excretion, the mortality of microorganisms B and 
their grazing by B*, respectively (day
-1
).   
 
Biomasses B and B* are calculated in the units of 
biogenic elements (N, P, C or Si). 
 
The simulation of processes of the substrate 
consumption by microorganisms 
 
For the simulation of processes of the substrate 
consumption by microorganisms (bacterio-, phyto- 
and zooplankton), the equation of Michaelis-
Menten-Monod is traditionally used: 
 
(2.5.2) UP = K (T, L) * C
i
 / (K
m
 + C
i
)     
 
where UP is the growth rate of the microorganism 
biomass (or the substrate uptake), day
-1
;  C
i
 is the 
concentration of concrete substratum, mg/l;  K
m
 is 
the Michaelis constant, mg/l;  K (T, L) is the 
maximum growth rate of the microorganism 
biomass (or the substrate uptake) corrected to the 
temperature (T) and radiation (L) conditions in the 
water environment, mg/(l day).  Thus, for 
description of the process of the substrate uptake 
by one group of microorganism (by bacterio-, 
phyto- or zooplankton) it is necessary to estimate 
the values of two coefficients - K (T, L) and K
m
.  
Using this equation form for the description of the 
consumption of several substrata by 
microorganisms, means that the process of the 
substrate uptake is described independently of 
each other for any substrate, and in this case, the 
values of the rate constants for the consumption of 
each substrata should be evaluated.  If the number 
of such substrata reaches five (ammonia, nitrites, 
100
nitrates, phosphates, silicates) then the number of 
evaluated coefficients should be equal to ten. 
 
The form of equation (2.5.2) with some 
modifications is used for describing the processes 
of the substrate consumption by microorganisms 
in the models developed by PICES MODEL Task 
Team for the studying of chemical and biological 
compartment dynamics in the marine environment.  
However, in the marine environment, the substrate 
concentrations are always little and therefore it is 
very difficult to describe the dynamics of the 
biomasses and substrate concentrations even for 
one season.  Frequently the very task of the 
simulation of the chemical and biological 
compartment dynamics in the marine systems is a 
rather difficult labor-consuming or even 
insurmountable problem. 
 
Here we present the logic of the simulation of the 
substrate consumption process by the 
microorganisms that is used for development of 
the model describing the transformation of N, P, C 
and Si compounds in the polysubstrate 
environment (Leonov and Saposhnikov 1997).  
First we shall transform the equation (2.5.2) 
subdividing the terms of equation in the numerator 
and the denominator on C
i
.  As a result, we obtain 
the following equation: 
 
(2.5.3) UP = K (T, L) /(1 + K
m
 / C
i
)  
 
The analysis of literature shows that the value of 
K
m
 in different examples of using equation (2.5.2) 
for describing of processes in the natural waters 
changes by 2-3 orders.  Consequently, the 
convincing arguments of the application of the 
equation (2.5.2) for describing the substrate 
consumption processes in the marine ecosystems 
is clearly insufficient (large number of coefficients 
for the polysubstratal environment and the large 
variability of the coefficient K
m
).  The value of the 
coefficient K
m
 for the marine ecosystems may be 
compared with the values of the microorganism 
biomasses.  Therefore we have all reasons to use, 
instead of the coefficient K
m
, the value of the 
biomass in the units of biogenic element (N, P, C 
or Si) from which biomass can be evaluated.  If 
the biomass is considered in N, then the equation 
(2.5.3) can be written as: 
 
(2.5.4) UP = K (T, L) /(1 + В
N
 / C
N
)  
 
where B
N
 is the biomass of the studied group of 
microorganisms, in units of N, mg N/l;  C
N
 is the 
concentration of N fractions consumed by these 
microorganisms, mg N/l.  
 
If there are several N-containing substrata in the 
water environment (for example, ammonia NH
4
, 
nitrites NO
2
, and nitrates NO
3
) and these 
substrates are interchangeable and may be 
consumed by the microorganism (let us mark it as 
F and taking into account that the biomass is 
expressed in units of N, it may be written as F
N
), 
then the expression for C
N
 can be represented in 
the form of the pool on N (PoolF
N
) for the studied 
group of microorganism: 
 
(2.5.5) PoolF
N
 = d(1) * NH4 + d(2) * NO2 + 
d(3) * NO3 
 
Here the coefficients d(i) show preferences in the 
consumption of each substrate by the 
microorganism for this N-substrates (NH
4
, NO
2
, 
and NO
3
).  Value of the coefficients d(i) for each 
substrate can change from 0 to 1, and their sum for 
the selected set of substrata is 1. 
 
How are the values of coefficients d(i) evaluated? 
It is known from literature that the phytoplankton 
consumes more preferably ammonium N than 
other mineral forms.  The nitrate N is in second 
place.  So, in the first approximation, we can 
assign the values of the preference coefficients in 
the uptake of indicated substrates by the studied 
group of phytoplankton:  d(1) = 0.5;  d(2) = 0.2; 
d(3) = 0.3.  Inserting the equation (2.5.5) into the 
equation (2.5.4), we obtain: 
 
(2.5.6) UP
FN
 = K (T, L) /(1 + В
N
 / PoolF
N
)  
or  
(2.5.6a) UP
FN
 = K (T, L) /(1 + В
N
 /(d(1)*NH4 + 
d(2)*NO2 + d(3)*NO3)) 
 
The general rate of the N-containing substrata 
consumption, UP
FN
, is composed of the rates of 
the consumption of the individual substrates: 
 
(2.5.7) UP
FN
 = UP
NH4 
+ UP
NO2 
+ UP
NO3 
  
101
Let us write down the equations, which describe 
the consumptions of individual substrates (NH
4
, 
NO
2
 and NO
3
) by phytoplankton taking into 
account that in the water environment several 
substrates are interchangeable on N, as indicated 
by the equation (2.5.6a).  Making elementary 
algebraic conversions, we shall obtain the 
equations, which describe the consumption of each 
studied substrates by the phytoplankton: 
 
(2.5.8) UP
NH4 
= K (T, L) * d(1) * NH4 / (PoolF
N
 
+ В
N
)  
 
(2.5.9) UP
NO2 
= K (T, L) * d(2) * NO2 / (PoolF
N
 
+ В
N
)  
 
(2.5.10) UP
NO3 
= K (T, L) * d(3) * NO3 / (PoolF
N
 
+ В
N
)    
 
The suggested form of the description of the 
interchangeable substrates by the microorganism 
assumes that the rates of the consumption of each 
substrate will be compared only in such a case, 
when the product of substrate concentrations to 
their preference coefficient will be close.  With the 
maximum rate will be consumed that substratum, 
for which the product of its preference coefficient 
to the concentration will be the greatest (in this 
case, from of three given substrates).  This form of 
the equations for the consumption of the 
interchangeable substrates by microogranism (in 
particular, by phytoplankton) gives the possibility 
of switching for the intensive consumption by the 
hydrobionts only of those substrata whose 
concentrations to these are greatest in the 
comparison with other substrata.  It gives a 
possibility for the water environment to restore the 
pool of those substrata, which in the process of the 
biomass growth descend to the smallest 
(sometimes critically small) values.  This 
phenomenon in the description of the processes of 
increasing of the biomass and substrate 
consumption is impossible by equations the 
traditionally used for the simulation of marine 
ecosystems, in which the substrate consumption 
by different groups of microorganism is assigned 
independently of each other. 
 
Let us consider the case, when there are several 
substrates as the interchangeable (as it was 
examined above), so also not interchangeable, in 
the water environment for the phytoplankton.  If 
we want correctly describe in the model the 
substrate uptake processes then we should 
remember the basic Odum’s postulate that 
everything is interrelated in the natural water 
environment.  The requirements of phytoplankton 
in P cannot be compensated by N or Si 
compounds, and vice versa.  Therefore the 
compounds of different biogenic elements cannot 
be considered as interchangeable for the formation 
of the microorganism biomass and the kinetics of 
the uptake substrate processes should be 
formulated with point of view their mutual 
influence on each other and not their 
interchangeability.  
 
Taking into account these reasons, let us write 
down the equation (2.5.6) for the rate of biomass 
growth (or the different substrate uptake) for the 
conditions of the combined influence of N and P 
compounds on the biomass of the considered 
microorganism group (for example, the 
phytoplankton) keeping the logic of all foregoing 
reasons.  Then we obtain, that 
 
(2.5.11) UP
F 
 = K (T, L) /(1 + В
N
 / PoolF
N
 + В
Р
 / 
PoolF
Р
)   
 
Here B
P
 is the biomass in units of P, mg P/l; 
PoolF
p
 - the pool of the P substrates, mg P/l, that 
may be consumed by the phytoplankton, and these 
substrates are the dissolved mineral (DIP) and 
organic (DOP) forms of P: 
 
(2.5.12) PoolF
p 
= d(4)*DIP + d(5)*DOP 
 
In this case the total rates of the uptake of N and P 
compounds by the given group of microorganisms 
are represented as: 
 
(2.5.13) UP
FN
 = UP
NH4 
+ UP
NO2 
+ UP
NO3 
  
 
(2.5.14) UP
FP
 = UP
DIP 
+ UP
DOP  
   
 
Accordingly to the same logic, let us formulate 
equations for describing the individual substrates 
taking into account the influence of each of them 
on the kinetics of the formation of biomass and the 
substrate uptake being oriented toward general 
equation (2.5.11): 
 
102
(2.5.15) UP
NH4 
= K (T, L) * d(1) * NH4 / MF   
 
(2.5.16) UP
NO2 
= K (T, L) * d(2) * NO2 / MF   
 
(2.5.17) UP
NO3 
= K (T, L) * d(3) * NO3 / MF     
 
(2.5.18) UP
DIP 
= K (T, L) * d(4) * DIP / MF     
 
(2.5.19) UP
DOP 
= K (T, L) * d(5) * DOP / MF    
 
where  
(2.5.20) MF=PoolF
N
 * PoolF
P
 + B
N
 * PoolF
P
 + B
P
 
* PoolF
N
.   
 
When the joint consumption of N, P, and SI 
compounds is considered for the same group of 
microorganism, the equation (2.5.11) takes the 
form:  
 
(2.5.21) UP
F 
 = K (T, L) /(1 + В
N 
/ PoolF
N
 + В
Р
 / 
PoolF
Р
 + В
si
 / PoolF
Si
)    
 
where  
(2.5.22) PoolF
Si 
= d(6) * DISi     
 
and DISI is the content of dissolved inorganic 
silicon, mg Si/l.  
 
In accordance to the accepted logic for the 
formulations of kinetic dependences, the equations 
describing the individual substrate uptake and their 
mutual influence on each other are written in the 
following form: 
 
(2.5.23) UP
NH4 
= K (T, L) * d(1) * NH4 / MF1 
 
(2.5.24) UP
NO2 
= K (T, L) * d(2) * NO2 / MF1 
 
(2.5.25) UP
NO3 
  = K (T, L) * d(3) * NO3 / MF1 
 
(2.5.26) UP
DIP 
= K (T, L) * d(4) * DIP / MF1 
 
(2.5.27) UP
DOP 
= K (T, L) * d(5) * DOP / MF1 
 
(2.5.28) UP
DISi 
= K (T, L) * d(6) * DISi / MF1 
 
where  
(2.5.29) MF1 = PoolF
N
 * PoolF
P
 * PoolF
Si 
+ B
N
 * 
PoolF
P
 * PoolF
Si
 + B
P
 * PoolF
N
 * PoolF
Si 
+ B
Si
 * PoolF
N
 * PoolF
P
 
  
A similar form of equations may be used for any 
functional group of microorganism taking into 
account any the variety of the substrate assortment  
including the components of the water 
environment pollution (for example, oil products).  
The substrate assortment for the organisms of 
higher trophic levels is higher than for the 
organisms of lowest trophic status.  In this 
assortment fall the dissolved and particulated 
organic compounds of biogenic elements, 
including biomasses of certain microorganisms 
and detritus.  
 
The equation for the term G (the specific grazing 
rate of the microorganism from the lowest trophic 
levels by the organisms of higher levels) is 
constructed, on the basis of the presented above 
principles considering the high-constituent nature 
of water environment and the mutual influence of 
the uptake of individual substrates on each other in 
the process of the microorganism biomass growth. 
 
The value of the maximum growth rate of the 
microorganism biomass (or the substrate 
consumption), K (T, L) should be corrected to the 
conditions on the temperature and for light (for the 
planktonic organisms) in the water environment.  
The analysis of ecological models existing at 
present shows that there are many methods of 
carrying out a similar correction. 
 
In the model of the transformation of nitrogen, 
phosphorus, silicon and carbon compounds the 
temperature dependence is considered by the 
exponential function, which differs for the 
different groups of microorganisms in the slope 
and the optimum values of temperature.  The 
dependence of the plankton biomass growth as a 
function of light conditions in water environment 
is considered by the traditional functions that are 
used at the simulation of the processes of 
phytoplankton photosynthesis and daily vertical 
migration of zooplankton. 
 
Formalization of the excretion processes of 
metabolic products by microorganisms 
 
At first stages of mathematical simulation model 
development as the independent scientific 
direction in the studies of the natural aquasystems 
state, this important biological function of 
103
microorganisms was not considered at all.  At 
present time, in the majority of the cases the 
specific rate of the metabolic excretion by 
microorganisms (L) is formulated in the ecological 
models by the simplest method and, as a rule, it is 
represented in the form of a constant quotas (α) 
from the UP function: 
 
(2.5.30) L = α * UP 
 
The experience of the experimental research of the 
microorganism population dynamics and the 
simulation of the conditions for the biomass 
growth shows that the excretion fraction of the 
products of metabolic exchange in different 
microorganisms differs very substantially, and it 
can change considerably in the process of the 
biomass growth in each group of microorganisms. 
 
This fact was taken into account, and during the 
development of the mathematical model of the 
transformation of nitrogen, phosphorus, silicon, 
and carbon compounds the different forms of the 
expression of the excretion fraction of metabolic 
products changing in the time were checked.  It 
was found the form of equation for α that most 
completely consider the special features of the 
microorganism biomass growth, and it is 
formulated as the dependence from the specific 
rate of the substrate uptake, UP: 
 
(2.5.31) α = a * UP / (1 + b * UP) + (1 - a / b)    
 
where a and  b are constants (moreover a < b) 
whose values determine the nature of change in 
the excretion fraction in the dependence on the 
values of the total substrate uptake by considered 
group of microorganisms.  
 
The first term of the equation (2.5.31) shows the 
forming quota of the metabolic excretion of 
substance in the favorable on the nutrient 
conditions of the water environment, when values 
of UP are significant.   
 
The second term of the equation (2.5.31) shows 
the quota of the metabolic excretion at the 
substrate deficite when values of UP become 
minimum.   
 
With the values of coefficients a and b can be 
reproduced the significant spectrum of the 
conditions for the microorganism biomass growth 
which can be evaluated in the units of different 
biogenic elements (N, P, C or Si).  
 
Formalization of the processes of the 
microorganism mortality 
 
The processes of development and growth of the 
microorganism biomass are continuous with the 
processes of the internal losses of biomasses (S).  
It is possible to assume that the natural 
physiological losses of the biomasses of any group 
of microorganisms compose 5-10% of the total 
biomass although this problem remains 
insufficiently studied experimentally for all 
microorganism groups.  In the process of the 
microorganism mortality, the detritus (or the dead 
suspended matter) is formed in the water 
environment.  The biogenic substances containing 
in it are actively included in turnover by bacteria 
and zooplankton which transform detritus into the 
labile nutrients well assimilated by other 
microorganisms.  Under the conditions of reduced 
temperatures, the detrital links become the most 
important in the nutrition and growth of the 
populations of fishes. 
 
At the first ecological models, the microorganism 
mortality S is not taken into account at all or only 
natural physiological biomass losses are 
considered.  The modern ecological models 
include the natural internal biomass losses and 
take into account losses inevitable at the 
stimulation of the biomass growth processes.  It 
may be differently formulated.  In the 
mathematical model of the transformation of N, P, 
Si, and C compounds this important biological 
function is described by the equation: 
 
(2.5.32) S
N
 = g (1) + g (2) * В
N
 / UP
FN
 
 
where g (1) and g (2) are constants describing the 
processes of the natural  biomass losses and 
mortality  depending on the conditions of 
activating the growth, respectively.  If the biomass 
of the microorganism group is evaluated in the 
units of different biogenic elements (N, P, C or Si) 
then respectively for each case their specific rates 
of the internal losses of biomasses are evaluated 
104
with the use of specific values of coefficients g (i), 
values of biomasses B and rates of the substrate 
consumption UP. 
 
The set of model coefficients applied in two case 
studies (for the Okhotsk Sea (Leonov and 
Sapozhnikov 1997) and Caspian Sea (Leonov and 
Srygar 1999) for the simulation of microorganism 
dynamics is presented in Table 2.5.1.  
 
Thus, in the mathematical model of the 
transformation of N, P, Si, and C compounds, the 
interactions between chemical (concentrations of 
biogenic substances) and biological (biomasses the 
microorganisms - bacteria, phyto- and 
zooplankton) compartments are considered and 
reproduced the most important biological 
processes of the substrate uptake, excretion of the 
metabolic products and mortality of the 
microorganisms.  As a result of these processes, 
the turnover of chemical substances (organic and 
mineral) are performed in natural marine 
ecosystems.  The special feature of this model is 
the formalization of the important biological 
functions (the excretion of the metabolic products 
and mortality of microorganisms) in a dependence 
on the consumption of different biogenic 
substances by microorganism.  These biogenic 
substrates are subdivided on interchangeable (on 
one biogenic element) and not interchangeable (on 
the different biogenic elements).  The used form of 
equations for the description in this model of the 
most important biological functions serves as the 
example for the formalization of the processes of 
the internal regulation (self regulation) of the 
microorganism activity within the ecosystems.  
The account of a similar internal regulation 
mechanism of the microorganism activity makes 
this model sufficiently resistant and allow us to 
apply it without the significant correction of the 
parameters in the study the aqueous ecosystems 
which essentially differ in the environmental 
conditions (temperature, radiation, water regime, 
transparency).  There are several positive 
experiences in the application of this model to 
study the special features of the ecosystem 
functioning of the Sea of Okhotsk (Leonov and 
Sapozhnikov 1997) and Caspian Sea (Leonov and 
Stygar 1999).  The first results are also obtained 
on the simulation of the intraannual dynamics of 
biogenic substances in the ecosystem in La 
Perouse Strait and Aniva Bay (Sea of Okhotsk) 
(Pischalnik and Leonov 2002). 
 
Table 2.5.1 Values of model parameters used for description of biological compartment dynamics in 
the Sea of Okhotsk and the Caspian Sea. 
 
Case study 1 - The Sea of Okhotsk Case study 2 - The Caspian Sea  
Heterotrophic bacteria (B) 
Maximum growth rate: K=1.0 
Preference coefficients for substrate uptake: 
for C-containing substrate: d
DOC
=1; 
for Si-containing substrate: d
DOSi
=0.6; d
DISi
=0.01  
                                            d
SID
=0.39; 
for N-containing substrate: d
DON
=0.6; d
ND
=0.4  
for P-containing substrate: d
DOP
=0.4; d
PD
=0.6 
Excretion activity: 
for C substrate: a
C
=0.05; b
C
=0.09  
for Si substrate: a
Si
=0.05; b
Si
=0.088’ 
for N substrate: a
N
=0.05; b
N
=0.087 
for P substrate: a
P
=0.05; b
P
=0.09 
Mortality coefficients: 
for C substrate: g(1)
C
=0.04; g(2)
C
=0.04 
for Si substrate: g(1)
Si
=0.045; g(2)
Si
=0.05 
for N substrate: g(1)
N
=0.035; g(2)
N
=0.035 
for P substrate: g(1)
P
=0.055; g(2)
P
=0.055 
Heterotrophic bacteria (B) 
Maximum growth rate: K=0.75 
Preference coefficients for substrate uptake: 
for C-containing substrate: d
DOC
=1; 
for Si-containing substrate: d
DOSi
=0.6; d
DISi
=0.01 
                                            d
SID
=0.39; 
for N-containing substrate: d
DON
=0.6; d
ND
=0.4 
for P-containing substrate: d
DOP
=0.4; d
PD
=0.6 
Excretion activity: 
for C substrate: a
C
=0.05; b
C
=0.088 
for Si substrate: a
Si
=0.05; b
Si
=0.088 
for N substrate: a
N
=0.05; b
N
=0.1 
for P substrate: a
P
=0.05; b
P
=0.086 
Mortality coefficients: 
for C substrate: g(1)
C
=0.03; g(2)
C
=0.025 
for Si substrate: g(1)
Si
=0.045; g(2)
Si
=0.05 
for N substrate: g(1)
N
=0.028; g(2)
N
=0.03 
for P substrate: g(1)
P
=0.045; g(2)
P
=0.05 
105
First phytoplankton group (F1-diatom algae) 
Maximum growth rate: K=2.5 
Preference coefficients for substrate uptake: 
for Si-containing substrate:  d
DOSi
=0.3;    d
DISi
=0.7  
for N-containing substrate:d
NH4
=0.025;  
NO2
=0.025 
                                            d
NO3
=0.9;     d
UR
=0.05 
for P-containing substrate:   d
DOP
=0.3;    d
DIP
=0.7 
Excretion activity: 
for Si substrate: a
Si
=0.051; b
Si
=0.052 
for N substrate: a
N
=0.05; b
N
=0.053 
for P substrate: a
P
=0.05; b
P
=0.065 
Mortality coefficients:  
for Si substrate: g(1)
Si
=0.0; g(2)
Si
=0.08 
for N substrate: g(1)
N
=0.0; g(2)
N
=0.02 
for P substrate: g(1)
P
=0.0; g(2)
P
=0.02 
First phytoplankton group (F1-diatom algae) 
Maximum growth rate: K=2.5 
Preference coefficients for substrate uptake: 
for Si-containing substrate: d
DOSi
=0.3;    d
DISi
=0.7  
for N-containing substrate: d
NH4
=0.2;     d
NO2
=0.05 
                                            d
NO3
=0.7;     d
UR
=0.05 
for P-containing substrate: d
DOP
=0.05;    d
DIP
=0.95 
Excretion activity: 
for Si substrate: a
Si
=0.051; b
Si
=0.052 
for N substrate: a
N
=0.05; b
N
=0.052 
for P substrate: a
P
=0.05; b
P
=0.055 
Mortality coefficients:  
for Si substrate: g(1)
Si
=0.04;  g(2)
Si
=0.03 
for N substrate: g(1)
N
=0.05;   g(2)
N
=0.049 
for P substrate:  g(1)
P
=0.05;   g(2)
P
=0.07 
Second phytoplankton group (F2-peridinium 
algae) 
Maximum growth rate: K=1.8 
Preference coefficients for substrate uptake: 
for N-containing substrate: d
NH4
=0.15;    d
NO2
=0.05 
                                             d
NO3
=0.2;      d
UR
=0.6 
for P-containing substrate:   d
DOP
=0.4;      d
DIP
=0.6 
Excretion activity: 
for N substrate: a
N
=0.049; b
N
=0.0495 
for P substrate: a
P
=0.049; b
P
=0.053 
Mortality coefficients:  
for N substrate: g(1)
N
=0.0;  g(2)
N
=0.05 
for P substrate:  g(1)
P
=0.0;  g(2)
P
=0.1 
Second phytoplankton group (F2-green algae) 
 
Maximum growth rate: K=2.5 
Preference coefficients for substrate uptake: 
for N-containing substrate: d
NH4
=0.2;      d
NO2
=0.05 
                                             d
NO3
=0.7;      d
UR
=0.05 
for P-containing substrate:   d
DOP
=0.05;    d
DIP
=0.95 
Excretion activity: 
for N substrate: a
N
=0.049; b
N
=0.0495 
for P substrate: a
P
=0.049; b
P
=0.052 
Mortality coefficients:  
for N substrate: g(1)
N
=0.04;  g(2)
N
=0.03 
for P substrate:  g(1)
P
=0.04;  g(2)
P
=0.06 
Third phytoplankton group (F3-green algae) 
Maximum growth rate: K=1.8 
Preference coefficients for substrate uptake: 
for N-containing substrate: d
NH4
=0.15;    d
NO2
=0.05 
                                             d
NO3
=0.2;      d
UR
=0.6 
for P-containing substrate:   d
DOP
=0.4;      d
DIP
=0.6 
Excretion activity: 
for N substrate: a
N
=0.049; b
N
=0.0495 
for P substrate: a
P
=0.049; b
P
=0.0523 
Mortality coefficients:  
for N substrate: g(1)
N
=0.0;  g(2)
N
=0.05  
for P substrate:  g(1)
P
=0.0;  g(2)
P
=0.1 
Third phytoplankton group (F3-blue-green 
algae) 
Maximum growth rate: K=2.5  
Preference coefficients for substrate uptake: 
for N-containing substrate: d
NH4
=0.2;      d
NO2
=0.05 
                                             d
NO3
=0.7;      d
UR
=0.05 
for P-containing substrate:   d
DOP
=0.05;    d
DIP
=0.95 
Excretion activity: 
for N substrate: a
N
=0.049; b
N
=0.0495 
for P substrate: a
P
=0.049; b
P
=0.052 
Mortality coefficients:  
for N substrate: g(1)
N
=0.04;  g(2)
N
=0.03 
for P substrate:  g(1)
P
=0.04;  g(2)
P
=0.06 
First zooplankton group (Z1-herbivorous) 
Maximum growth rate: K=1.5 
Preference coefficients for substrate uptake: 
for Si-containing substrate: d
DOSi
=0.15;   d
DISi
=0.02 
                                             d
SiD
=0.77;     d
BSi
=0.01 
                                             d
F1Si
=0.05 
for N-containing substrate: d
ND
=0.48;   d
F1N
=0.34 
                                            d
F2N
=0.05;   d
F3N
=0.02 
First zooplankton group (Z1-herbivorous) 
Maximum growth rate: K=0.75 
Preference coefficients for substrate uptake: 
for Si-containing substrate: d
DOSi
=0.15;   d
DISi
=0.02 
                                             d
SiD
=0.77;     d
BSi
=0.01 
                                             d
F1Si
=0.05 
for N-containing substrate:  d
ND
=0.5;       d
F1N
=0.05 
                                             d
F2N
=0.25;     d
F3N
=0.1 
106
                                             d
BN
=0.11; 
for P-containing substrate:  d
PD
=0.78;   d
F1P
=0.15 
                                             d
F2P
=0.025; d
F3P
=0.025 
                                             d
BP
=0.02; 
Excretion activity: 
for Si substrate: a
Si
=0.048;  b
Si
=0.052 
for N substrate: a
N
=0.041;  b
N
=0.05 
for P substrate: a
P
=0.035;    b
P
=0.05 
Mortality coefficients:  
for Si substrate: g(1)
Si
=0.0;  g(2)
Si
=0.2 
for N substrate: g(1)
N
=0.0;  g(2)
N
=0.4  
for P substrate: g(1)
P
=0.0;   g(2)
P
=0.8 
                                             d
BN
=0.1; 
for P-containing substrate:   d
PD
=0.73;   d
F1P
=0.1 
                                             d
F2P
=0.025; d
F3P
=0.025 
                                             d
BP
=0.02;    d
DOP
=0.1 
Excretion activity: 
for Si substrate: a
Si
=0.035;  b
Si
=0.052 
for N substrate: a
N
=0.041;  b
N
=0.05 
for P substrate: a
P
=0.035;   b
P
=0.052 
Mortality coefficients:  
for Si substrate: g(1)
Si
=0.05;  g(2)
Si
=0.2 
for N substrate: g(1)
N
=0.05;   g(2)
N
=0.4 
for P substrate:  g(1)
P
=0.035; g(2)
P
=0.5 
Second zooplankton group (Z2-predatory) 
Maximum growth rate: K=0.5 
Preference coefficients for substrate uptake: 
for N-containing substrate: d
ND
=0.55;     d
F1N
=0.31 
                                             d
Z1N
=0.1;      d
BN
=0.04 
for P-containing substrate:   d
PD
=0.8;       d
F1P
=0.1 
                                             d
BP
=0.05;     d
Z1P
=0.05 
Excretion activity: 
for N substrate: a
N
=0.0276;  b
N
=0.0287 
for P substrate:  a
P
=0.0276;   b
P
=0.0287 
Mortality coefficients:  
for N substrate: g(1)
N
=0.0;    g(2)
N
=0.5 
for P substrate:  g(1)
P
=0.0;    g(2)
P
=1.0 
Second zooplankton group (Z2-predatory) 
Maximum growth rate: K=0.75 
Preference coefficients for substrate uptake: 
for N-containing substrate:  d
ND
=0.55;     d
F1N
=0.2 
    d
F2N
=0.02;   d
F3N
=0.02;    d
Z1N
=0.15;    d
BN
=0.06 
for P-containing substrate:   d
PD
=0.75;      d
F1P
=0.05 
                          d
BP
=0.05;    d
Z1P
=0.05;     d
DOP
=0.1 
Excretion activity: 
for N substrate: a
N
=0.0276;  b
N
=0.03 
for P substrate:  a
P
=0.0276;   b
P
=0.032 
Mortality coefficients:  
for N substrate: g(1)
N
=0.05;    g(2)
N
=0.4  
for P substrate:  g(1)
P
=0.035;  g(2)
P
=0.6 
Note:  the dimension of parameters: K - day
-1
, d
i
, a
i
, b
i
 - (undimension), g(1)
 - 
day
-1
, g(2)
i
 -  
[(mg Element/l)
-1
 (day
-2
)]. 
 
 
3.0 Herring group report and model results 
 
Douglas E. Hay
1
,
 
Robert A. Klumb
2
, Bernard A. Megrey
3
, S. Lan Smith
4
 and Francisco E.  
Werner
5
 (authors listed alphabetically)
 
1 
Pacific Biological Station, Fisheries and Oceans Canada, 3190 Hammond Bay Road, Nanaimo, B. C., 
Canada, V9R 5K6.  E-mail:  hayd@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca   
2 
Department of Natural Resources, Cornell Biological Field Station, Cornell University, 900 
Shackelton Point Road, Bridgeport, NY 13030, U.S.A.  E-mail:  rak11@cornell.edu  
3
 National Marine Fisheries Service, Alaska Fisheries Science Center, 7600 Sand Point Way NE, 
Seattle, WA 98115, U.S.A.  E-mail:  bern.megrey@noaa.gov 
4 
Frontier Research System for Global Change, Showa-machi 3173-25, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, 
Kanagawa, 236-001, Japan.  E-mail:  lanimal@jamstec.go.jp  
5
 Marine Sciences Department, CB# 3300, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3300, 
U.S.A.  E-mail:  cisco@unc.edu  
 
Summary report from the herring group 
 
Specific data for most physiological parameters of 
Pacific herring are lacking.  The first task of 
“Team Herring” towards linking the LTL 
NEMURO model to pelagic fish required 
modifications of the existing Atlantic herring 
bioenergetics model of Rudstam (1988).  Three 
main areas focused on at the workshop included: 
1) modifying the temperature dependence function 
107
for consumption and cutoff temperature values, 
where swimming speed changes in the Rudstam 
model to describe the actual temperatures 
inhabited by Pacific herring,  2) accounting for 
known differences in larval and juvenile fish 
physiology (age-0) compared to adults, and  
3) incorporating known seasonal changes in 
energy density of adult Pacific herring.  Trends in 
size-at-age were discussed and potential 
hypotheses to be tested after completion of the 
model were proposed.  In the application to Pacific 
herring our objectives were to model one fish, 
generate data to compare to observed size-at-age, 
follow one cohort through time, and provide a 
means to perform regional comparisons.  
 
Temperature-dependence of consumption and 
swimming speed 
 
Douglas Hay provided diet data for Pacific herring 
from near Vancouver, British Columbia, from 
which he and Robert Klumb tried to extract the 
temperature-dependence terms for the herring 
consumption equation.  The original herring 
bioenergetics model was formulated for the Baltic 
Sea, but the Vancouver site has lower 
temperatures and less seasonal variation of 
temperature.  Because temperature is one of the 
main process-mediating functions in the 
bioenergetics model,  we had to modify the 
parameters for temperature dependence on 
consumption function to agree with the 
temperature ranges inhabited by Pacific herring off 
the coast of Vancouver.  Vadim Navrotsky 
suggested that we formulate this temperature 
dependence in terms of DT = T - T
opt
 , where T
opt
 
is the optimal temperature for consumption 
(depending upon location).  One could also use the 
temperature of the waters in which the growth of 
herring is maximized as a proxy for the 
temperature at which their consumption rate is 
maximum (e.g., 12°C, based on the data for peak 
growth versus abundance and temperature in Haist 
and Stocker (1985)).  
 
As a preliminary approximation, Bernard Megrey 
normalized the Baltic Sea temperatures to a zero-
one scale, based on the maximum and minimum 
temperatures observed for a location off the west 
coast of Vancouver Island, Amphitrite lighthouse 
(Fig. 3.1).   
 
 
 
Fig. 3.1 Location of B.C. Lighthouse stations 
including Amphitrite Point Lighthouse, the source 
of the temperature data used in the model. 
 
Values for the two temperature series were 
rescaled using the formula:  
 
(3.1) 
() ()
()
min
min max
min max min
TA
TB TB
TA TA TB TB
TA +
−
− ⋅ −
=
 
 
where TB
max
=30.0, TB
min
=1.0, TA
max
=14.0, 
TA
min
=8.0, TA refers to temperatures from 
Amphitrite lighthouse, and TB refers to 
temperatures from the Baltic Sea. 
 
The re-scaled temperatures used for the Thornton 
and Lessem (1978) temperature dependence 
function for consumption  were as follows: 
 
Age 0 Age 1 Age > 1 
Amphitrite Baltic Amphitrite Baltic Amphitrite Baltic 
8.0 1 8.0 1 8.0 1 
10.897 15 10.897 15 10.483 13 
11.31 17 11.31 17 10.897 15 
12.552 23 12.552 23 12.553 23 
 
108
Temperatures in the respiration model, where 
activity changed needed to be re-computed for 
age-0 and age-1 herring: 
 
Old ► New 
15°C  10.897°C 
  9°C    9.655°C 
 
Finally the equation describing the annual 
temperature signal needed to be re-computed 
based on observed mean monthly sea surface 
temperature (SST) data from Amphitrite 
lighthouse.  The following equation 
 
(3.2) 
()
⎟
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎜
⎝
⎛
⎟
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎜
⎝
⎛
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎝
⎛ − ⋅ ⋅
− ⋅ ⋅ + =
365
30 2
cos 1 5 . 0 6796 . 5 717 . 7
JDAY
T
π
 
 
was fit to the observed data (Fig 3.2) where JDAY 
is Julian day and T is water temperature. 
 
 
 
Fig. 3.2 Observed and predicted mean SST at 
Amphitrite Lighthouse. 
 
Validation to Pacific herring 
 
To validate the bioenergetics model to herring, we 
used model structure and parameters after 
Rudstam (1988) for Baltic Sea herring, but 
included no young-of-the-year (YOY) dynamics, 
no multispecies functional response, and no 
spawning (Rudstam model has spawning).  
 
Results of the model (Fig 3.4) can be compared to 
the Rudstam results (Fig. 3.3) and good agreement 
in dynamical behavior can be noted.  
 
 
Fig. 3.3 Results of the Baltic Sea herring model 
from Rudstam (1988).  The solid line represents 
model output and the open circles are weight-at-
age values from field observations. 
 
Julian Day 
 
 
Fig. 3.4 Simulated growth from the herring 
bioenergetics model. 
 
Separate age 0 and adult formulations 
 
Describing the growth of a YOY fish involves 
more than just rescaling process equations derived 
for adult fishes.  Often the process rates differ 
substantially between different life stages (Post 
and Lee 1996).  Cisco Werner and Rob Klumb 
modified the Atlantic herring bioenergetics model 
for age-0 herring. Rob’s parameters for respiration 
were based on his laboratory measurements from 
age-0 alewife, another clupeid, which used routine 
metabolism without an activity multiplier.  
Literature values for larval and juvenile clupeids 
109
were also used that lowered SDA, egestion, and 
excretion parameters compared to the adult 
Atlantic herring parameters.  
 
The YOY formulation for herring respiration 
proposed by Arrhenius (1998) along with our 
conversion factor from wet weight (g) to energy 
(J) was:  
 
(3.5) 258 . 5 ) ( ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ = activity T f W a R
R
b
R
R
 
 
where the units are the same as in equation 2.1.5 
and a
R=
 0.0033, b
R
 = -0.227.  
 
The temperature dependence function for 
respiration  
 
(3.6) 
() T c
R
R
e T f
⋅
= ) ( 
 
for a age-0 herring was similar to equation 2.1.8.  
 
Activity is a power function of body weight 
conditioned on water temperature and is given by 
 
(3.7) 
() U d
R
e activity
⋅
= 
 
where U is swimming speed in cm·s
-1
 and d
R
 is a 
coefficient relating swimming speed to 
metabolism.  Swimming speed is calculated as a 
function of body weight and temperature using 
 
(3.8) 
() T c b
A
A A
e W a U
⋅
⋅ ⋅ = 
 
Swimming speeds have been observed to switch 
from temperature dependence (at low 
temperatures) to temperature independence (at 
high temperatures).  Formulations by life stage for 
changes in swimming speeds versus the adjusted 
temperatures from temperature-dependence of 
consumption and swimming speed section (given 
earlier) were: 
 
if age=0 and T ≤10.897 °C then   
 a
R=
 0.0033, b
R
 = -0.227, c
R=
 0.0548,  
 a
A=
 5.76, b
A
 = 0.386, c
A
=0.238 and d
R
=0.03  
 
if age=0 and T >10.897 °C then   
 a
R=
 0.0033, b
R
 = -0.227, c
R=
 0.0548, a
A=
 8.6,  
 b
A
 = 0.386,  c
A
=0.0 and d
R
=0.03 
if age ≥=1 and T ≤9.655 °C then   
 a
R=
 0.0033, b
R
 = -0.227, c
R=
 0.0548, a
A=
 3.9,  
 b
A
 = 0.13, c
A
=0.149 and d
R
=0.03  
 
if age ≥=1 and T >9.655 °C then   
 a
R=
 0.0033, b
R
 = -0.227 c
R=
 0.0548, a
A=
 15.0,  
 b
A
 = 0.13,  c
A
=0.0 and d
R
=0.03 
 
In the final set of simulations, the Arrhenius 
(1998) equations 3.5 and 3.6 were modified after 
Klumb et al. (in press) to use the parameters. 
 
if age=0 then   
 a
R=
 0.00528, b
R
 = -0.007, c
R=
 0.0548, a
A=
 1.0,  
 b
A
 = 0.0, c
A
=0.0 and d
R
=0.0.  
 
In all simulations, equations for age 1 and older 
Pacific herring were the same as described in 
Arrhenius (1998). 
 
The coefficients of SDA, egestion, and excretion 
in equations 2.1.6, 2.1.11, and 2.1.12 were made 
age dependent with the parameters given in Table 
3.1. 
 
Formulation for energy density  
 
The energy density of clupeids varies seasonally.  
Instead of using constant conversion factors, as in 
equation 2.1.1, we incorporated a simple energy 
cycle based on data in Paul et al. (1998) for age-2 
and greater herring.  Paul et al. (1998) found 
energy density peaked at 9800 J/g wet wt. (range 
9400 - 10200) in fall (October 1), and in spring 
(March 1) dropped to 5750 J/g wet wt. (range 
5200 - 6300).  For age-0 and age-1 herring we 
assumed a constant energy density of 4460 J/g wet 
wt. (Foy and Paul 1999). Age-0 herring do exhibit 
a seasonal energy cycle from 5000 J/g wet wt. in 
November to 3900 J/g wet wt. in March, and could 
be included in future modifications of the model. 
 
The following code was used to implement a 
straight-line approximation to a sinusoid that 
described seasonal changes in energy density.  The 
period between March 1 and October 1 consisted 
of 214 days.  The period prior to March 1 and the 
period after October 1, together summed to 151 
days.  
 
 
110
Table 3.1 Summary of final parameter values used in the herring bioenergetics model. 
 
Symbol  Parameter description      Value 
Consumption, C
MAX 
a
C
 Intercept for C
MAX
 at       0.642 
b
C
 coefficient for C
MAX
 versus weight    -0.256 
te1 Temperature for xk1 (in ºC)        8.0
a
       8.0
b
       8.0
c
 
te2 Temperature for xk2 (in ºC)      10.897
a
 10.897
b
  10.483
c
 
te3 Temperature for xk3 (in ºC)      11.310
a
 11.310
b 
 10.897
c
 
te4 Temperature for xk4 (in ºC)      12.552
a
 12.966
b  
12.552
c
 
xk1 Proportion of C
MAX
 at te1     0.10 
xk2 Proportion of C
MAX
 at te2     0.98 
xk3 Proportion of C
MAX
 at te3     0.98 
xk4 Proportion of C
MAX
 at te4     0.01 
 
Metabolism, R  
a
R
 Intercept for R        0.00528
a
  0.0033
bc
 
b
R
 Coefficient for R versus weight      -0.007
a
   -0.227
bc
 
c
R 
Coefficient for R versus temperature     0.083
a
     0.0548
bc
 
d
R 
Coefficient for R versus swimming speed   0.0
a
       0.03
bc
 
S Coefficient for Specific Dynamic Action    0.125
a
     0.175
b   
0.175
c
 
 
Swimming Speed, U 
a
A
 Intercept U (< 9.655 ºC) (in cm/s)    3.9
bc 
a
A
 Intercept U ( ≥9.655 ºC) (in cm/s)    15.0
bc
 
b
A
  Coefficient U versus weight      0.13
bc
 
c
A
  Coefficient U versus temperature (<9.655 ºC)    0.149
bc
 
c
A
  Coefficient U versus temperature (≥9.655 ºC)   0.0
bc
 
 
Egestion and Excretion, F and E 
a
F
 Proportion of consumed food egested     0.125
a
 0.16
bc
 
a
E
 Proportion of consumed food excreted     0.078
a
 0.10
bc
 
 
Multispecies Functional Response 
V
11
 Vulnerability of prey group 1 to predator 1   1.0 
V
12
 Vulnerability of prey group 2 to predator 1   1.0 
V
13
 Vulnerability of prey group 3 to predator 1   1.0 
K
11
 Half saturation constant for prey group 1 to predator  
1 (g wet weight/m
3
)       750.0 
K
12
 Half saturation constant for prey group 2 to predator  
1 (g wet weight/m
3
)       7 5 . 0 
K
13
 Half saturation constant for prey group 3 to predator  
1 (g wet weight/m
3
)       750.0 
 
a - values for age-0 herring, b - values for age-1 herring, c - values for age-2 and older herring 
 
111
if(iage.ge.2)then 
 enMar1=5750. 
 jdMar1=60 
 enOct1=9800. 
 jdOct1=274 
if(jjday.lt.60)then 
 delen=(enMar1-enOct1)/151 
 en=enOct1+(90+jjday)*delen 
end if 
if(jjday.ge.60.and.jjday.lt.274)then 
 delen=(enOct1-enMar1)/(jdOct1-jdMar1) 
 en=enMar1+(jjday-jdMar1)*delen 
end if 
if(jjday.ge.274)then 
 delen=(enMar1-enOct1)/151 
 en=enOct1+(jjday-jdOct1)*delen 
end if 
else 
 en=4460. 
end if    
 
Figure 3.9 shows the straight line approximation to 
seasonal energy density.  Forcing prey fields are 
given in Figure 2.1.7. 
 
 
 
Fig. 3.9 Straight line approximation to a 
seasonal energy density curve. 
 
Simulation results and final modifications to 
the herring model 
 
The base model included YOY processes, 
included no multi-species functional response and 
provided a comparison of observed and predicted 
size-at-age, and included no spawning (observed 
data were taken after feeding but before 
spawning).  Figures 3.10 to 3.12 show the fit of 
observed size (weight)-at-age compared to size-at 
-age predicted by the herring bioenergetics model 
by adjusting the “p” parameter of equation 2.1.2.   
 
p=0.425 
 
Fig. 3.10 Observed size-at-age of the 1973 
herring year-class and size-at-age predicted from 
the herring bioenergetics model using p=0.425. 
 
 
Fig. 3.11 Observed size-at-age of the 1973 
herring year-class and size-at-age predicted from 
the herring bioenergetics model using p=0.40. 
 
p=0.475
 
Fig. 3.12 Observed size-at-age of the 1973 
herring year-class and size-at-age predicted from 
the herring bioenergetics model using p=0.475. 
112
Observed herring size-at-age data were taken from 
the Straight of Georgia herring data using the 1973 
age class, seen as age-1 in 1973 and present in the 
fishery until age 12 in 1984.  As can be seen from 
these figures the model predictions of size-at-age 
were extremely sensitive to changing this 
parameter, the best fit being when p=0.425.  A 
long-term simulation with these parameters is 
shown in Figure 3.13. 
 
The base case was modified to include YOY 
improvements, age specific rates, multispecies 
functional response, location specific temperature 
description and change of temperature curve 
parameters, re-adjustment of p and k’s to 
temperature change, and seasonal and age 
dependent energy density for fish. 
 
 
 
Fig. 3.13 Example of a long-term simulation of 
herring growth using tuned model parameters. 
 
 
 
Fig. 3.14 Comparison of observed and predicted 
size-at-age, base case. 
 
Figure 3.14 shows the base case.  Figure 3.15 
shows the base curve plotted against a run where 
the SDA, E and F equations were made age 
dependent.  Age dependent parameters are given 
in Table 3.1.  Also plotted in Figure 3.15 are 
model predictions when modifying the respiration 
equation to more accurately reflect the metabolic 
requirements of an age-0 herring (R) (Klumb et al. 
In review).  The final curve in Figure 3.15 (All) 
demonstrates model output when all of these 
features were activated. 
 
 
Fig. 3.15 YOY sensitivity. Observed and 
predicted size-at-age due to implementing age 
specific formulation for Specific Dynamic Action, 
egestion, excretion, respiration one at a time.  The 
“all” line represents the run where all processes 
are age dependent and compared to the base run. 
 
 
Fig. 3.16 Simulation run incorporating new 
temperature dependent values (seasonal range 8-
14ºC) and the seasonal herring energy density 
algorithm.  Comparisons are made of observed 
size-at-age between adjusting little “p” in equation 
2.1.2 and using the multispecies functional 
dependence function (equations 2.1.13 and 2.1.14) 
with the k values as described above. 
113
Finally, Figure 3.16 demonstrates results of the 
customized herring model for a p value of 0.6375, 
and for a run where the multispecies functional 
response to three prey types was activated using 
the parameters (k1, k2 and k3) shown in Figure 
3.16, as well as the seasonal energy density 
algoritm.  Note that to implement the multispecies 
functional response feature the line 
“con=0.75*gcmax” in the FORTRAN code needs 
to be commented out. 
 
Trends in size-at-age:  some ideas for 
hypothesis testing  
 
Douglas Hay has data for size-at-age of Pacific 
herring over several decades.  Over the last 20 
years, the mean size-at-age has decreased at 
several locations for fish aged greater than 3 years.  
However, the mean size-at-age for ages 1–3 years 
did not show a significant decrease which may 
result from difficulties in sampling small fish (i.e. 
gear selectivity).  In agreement to the observed 
size-at-age data, measurements from scale annuli 
collected over the same period from larger herring 
also showed no consistent decrease in growth for 
fish during the first 3 years of life.  This decrease 
in size-at-age first appears when herring can begin 
to eat euphausiids in addition to copepods (age 
3+).  Generally, when euphausiids are abundant, 
the predation on herring by other piscivores that 
also eat euphausiids is reduced.  Given this double 
benefit of more available food and less predation, 
the growth of herring should be highly sensitive to 
euphausiid production.  The predatory 
zooplankton (ZP) compartment in the NEMURO 
model was designed to represent euphausiids.   
 
Thus the coupled NEMURO-herring bioenergetics 
model could be used to examine the effects of 
temperature and other physical forcings (e.g., 
Pacific Decadal Oscillation) on the production of 
euphausiids and thereby on the size-at-age of 
herring.  
 
 
 
4.0 Saury group report and model results 
 
Shin-ichi Ito
1
, Michio J. Kishi
2
, Yasuhiro Yamanaka
3
 and Masahiko Fujii
4
 
1 
Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute, 3-27-5 Shinhamacho, Shiogama, Miyagi 985-0001, 
Japan.  E-mail:  goito@affrc.go.jp 
2 
Hokkaido University, Minato-cho 3-1-1, Hakodate, Hokkaido 041-8611, Japan.  E-mail: 
kishi@salmon.fish.hokudai.ac.jp 
3 
Graduate School of Environmental Earth Science, Hokkaido University, North 10, West 5 Kita-ku, 
Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-0810, Japan.  E-mail:  galapen.ees.hokudai.ac.jp 
4 
National Institute for Environmental Studies, 16-2 Onogawa, Tsukuba, 305-8506, Japan.  E-mail: 
fujii.masahiko@nies.go.jp 
 
The members of  “team saury” were D. Huang, C. 
Hong, Y. I. Zuenko, T. Katukawa, T. Azumaya, S. 
Chiba, M. Fujii, M. J. Kishi, K. Tadokoro, M. B. 
Kashiwai, Y. Yamanaka, T. Okunishi, A. Tsuda, 
D. Mukai, M. Inada, T. Aiki and S. Ito.  
 
According to the life history of Pacific saury, S. 
Ito proposed to have saury bioenergetics model 
coupled with the ecosystem model composed of a 
three- ocean-box model which corresponds to 
Kuroshio, Oyashio, and the mixed water region.  
But the three-box model is a little complicated to 
start with.  As a first step we started from a 
coupled saury bioenergetics-ecosystem model with 
one box, and adapted the same type of governing 
equations for bioenergetics model as the ones for 
Pacific herring.   
 
Model parameters are discussed for applying the 
model to Pacific saury.  Here we report the 
discussion summary and model results. 
 
Life history stages 
 
Pacific saury are spawned in the Kuroshio and the 
mixed water region from autumn to spring.  The 
larvae are advected to the Kuroshio extension 
region and juveniles migrate to the Oyashio region 
114
through the mixed water region.  After sufficient 
feeding in the Oyashio region, they migrate back 
to the spawning region.  The swimming activity, 
feeding habitat and metabolism are different 
according to the life history stages.  Odate (1977) 
and Kosaka (2000) divided the Pacific saury life 
history stages according to knob length (KL) 
(Table 4.1). 
 
Table 4.1 Life stages of Pacific saury after 
Odate (1977). 
 
Stage 
 
Knob length 
larvae < 2.5 cm 
juvenile 2.5 - 5.9 cm 
earlier young 6.0 - 9.9 cm 
later young 10.0 - 14.9 cm 
small 15.0 - 19.9 cm 
adult > 20.0 cm 
 
About the earlier stage growth, Watanabe and Kuji 
(1991) reared the saury larvae from hatching and 
they showed that it takes 60 days to grow to 79 
mm KL.  Watanabe et al. (1988) analyzed the 
growth rate of Pacific saury and they showed that 
it takes about 100 days to grow to 100 mm KL.  
According to their result, it takes about 180 days 
to become adult saury.  Suyama et al. (1996) 
showed lower growth rate and it takes about 200 
days to become an adult.  For simplicity, only 
three life stages are assumed in the saury 
bioenergetics model (Table 4.2). 
 
Table 4.2 Life stages of Pacific saury in the 
saruy bioenergetics model. 
 
Stage Age 
 
larvae and juvenile < 60 days 
young and premature 60-180 days 
adult > 180 days 
 
Maximum consumption rate C
MAX
 
 
Because adult Pacific saury are too difficult to rear 
in laboratories, there is no experimental estimation 
of consumption rate.  Field data showed the  
 
average ration of the Pacific saury are 5.0 
gww/day/individual for 20 cm, 7.2 
gww/day/individual for 26 cm, and 10.2 
gww/day/individual for 30 cm saury (Kurita and 
Sugisaki; in preparation).  These data were 
estimated in the Oyashio region.  Comparing this 
with observational data, we adapted 0.6 for a
c
 and 
-0.256 for b
c
 parameters.  Figure 4.1 shows the 
C
MAX
 curve and observational value of ration per 
unit wet weight of the Pacific saury. 
 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
0 50 100 150
wet weight
Cmax
Cmax
feeding/W
 
 
Fig. 4.1 C
MAX
 curve and observational value of 
ration per unit wet weight of the Pacific saury. 
 
Temperature dependency for C
MAX
 
 
Oozeki (in preparation) analyzed the relationship 
between saury growth rate and environmental 
factors using the same field data reported in 
Watanabe et al. (1997).  His result showed 
positive contributions from surface temperature 
and food density to growth rate.  The SST range 
was between 16-22°C.  Oozeki and Watanabe 
(2000) reared Pacific saury in the laboratory with 
different water temperatures and found a strong 
dependence of growth rate on temperature.  The 
temperature range was between 12-24°C. 
 
For adult saury we have no measures of growth 
rate at different temperatures.  But the habitat 
temperature is between 16 and 20°C.  We adapted 
the following values for the temperature 
dependency parameters for C
MAX
 of Pacific saury 
(Table 4.3).  Figure 4.2 shows the temperature 
dependence function for each stage. 
 
115
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
01 02 03 0
Temperature (degC)
fc(T)
stage1
stage2
stage3
 
 
Fig. 4.2 Temperature dependence function of 
consumption rate of Pacific saury for each life 
stage. 
 
Table 4.3 Temperature dependency parameters 
for C
MAX. 
 
  Stage 
1 
Stage 
2 
Stage 
3 
te1 Temperature for 
xk1 (in ºC) 
5 5 5 
te2 Temperature for 
xk2 (in ºC) 
20 16 16 
te3 Temperature for 
xk3 (in ºC) 
26 20 20 
te4 Temperature for 
xk4 (in ºC) 
30 30 30 
xk1 Proportion of 
C
MAX
 at te1 
 0.10  
xk2 Proportion of 
C
MAX
 at te2 
 0.98  
xk3 Proportion of 
C
MAX
 at te3 
 0.98  
xk4 Proportion of 
C
MAX
 at te4 
 0.5  
 
 
Swimming speed 
 
Although we do not have actual data on swimming 
speed of Pacific saury, other small pelagic fish 
swim at speeds of several times their body length 
per second.  We assumed the normal swimming 
speed is two times of the knob length (nearly same 
as body length) per weight (Fig. 4.3). 
 
 U = 2.0 KL 
 
On the other hand, the wet weight (g)-knob length 
(cm) relation was proposed by Kosaka (2000) as: 
 
 larvae and juvenile  
logW = -2.069+2.42439logL 
 earlier young  
logW = -2.483+3.06174logL 
 later young   
logW = -2.335+2.93760logL 
 small  
logW = -2.688+3.22526logL 
 adult  
logW = -2.685+3.21229logL 
 
Figure 4.4 shows the wet weight-knob length 
relation curves of Kosaka (2000).  If we adapt the 
simple one curve for all stages, it becomes 
 
 W = ( KL / 6.13 ) 
3
 
 
and the curve will look like Figure 4.4.  The 
broken line in Figure 4.3 shows the same curve.  
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
01 02 03 0
knob length (cm)
weight (g)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
weight
swimming speed
 
 
Fig. 4.3 Swimming speed (cm/s) and wet weight 
(g) as a function of body length (cm). 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
01 02 03 0
body length (cm)
weight (g)
weight
obs
 
 
Fig. 4.4 Wet weight (g)-knob length (cm) 
relation curves of Kosaka (2000) (red) and fitting 
curve (black).  
116
The last equation could be rewritten as  
 KL = 6.13 W
0.33
  
and the swimming speed becomes  
 U = 12.3 W
0.33
 
and we adapted 12.3 as a
A
 parameter when the 
temperature is higher than 12°C and  0.33 for b
A
 
value.  For temperatures less than 12°C we 
adapted 2.0 as a
A
.  The weight - swimming speed 
relation looks like Figure 4.5 when the 
temperature is higher than 12°C.   
 
The parameters we adapted for Pacific saury 
bioenergetics model are summarized on Table 4.4. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0 50 100 150
wet weight (g)
U (cm/s)
U
 
 
Fig. 4.5 Wet weight (g)-swimming speed  
(U-cm/s) relation curve for higher temperature. 
 
Table 4.4 Summary of parameter values used in the saury bioenergetics model. 
 
Symbol  Parameter description     Value 
 
Consumption, C
MAX
 
a
C
  Intercept for C
MAX
 at (te1+te3)/2    0.6  
b
C
  coefficient for C
MAX
 versus weight   -0.256 
te1  Temperature for xk1 (in ºC)     5,  5,  5  
te2  Temperature for xk2 (in ºC)    20, 16, 16  
te3  Temperature for xk3 (in ºC)    26, 20, 20  
te4  Temperature for xk4 (in ºC)    30, 30, 30  
xk1  Proportion of C
MAX
 at te1    0.10 
xk2  Proportion of C
MAX
 at te2    0.98 
xk3  Proportion of C
MAX
 at te3    0.98 
xk4  Proportion of C
MAX
 at te4    0.5  
 
Metabolism, R  
a
R
  Intercept for R      0.0033 
b
R
  Coefficient for R versus weight    -0.227 
c
R  
Coefficient for R versus temperature   0.0548 
d
R  
Coefficient for R versus swimming speed  0.03 
S  Coefficient for Specific Dynamic Action   0.175 
 
Swimming speed, U 
a
A
  Intercept U (< 12 ºC) (in cm/s)    2.0  
a
A
  Intercept U (≥ 12 ºC) (in cm/s)    12.3  
b
A
   Coefficient U versus weight    0.33  
c
A
   Coefficient U versus temperature (< 12 ºC)  0.149 
c
A
   Coefficient U versus temperature (≥ 12 ºC)  0.0 
 
Egestion and excretion, F and E 
a
F
  Proportion of consumed food egested   0.16 
a
E
  Proportion of consumed food excreted   0.10 
 
Multispecies functional response (by saury size groups) 
117
V
11
  Vulnerability of prey group 1 to predator 1  1.0 
V
12
  Vulnerability of prey group 2 to predator 1  0.0 
V
13
  Vulnerability of prey group 3 to predator 1  0.0 
K
11
  Half saturation constant for prey group 1 to  
predator 1 (g wet weight/m
3
)    100.0 
K
12
  Half saturation constant for prey group 2 to  
predator 1 (g wet weight/m
3
)    100.0 
K
13
  Half saturation constant for prey group 3 to  
predator 1 (g wet weight/m
3
)    100.0 
V
21
  Vulnerability of prey group 1 to predator 2  1.0 
V
22
  Vulnerability of prey group 2 to predator 2  1.0 
V
23
  Vulnerability of prey group 3 to predator 2  0.0 
K
21
  Half saturation constant for prey group 1 to  
predator 2 (g wet weight/m
3
)    100.0 
K
22
  Half saturation constant for prey group 2 to  
predator 2 (g wet weight/m
3
)    100.0 
K
23
  Half saturation constant for prey group 3 to  
predator 2 (g wet weight/m
3
)    100.0 
V
31
  Vulnerability of prey group 1 to predator 3  0.0 
V
32
  Vulnerability of prey group 2 to predator 3  1.0 
V
33
  Vulnerability of prey group 3 to predator 3  1.0 
K
31
  Half saturation constant for prey group 1 to 
 predator 3 (g wet weight/m
3
)    100.0 
K
32
  Half saturation constant for prey group 2 to  
predator 3 (g wet weight/m
3
)    100.0 
K
33
  Half saturation constant for prey group 3 to  
predator 3 (g wet weight/m
3
)    100.0 
 
start day is February 1st 
stage 1     0-50mm  0-30days   
stage 2     50-200mm  30-150days 
stage 3     >200mm  150day-720days 
 
 
Model result 
 
The parameters which are revised for the Pacific 
saury were used to integrate the bioenergetics 
model coupled with the ecosystem model.  Figure 
4.6 shows the result of the integration, and shows 
that the weight of saury reached 120 g after one 
year.  This seems reasonable for Pacific saury.  
The model shows a high growth rate around 13ºC 
water temperature.  This corresponds to the habitat 
temperature in the Oyashio region during the 
feeding season. 
 
Figure 4.7 shows the interannual experiment of 
ecosystem-saury coupled model with realistic  
 
Pacific saury
0
50
100
150
200
0 200 400 600 800
age (day)
weight (g)
0
5
10
15
20
25
wei ght
temp
light
 
 
Fig. 4.6 Result of Pacific saury bioenergetics 
model.  Light is in units of ly/min. 
 
118
forcing of A7 (Akkeshi line St 7 off Hokkaido, 
Japan).  The model results show low growth rate 
in the third and fourth year cohort.  The result 
strongly depends on water temperature. 
 
Future work 
 
This model is not perfect and needs improvements 
in several respects.  
 
• The weight of the earliest stage is not 
reproduced well.  We should re-parameterize 
values for this stage. 
• More than half of the Pacific saury spawn in 
the first year and all of them spawn in the 
second year (Kurita and Sugisaki; in 
preparation).  We should include the effect of 
spawning in this model. 
• In this model only one ocean region is 
included.  But the saury migrate from the 
subtropical to the subarctic region through the 
mixed water region, each with its own 
seasonal cycle of temperature and prey.  We 
should include at least three ocean regions in 
the ecosystem-saury coupled model.  We 
suggest Figure 4.8 as a prototype three ocean 
region model.  This kind of model is very 
useful for the analysis of interannual 
variability of saury growth. 
Pacific saury
0
50
100
150
200
DMJSDMJSDMJSDMJSDMJSDMJS
Month
Weight
1
2
3
4
5
 
 
Fig. 4.7 Result of Pacific saury bioenergetics 
model with realistic forcing. 
 
O yashio 
M ixed water 
region
Ku r o s h i o 
 
 
Fig. 4.8 Schematic picture of a three-ocean-box 
model.  This model includes three ocean regions 
but only one saury bioenergetic model. 
 
 
5.0 Model experiments and hypotheses
Several model experiments were discussed to test 
hypotheses regarding the effects of climate 
change.  The details of the experiments and 
hypotheses are described below. 
 
Space hypothesis  
 
Geographic variation in fish growth:  Differences 
in environmental conditions, and resulting 
differences in lower trophic conditions, can 
account for the differences in herring growth rates 
among selected sites in the North Pacific 
ecosystem.  There exist long-term data sets on 
size-at-age of herring from many locations in the 
North Pacific.  These data sets show that herring 
growth rates over the past decades have varied 
consistently among the different locations.  
Understanding the extent to which environmental 
conditions account for these temperature 
differences in herring growth is important for 
predicting climate change effects and for effective 
management of these fisheries in the future. 
 
Key regions contributing to fish growth and 
biomass variations:  Pacific saury are spawned in 
the subtropical and transition zone from autumn to 
spring, and migrate from the subtropical to the 
subarctic ocean through a transition zone.  The 
environments of these three regions show different 
interannual variability, and it is very difficult to 
distinguish which location (or season) is most 
important to the interannual variability of fish 
growth and biomass.  We will tune up the NPZ 
model coupled to the fish growth model with long-
119
term climate and weather records by comparing 
the model results of fish growth with interannual 
variability in observed size composition.  To 
understand which region contributes most to the 
interannual variability in fish growth and biomass, 
sensitivity tests of this model will be very useful. 
Understanding key regions in fish growth and 
biomass variation is also important for predicting 
climate change effects and for effective 
management of these fisheries in the future. 
 
Time hypothesis   
 
Understanding regime shifts:  Synchronous 
changes in herring growth rates across locations 
may be accounted for by basin-wide decadal-scale 
changes in environmental conditions.  Preliminary 
examination of herring growth rates at several 
locations showed sudden shifts in growth rates 
occurring in the same years across all locations.  
We will combine the long-term datasets on herring 
growth, where possible, with regional and local 
long-term climate and weather records, and use the 
NPZ model coupled to the fish growth model to 
examine possible environmental regime changes.   
 
Understanding how regime shifts cascade up the 
food web may be our best chance for using past 
conditions to infer future effects of climate 
change. 
 
Change of dominant species:  Changes in the 
dominant small pelagic fish species seems to 
coincide with basin-wide decadal-scale changes in 
environmental conditions.  For example, the 
dominant species changed from sardine to saury 
across the regime shift in 1987.   
 
Comparing different fish bioenergetics models 
with the same NPZ model is very useful to 
understand the climate change effects on ocean 
ecosystems through bottom-up processes. 
 
Climate change hypothesis 
 
Global climate change effects on energy 
pathways and fish production:  Climate change 
may result in energy being diverted from the 
pelagic pathway and shunted through the 
microbial pathway, resulting in less food for 
pelagic fish and consequently slower fish growth 
rates.  We will use the coupled NPZ and fish 
models, the long-term datasets, and defined 
climate change scenarios to predict how climate 
change might affect energy cycling, shift the 
dominance among different phytoplankton and 
zooplankton groups, and affect fish growth and 
production in the North Pacific ecosystem.  Model 
simulations will be performed under present-day 
(baseline) environmental conditions, and for a 
suite of realistic climate change scenarios.  
Comparing these linkages and pathways under 
baseline and climate change scenarios for a variety 
of locations that have different environmental 
conditions (e.g., shallow coastal versus deep blue 
water) will aid in the interpretation and 
generalization of our results. 
 
 
6.0 Recommendations 
 
Results of the model work accomplished at the 
workshop resulted in several recommendations.  
They are listed here in priority.  A description of 
workplan scheduling is indicated after each item in 
parentheses and in italics: 
 
1. Develop site-specific applications (to be 
scheduled); 
2. Perform herring comparison between the Sea 
of Okhotsk and Vancouver Island (to be 
scheduled); 
3. Incorporate data observations into NEMURO 
(to be programmed); 
a. Obtain physical parameters (radiation, 
cloud cover, wind stress); 
b. Obtain realistic time series of SST and 
photosynthetically active light; 
c. Obtain physical observed time series; 
d. Obtain observed zooplankton time series; 
4. Execute a dynamics linkage in 
NEMURO.FISH (to be scheduled); 
120
5. Revise physiological parameters (fish and 
LTL) (to be scheduled); 
6. Public web distribution (PICES to support) (to 
be scheduled); 
7. Meet in Qingdao with (1) and (2) finished (to 
be scheduled); 
8. Consider explicit spatial (x, y, z) and temporal 
structure (to be programmed); 
9. Dissemination of NEMURO.FISH results in 
GLOBEC newsletter and scientific 
publications (to be scheduled); 
10. Develop a project home page (to be 
scheduled); 
11. Incorporate age structure, reproduction and 
early life history into NEMURO.FISH (to be 
programmed). 
 
The last recommendation was discussed at length 
because of a perceived need to provide a tool for 
the management of fisheries.   
 
It was noted that fish biomass at any time can be 
represented as the product of fish weight (W) and 
fish numbers (N). 
 
(6.1) 
t t t
W N B ⋅ = 
 
The rate of change of fish biomass can be written 
as 
(6.2) 
dt
dN
W
dt
dW
N
dt
dB
+ =  
 
where we know from the fish bioenergetics model 
that 
 
(6.3) W F E SDA R C
dt
dW
⋅ + + + − = ) (  
 
and from fish population dynamics we know that 
 
(6.4) N e
dt
dN
M F
⋅ =
+ − ) (
 
 
where F is the instantaneous fishing mortality rate 
and M is the instantaneous natural mortality rate.  
Thus all of the components of equation 6.2 are 
known or can be estimated. 
 
Also note that with this approach we can compare 
observed growth to von Bertalanffy growth, a 
growth model very commonly used in fisheries 
science.  
 
The von Bertalanffy empirical growth model (von 
Bertalanffy 1938) is written 
 
(6.5) 
3 ) (
) 1 ( ) (
0
t t k
e W t W
− ⋅ −
∞
− ⋅ =  
 
where W
∞
 is the asymptotic weight, W is the 
weight at time t, k is the growth parameter with 
units t
-1
, and t
0
 is the theoretical age the fish would 
have zero weight had they always grown as 
described by (6.5). 
 
The differential form of (6.5) is  
 
(6.6) ) ( 3
3
1
3
2
W W W k
dt
dW
− ⋅ ⋅ =
∞
  
 
We know that the change in weight formulation 
from the fish bioenergetics model (6.3) can be 
collapsed into a simpler form because most terms 
are dependent on consumption thus they are 
proportional to C and the C and R terms are weight 
dependent.  So (6.3) can be simplified to 
 
(6.7) 
2
1 3
p
W p C p
dt
dW
⋅ − ⋅ =  
 
Equating (6.7) and (6.6) we can calculate the rate 
of consumption required for von Bertalanffy 
growth, C*, as 
 
(6.8) 
⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢
⎣
⎡
⋅ + ⋅ − ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ =
∞
2
3
1
3
2
1 3 3
3
1
*
p
W p W k W W k
p
C  
 
So it seems the theoretical foundation of extending 
NEMURO.FISH to a population level model 
useful for fisheries management is possible with a 
few minor modifications. 
121
7.0 Achievements and future steps 
 
The achievements of the Workshop can be listed 
as follows: 
 
1. Developed the prototype model, 
NEMURO.FISH.  This was an extremely 
important step because it translates our science 
into something tangible and economically 
relevant to human populations that rely on 
fishes for food - obtaining food from the seas 
on a sustainable basis; 
2. Assembled an international team of marine 
biologists, fisheries biologists, and physical 
oceanographers who collectively achieved a 
consensus on the structure and function of a 
PICES Climate Change and Carrying Capacity 
(CCCC) prototype lower trophic level (LTL) 
ecosystem model for the North Pacific Ocean 
that included pelagic fishes, and named it 
“NEMURO.FISH”; 
3. Developed a computer simulation model of 
fish bioenergetics and growth;  
4. Coupled the fish model to the NEMURO 
lower trophic level model; 
5. Adapted the fish bioenergetics model to 
Pacific herring (Clupea harengus pallasi) in 
the eastern North Pacific and Pacific saury 
(Cololabis saira) in the western North Pacific; 
6. Made recommendations for future modeling 
activities.  
 
The significance of these achievements will 
ultimately be evaluated by how well the CCCC 
Program effectively utilizes and embraces these 
models as a basis of future modeling activity.  
 
 
8.0 Acknowledgements 
 
This workshop was proposed and convened by 
PICES, more precisely the PICES/CCCC-
IP/MODEL and REX Task Teams.  On behalf of 
the workshop participants, the co-conveners would 
like to express sincere thanks for giving us a 
timely and valuable opportunity to participate in 
the development of a linked higher trophic level - 
lower trophic level marine ecosystem model 
common among component programs of the 
PICES GLOBEC Program. The Heiwa-Nakajima 
Foundation of Japan contributed the major part of 
financial support for this workshop.  We note this 
valuable support, for without it, the workshop 
would not have been possible.  Nemuro was 
selected as the venue due in large part to the 
invitation from the Nemuro Supporting 
Committee.  The conveners express their very 
deep appreciation for the warm welcome and 
perfect support arranged and given by the Nemuro 
Supporting Committee, their staff, and the people 
of Nemuro. 
 
 
9.0 References
Arrhenius, F.  1998a.  Variable length of daily 
feeding period in bioenergetics modelling: a 
test with 0-group Baltic herring.  Journal of 
Fish Biology 52:855-860. 
Arrhenius, F.  1998b.  Food intake and seasonal 
changes in energy content of young Baltic Sea 
sprat (Sprattus sprattus L.).  ICES Journal of 
Marine Science 55:319-324. 
Arrhenius, F. and Hansson, S.  1996.  Growth and 
seasonal changes in energy content of young 
Baltic Sea herring (Clupea harengus L.).  
ICES Journal of Marine Science 53:792-801. 
Batty, R. S.  1987.  Effect of light intensity on 
activity and food-searching of larval herring, 
Clupea harengus: a laboratory study.  Marine 
Biology 94:323-327. 
122
Beamish, R.J., Noakes, D.J., Mcfarlane, G.A., 
Klyashtorin, L., Ivanov, V.V., and Kurashov, 
R.  1999.  The regime concept and natural 
trends in the production of Pacific salmon.  
Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 56: 516-526. 
Beamish, F. W. H.  1974.  Apparent specific 
dynamic action of largemouth bass, 
Micropterus salmoides. Journal of the 
Fisheries Research Board of Canada 31:1763-
1769. 
Beamish, F. W. H. and Trippel, E. A.  1990.  Heat 
increment: A static or dynamic dimension in 
bioenergetic models?  Transactions of the 
American Fisheries Society 119:649-661. 
Beitinger, T. L. and Magnuson, J. J.  1979.  
Growth rates and temperature selection of 
bluegill, Lepomis macrochirus.  Transactions 
of the American Fisheries Society 108:378-
382. 
Bertalanffy, L. von.  1938.  A quantitative theory 
of organic growth (Inquiries on growth laws 
II).  Human Biology, 10(2): 181-213. 
Blaxter, J. H. S. and Hunter, J. R.  1982.  The 
biology of clupeoid fishes.  In J. H. S. Blaxter, 
F. S. Russell, and M. Yonge (eds.) Advances 
in Marine Biology Volume 20.  Academic 
Press, London, UK. 
Brett, J. R.  1985.  Correction in use of 
oxycalorific equivalent.  Canadian Journal of 
Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 42:1326-1327. 
Brett, J. R. and Groves, T. D. D.  1979.  
Physiological energetics.  In W. S. Hoar, D. J. 
Randall, and J.R. Brett (eds.) Fish physiology 
Vol. VIII bioenergetics and growth.  
Academic Press, Inc., New York, pp. 279 – 
352. 
Cummins, K. W. and Wuycheck, J. C.  1971.  
Caloric equivalents for investigations in 
ecological energetics.  Mitteilungen 
Internationale Vereinigung fur Theoretische 
und Angewandte Limnologie 18. 
Dabrowski, K.  1985.  Energy budget of coregonid 
(Coregonus spp.) fish growth, metabolism and 
reproduction.  Oikos 45:358-364. 
Dabrowski, K.  1986.  Energy utilization during 
swimming and cost of locomotion in larval 
and juvenile fish.  Sonderdruck aus Journal of 
Applied Ichthyology 2:110-117. 
Dabrowski, K., Takashima, F. and Law, Y. K.  
1988.  Bioenergetic model of planktivorous 
fish feeding, growth and metabolism: 
theoretical optimum swimming speed of fish 
larvae.  Journal of Fish Biology 32:443-458. 
De Silva, S. S.  1973.  Food and feeding habits of 
the herring Clupea harengus and the sprat C. 
sprattus in inshore waters of the west coast of 
Scotland.  Marine Biology 20:282-290. 
De Silva, C. D. and Tytler, P.  1973.  The 
influence of reduced environmental oxygen on 
the metabolism and survival of herring and 
plaice larvae.  Netherlands Journal of Sea 
Research 7:345-362. 
De Silva, S. S. and Balbontin, F.  1974.  
Laboratory studies on food intake, growth and 
food conversion of young herring, Clupea 
harengus (L.).  Journal of Fish Biology 6:645-
658. 
Durbin, E. G. and Durbin, A. G.  1981.  
Assimilation efficiency and nitrogen excretion 
of a filter-feeding planktivore, the Atlantic 
menhaden, Brevoortia tyrannus (Pisces: 
Clupeidae).  Fishery Bulletin U.S. 79:601-616. 
Durbin, E. G. and Durbin, A. G.  1983.  Energy 
and nitrogen budgets for the Atlantic 
menhaden, Brevoortia tyrannus (Pisces: 
Clupeidae), a filter-feeding planktivore.  
Fishery Bulletin U.S. 81:177-199. 
Durbin, A. G., Durbin, E. G., Verity, P. G., and 
Smayda, T. J.  1981.  Voluntary swimming 
speeds and respiration rates of a filter-feeding 
planktivore, the Atlantic menhaden, 
Brevoortia tyrannus (Pisces: Clupeidae).  
Fishery Bulletin U.S. 78:877-886. 
Elliott, J. M.  1976a.  Energy losses in the waste 
products of brown trout (Salmo trutta L.).  
Journal of Animal Ecology 45:561-580. 
Elliott, J. M.  1976b.  The energetics of feeding, 
metabolism, and growth of brown trout (Salmo 
trutta L.) in relation to body weight, water 
temperature, and ration size.  Journal of 
Animal Ecology 45:923-948. 
Elliott, J. M.  1979.  Energetics of freshwater 
teleosts.  Symposium Zoological Society of 
London 44:29-61. 
Elliott, J. M. and Davison, W.  1975.  Energy 
equivalents of oxygen consumption in animal 
energetics. Oecologia 19:195-201. 
Flath, L. E. and Diana, J. S.  1985.  Seasonal 
energy dynamics of the alewife in 
southeastern Lake Michigan.  Transactions of 
the American Fisheries Society 114:328-337. 
123
Fiksen, O. and Folkvord, A.  1999.  Modelling 
growth and ingestion processes in herring 
Clupea harengus larvae.  Marine Ecology 
Progress Series 184:273-289. 
Foy, R. J. and Norcross, B. L.  1999.  Spatial and 
temporal variability in the diet of juvenile 
Pacific herring (Clupea pallasi) in Prince 
William Sound, Alaska.  Canadian Journal of 
Zoology 77:697-706. 
Foy, R. J. and Paul, A. J.  1999.  Winter feeding 
and changes in somatic energy content of age-
0 Pacific herring in Prince William Sound, 
Alaska.  Transactions of the American 
Fisheries Society 128:1193-1200. 
Grabe, S. A.  1996.  Feeding chronology and 
habits of Alosa spp. (Clupeidae) juveniles 
from the lower Hudson River estuary, New 
York.  Environmental Biology of Fishes 
47:321-326. 
Giguère, L. A., Côté, B., and St-Pierre, J.-F.  1988.  
Metabolic rates scale isometrically in larval 
fishes. Marine Ecology Progress Series 50:13-
19. 
Haegele, C.W.  1997.  The occurrence, abundance 
and food of juvenile herring and salmon in the 
Strait of Georgia, British Columbia in 1990 to 
1994.  Can. Man. Rep. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 2390: 
124 pp.  
Haist, V. and Stocker, M.  1985.  Growth and 
maturation of Pacific herring (Clupea 
harengus pallasi) in the Strait of Georgia.  
Proceedings of The Symposium on the 
Biological Characteristics of Herring and 
Their Implication for Management.  Can. J. 
Aquat. Sci., vol. 42(l), pp. 138-146. 
Hanson, P. C., Johnson, T. B., Schindler, D. E., 
Kitchell, J. F.  1997.  Fish bioenergetics 3.0 
for Windows. University of Wisconsin Sea 
Grant Institute.  Technical Report WISCU-T-
97-001, Madison, Wisconsin, USA. 
Hartman, K. J. and Brandt, S. B.  1995.  
Estimating energy density of fish.  
Transactions of the American Fisheries 
Society 124:347-355. 
Hay, D.E. and McCarter, P.B.  2001.  Spatial, 
temporal and life-stage variation in herring 
diets in British Columbia.  PICES Workshop 
Reports.  PICES Sci. Report 15: 95-98.   
Hay, D.E., Thompson, M.J., and McCarter, P.B.  
2001.  Anatomy of a strong year class: 
Analysis of the 1977 year class of Pacific 
herring in British Columbia and Alaska. 
Herring: Expectations for a new millennium.  
University of Alaska Sea Grant, AK-SG-01-
04, Fairbanks, pp. 171-198.  
Hettler, W. F.  1976.  Influence of temperature and 
salinity on routine metabolic rate and growth 
of young Atlantic menhaden.  Journal of Fish 
Biology 8:55-65. 
Hollowed, A.B. and Wooster, W.S.  1992. 
Variability of winter ocean conditions and 
strong year-classes of Northeast Pacific 
groundfish.  ICES Mar. Sci. Symp. 195: 433-
444. 
Hollowed, A.B. and Wooster, W.S.  1995.  
Decadal scale variations in the eastern 
subarctic Pacific: II.  Response of Northeast 
Pacific fish stocks.  In R.J. Beamish. (ed.) 
Climate change and northern fish populations.  
Canadian Special Publication of Fisheries and 
Aquatic Sciences 121: 375-386.  
Ikeda, T.  1996.  Metabolism, body composition, 
and energy budget of the mesopelagic fish 
Maurolicus muelleri in the Sea of Japan.  
Fishery Bulletin U.S. 94:49-58. 
James, A. G. and Probyn, T.  1989.  The 
relationship between respiration rate, 
swimming speed and feeding behaviour in the 
Cape anchovy Engraulis capensis Gilchrist.  
Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and 
Ecology 131:81-100. 
Janssen, J.  1976.  Feeding modes and prey size 
selection in the alewife (Alosa 
pseudoharengus).  Journal of the Fisheries 
Research Board of Canada 33:1972-1975. 
Janssen, J. and Brandt, S. B.  1980.  Feeding 
ecology and vertical migration of adult 
alewives (Alosa pseudoharengus) in Lake 
Michigan.  Canadian Journal of Fisheries and 
Aquatic Sciences 37:177-184. 
Kamler, E.  1972.  Respiration of carp in relation 
to body size and temperature.  Polskie 
Archiwum Hydrobiologii 19: 325-331. 
Katz, H. M.  1978.  Circadian rhythms in juvenile 
American shad, Alosa sapidissima.  Journal of 
Fish Biology 12:609-614. 
Kaufmann, R.  1990.  Respiratory cost of 
swimming in larval and juvenile cyprinids.  
Journal of Experimental Biology 150:343-366. 
Kerr, S. R. and Dickie, L. M.  1985.  Bioenergetics 
of 0+ Atlantic herring (Clupea harengus 
124
harengus). Canadian Journal of Fisheries and 
Aquatic Sciences 42 (1):105-110. 
Kiørboe, T., Munk, P. and Støttrup, J. G.  1985.  
First feeding by larval herring Clupea 
harengus L. Dana 5:95-107. 
Kiørboe, T., Munk, P. and Richardson, K.  1987.  
Respiration and growth of larval herring 
Clupea harengus: relation between specific 
dynamic action and growth efficiency.  Marine 
Ecological Progress Series 40:1-10. 
Kitchell, J. F., Koonce, J. F., O'Neill, R. V., 
Shugart, H. H., Jr., Magnuson, J. J. and Booth, 
R. S.  1974. Model of fish biomass dynamics.  
Transactions of the American Fisheries 
Society 103:786-798. 
Klumb, R. A., Rudstam, L. G., and Mills, E. L.  
Respiration rates and swimming speeds of 
larval and juvenile alewives Alosa 
pseudoharengus: implications for 
bioenergetics models.  Transactions of the 
American Fisheries Society (in review). 
Klumpp, D. W. and Westernhagen, H. von.  1986.  
Nitrogen balance in marine fish larvae: 
influence of developmental stage and prey 
density.  Marine Biology 93:189-199. 
Kosaka S.  2000.  Life history of the Pacific saury 
Cololabis saira in the northwest Pacific and 
considerations on resources fluctuations based 
on it.  Bull. Tohoku Natl. Fish. Res. Inst. 63: 
1-96. 
Kurita Y. and Sugisaki, H.  2002.  Seasonal 
changes in daily ration of Pacific saury, 
Cololabis saria. to be submitted to Fish. 
Oceanogr. 
Laurence, G. C.  1976.  Caloric content of some 
north Atlantic calanoid copepods.  Fishery 
Bulletin U.S. 78: 218-220. 
Leonov A.V and Sapozhnikov V.V.  1997.  
Biohydrochemical model of organic substance 
transformations and its applying for the 
calculation of primary production in the 
Okhots Sea ecosystem.  In  Complex studies 
of the Okhotsk Sea ecosystem.  Publ. House 
VNIRO, Moscow, pp. 143-166. (In Russian). 
Leonov A.V. and Stygar O.V.  1999.  Seasonal 
variations of biogenic substance 
concentrations and bioproductivity of waters 
in northern part of the Caspian Sea.  Vodnye 
Resoursy V. 26 (6), pp. 743-756. (In Russian). 
Limburg, K. E.  1994.  Ecological constraints on 
growth and migration of juvenile American 
shad (Alosa sapidissima Wilson) in the 
Hudson River Estuary, New York.  Doctoral 
dissertation.  Cornell University, Ithaca, New 
York. 
Muir, B. S. and Niimi, A. J.  1972.  Oxygen 
consumption of the euryhaline fish aholehole 
(Kuhlia sandvicensis) with reference to 
salinity, swimming, and food consumption.  
Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of 
Canada 29:67-77. 
Munk, P.  1992.  Foraging behaviour and prey size 
spectra of larval herring Clupea harengus.  
Marine Ecology Progress Series 80:149-158. 
Munk, P. and Kiorboe, T.  1985.  Feeding 
behaviour and swimming activity of larval 
herring (Clupea harengus) in relation to 
density of copepod nauplii.  Marine Ecology - 
Progress Series 24:15-21. 
Nakata, K., Ito, H., Ichikawa, T., and Sasaki, K.  
2002.  Reproduction of three Oncaea speices 
in the Kuroshio Extention in spring.  Fish. 
Oceanogr. (submitted ). 
Odate, S.  1977.  On distribution of Pacific saury 
in the North Pacific Ocean.  Res. Inst. North 
Pac. Fish. Sp. Vol. 10 Faculty of Fisheries, 
Hokkaido University, Hakodate, Japan, pp. 
353-382. 
Ohtani, K. and Azumaya, T.  1995.  Influence of 
interannual changes in ocean conditions on the 
abundance of walleye pollock (Theragra 
chalcogramma) in the eastern Bering Sea. In 
R.J. Beamish. (ed.)  Climate change and 
northern fish populations.  Canadian Special 
Publication of Fisheries and Aquat. Sci. 121: 
87-95.  
Oozeki, Y. and Watanabe, Y.  2000.  Comparison 
of somatic growth and otolith increment 
growth in laboratory-reared larvae of Pacific 
saury, Cololabis saira, under different 
temperature conditions.  Marine Biology 136: 
349-359. 
Oozeki, Y. and Watanabe, Y.  2002.  Environment 
factor affecting the larval growth of Pacific 
saury, Cololabis saira, in the northwestern 
Pacific Ocean.  Fish. Oceanogr. (submitted ). 
Paul, A. J. and Paul, J. M.  1998a.  Spring and 
summer whole-body energy content of 
Alaskan juvenile Pacific herring.  Alaska 
Fishery Research Bulletin 5:131-136. 
Paul, A. J. and Paul, J. M.  1998b.  Comparisons 
of whole body energy content of captive 
125
fasting age zero Alaskan Pacific herring 
(Clupea pallasi Valenciennes) and cohorts 
over-wintering in nature.  Journal of 
Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 
226:75-86. 
Paul, A. J., Paul, J. M., and Brown, E. D.  1998.  
Fall and spring somatic energy content for 
Alaskan Pacific herring (Clupea pallasi 
Valenciennes 1847) relative to age, size and 
sex.  Journal of Experimental Marine Biology 
and Ecology 223:133-142. 
Pischalnik V.M. and Leonov A.V.  2001.  
Experience of combined application of 
electronic atlas of oceanographical data for 
shelf zone of Sakhalin Island and simulation 
mathematical model for the study of 
biotransformation processes in marine 
environment (examples for La Perouse Strait 
and Aniva Bay). (in press, in Russian).  
Polovina, J.J., Mitchum, G.T. and Evans, G.T.  
1995.  Decadal and basin-scale variation in 
mixed layer depth and the impact on 
biological production in the Central and North 
Pacific 1960-1988.  Deep Sea Research 
42:1701-1716. 
Post, J. R. and Lee, J. A.  1996.  Metabolic 
ontogeny of teleost fishes.  Canadian Journal 
of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 53:910-923. 
Rose, K.A., Rutherford, E.S., McDermot, D.S., 
Forney, J.L., and Miles, E.L.  1999.  
Individual-based model of yellow perch and 
walleye populations in Oneida Lake.  
Ecological Monographs 69(2): 127-154. 
Rudstam, L. G.  1988.  Exploring the dynamics of 
herring consumption in the Baltic: applications 
of an energetic model of fish growth.  Kieler 
Meeresforschung Sonderheft 6:312-322. 
Sherman, K. and Honey, K. A.  1971.  Seasonal 
variations in the food of larval herring in 
coastal waters of central Maine. Rapports et 
Proces-Verbaux des Reunions.  Conseil 
International pour l’Exploration de la Mer 
160:121-124. 
Stewart, D. J. and Binkowski, F. P.  1986.  
Dynamics of consumption and food 
conversion by Lake Michigan alewives: an 
energetics-modeling synthesis.  Transactions 
of the American Fisheries Society 115:643-
661. 
Stewart, D. J., Weininger, D., Rottiers, D. V., and 
Edsall, T. A.  1983.  An energetics model for 
lake trout, Salvelinus namaycush: application 
to the Lake Michigan population.  Canadian 
Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 40: 
681-698. 
Sugisaki H. and Kurita, Y.  2002.  Daily rhythm 
and seasonal variation of feeding habit of 
saury.  Fish. Oceanogr. (submitted ). 
Suyama S., Sakurai, Y., and Shimazaki, K.  1996  
Age and growth of pacific saury Cololabis 
saira (Brevoort) in the Western North Pacific 
Ocean estimated from daily otolith growth 
increments.  Fish. Science 62: 1-7. 
Suyama S., Kurita, Y., Kamei, Y., Kajiwara, Y., 
and Ueno, Y.  2002.  Annual change of the 
size in each year class of Pacific saury 
(Cololabis saira) estimated based on the 
hyaline zone in the otolith.  Fish. Oceanogr. 
(submitted ). 
Theilacker, G. H.  1987.  Feeding ecology and 
growth energetics of larval northern anchovy, 
Engraulis mordax.  Fishery Bulletin U.S. 
85:213-228. 
Thornton, K. W. and Lessem, A. S.  1978.  A 
temperature algorithm for modifying 
biological rates. Transactions of the American 
Fisheries Society 107:284-287. 
Tian Y., Akamine, T., and Suda, M.  2002a.  
Long-term variability in the abundance of 
Pacific saury in the northwestern Pacific ocean 
and climate changes during the last century.  
Bull. Jpn. Soc. Fish. Oceanogr. 66; 16-25. 
Tian Y., Ueno, Y., Akamine, T., and Suda, M.  
2002b.  Climate-ocean variability and the 
response of Pacific saury (Cololabis saira) in 
the northwestern Pacific during the last 
century.  Fish. Sci. (submitted). 
Wailes, G. H.  1936.  Food of Clupea pallasii in 
southern British Columbia waters.  Journal of 
the Biology Board of Canada 1:477-? 
Watanabe. Y., and Butler, J. L., and Mori, T.  
1988.  Growth of Pacific saury, Cololabis 
saira, in the northeastern and northwestern 
Pacific Ocean.  Fish. Bull. U.S. 86: 489-498. 
Watanabe. Y., and Kuji, Y.  1991.  Verification of 
daily growth increment formation in saury 
otolith by rearing larvae from hatching.  J. 
Ichthyol. 38: 11-15. 
Watanabe, Y., Oozeki, Y., and Kitagawa, D.  
1997.  Larval parameters determining 
preschooling juvenile production of Pacific 
saury (Cololabis Saira) in the northwestern 
126
Pacific.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci., 54: 1067-
1076. 
Watanabe. Y., and Lo, N. C. H.  1989.  Larval 
production and mortality of Pacific saury, 
Cololabis saira, in the northwestern Pacific 
Ocean.  Fish. Bull. U.S. 86: 601-613. 
Ware, D.M.and McFarlane, G.A.  1995.  Climate-
induced changes in Pacific hake (Merluccius 
productus) abundance in the Vancouver Island 
upwelling system.  In R.J. Beamish. (ed.)  
Climate change and northern fish populations.  
Canadian Special Publication of Fisheries and 
Aquat. Sci. 121: 509-521.   
Ware, D. M.  1975.  Growth, metabolism, and 
optimal swimming speed of a pelagic fish.  
Journal of the Fisheries Research Board of 
Canada 32:33-41. 
Wieser, W. and Forstner, H.  1986.  Effects of 
temperature and size on the routine rate of 
oxygen consumption and on the relative scope 
for activity in larval cyprinids.  Journal of 
Comparative Physiology B 156:791-796. 
Winberg, G.G.  1956.  Rate of metabolism and 
food requirements of fishes.  Belorussian 
University, Minsk.  Translated from Russian: 
Fisheries Research Board of Canada 
Translation Service 194, 1960, Ottawa. 
 
127
 
128
Appendix 1 List of Nemuro 2002 workshop participants. 
 
Canada
 
HAY , Douglas E. 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada 
Pacific Biological Station 
3190 Hammond Bay Road 
Nanaimo, BC. 
Canada. V9R 5K6 
hayd@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
 
Japan 
 
AZUMAYA, Tomomori 
Hokkaido National Fisheries Research Institute 
Katsurakoi-116,  
Kushiro, 085-0802  
Japan 
azumaya@fra.affrc.go.jp 
 
CHIBA, Sanae 
Frontier Research System for Global Change 
Showa-machi 3173-25, Kanazawaku, Yokohama 
Kanagawa, 236-001  
Japan 
chibas@jamstec.go.jp 
 
FUJII, Masahiko 
National Institute for Environmental Studies 
16-2 Onogawa, Tsukuba 
Japan 
fujii.masahiko@nies.go.jp.ac.jp 
 
INADA, Masakatsu 
Hokkaido University 
Minato-cho 3-1-1 
Hakodate, 041-8611 
Japan 
f990061@ec.hokudai.ac.jp 
 
ITO, Shin-ichi 
Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute 
Shinhama-cho 3-27-5, Shiogama 
Miyagi, 985-0001 
Japan 
goito@affrc.go.jp  
 
KATUKAWA, Toshio 
Ocean Research Institute, University of Tokyo 
Minamidai-1-15-1, Shinjuku-ku 
Tokyo, 164-8639 
Japan 
katukawa@ori.u-tokyo.ac.jp 
 
KASHIWAI, Makoto B. 
Hokkaido National Fisheries Research Institute 
Katsurakoi-116,  
Kushiro, 085-0802  
Japan 
kashiwai@fra.affrc.go.jp 
 
KISHI, Michio J. 
Hokkaido University 
Minato-cho 3-1-1 
Hakodate, 041-8611 
Japan 
kishi@salmon.fish.hokudai.ac.jp 
 
KOBAYASHI, Tokimasa 
Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute 
Samemachi Shimomekurakubo 
Hachinohe, Aomori, 031-0841 
Japan 
tokikoba@fra.affrc.go.jp 
 
MUKAI, Daiki 
Hokkaido University 
Minato-cho 3-1-1 
Hakodate, 041-8611 
Japan 
f980102@ec.hokidai.ac.jp 
 
OKUNISHI, Takeshi 
Hokkaido University 
Techo-park 1-2-14 Shinonoppro Atshetsu-ku 
Sapporo, Hokkaido, 005-8601  
Japan 
t-okunishi@econixe.co.jp 
 
SMITH, Lan S. 
Frontier Research System for Global Change 
Showa-machi 3173-25, Kanazawaku, Yokohama 
Kanagawa, 236-001  
Japan 
lanimal@jamstec.go.jp 
 
TADOKORO, Kazuaki 
Frontier Research System for Global Change 
Showa-machi 3173-25, Kanazawaku, Yokohama 
Kanagawa, 236-001  
Japan 
denden@jamstec.go.jp 
 
 
 
129
TOMOKAZU, Aiki 
Hokkaido University 
Minato-cho 3-1-1 
Hakodate, 041-8611 
Japan 
f990001@ec.hokudai.ac.jp 
 
TSUDA, Atsushi 
Hokkaido National Fisheries Research Institute 
Katsurakoi-116,  
Kushiro, 085-0802  
Japan 
tsuda@fra.affrc.go.jp 
 
YAMANAKA, Yasuhiro 
Graduate School of Environmental Earth Science 
Hokkaido University 
North 10, West 5 Kita-ku 
Sapporo, 060-0810 
Japan 
galapen@ees.hokudai.ac.jp 
 
YOSHIE, Naoki 
Graduate School of Environmental Earth Science 
Hokkaido University 
North 10, West 5 Kita-ku 
Sapporo, 060-0810 
Japan 
naoki@ees.hokudai.ac.jp 
 
 
People`s Republic of China 
 
HUANG, Daji 
2nd Institute of Oceanography 
P. O. Box 1207, Hangzhou 
Zhejiang, 310012 
People`s Republic of China 
dajih2001@yahoo.com 
 
 
Republic of Korea 
 
HONG, Chul-Hoon 
Pukyong National University 
599-1 Daeyeon3-Dong Nam-Gu 
Pusan, 608-737 
Republic of Korea 
hongch@pknu.ac.kr 
 
Russian Federation 
 
ZUENKO, Yury I. 
Pacific Fisheries Research Center 
4 Shevchenko Alley  
Vladivostok, 690950 
Russia 
kheng@tinro.ru 
 
LEONOV, Alexander 
Shirshov Institute of Oceanology 
36 Nakhimovsky Prospekt  
Moscow, 117997 
Russia 
leonov@sio.rssi.ru 
 
NAVROTSKY, Vadim V. 
Pacific Oceanological Institute 
43 Baltiyskaya Street  
Vladivostok, 690041 
Russia 
navr@online.vladivostok.ru 
 
 
U.S.A. 
 
KLUMB, Robert A. 
Cornell University 
Cornell Biological Field Station 
900 Shackelton Point Road 
Bridgeport, NY  13030 
U.S.A. 
rak11@cornell.edu 
 
MEGREY, Bernard A. 
National Marine Fisheries Service 
Alaska Fisheries Science Center 
7600 Sand Point Way N.E. 
Seattle, WA 98115-0070  
U.S.A. 
bern.megrey@noaa.gov 
 
WERNER, Francisco E. 
Department of Marine Science 
University of North Carolina 
Chapel Hill 
NC 27599-3300  
U.S.A. 
cisco@marine.unc.edu 
130
Appendix 2 Herring bioenergetic model FORTRAN code for the base case. 
 
C ------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
C Bioenergetic herring model based on the paper of Rudstam (1988).  
C Exploring the dynamics of herring consumption in the Baltic:  
C Aplications of an energetic model of fish growth. 
C Kieler Meeresforsch Sonderth 6:312-322.  
C 
C Originally coded as difference equation in FORTRAN by Kenny Rose 26 Dec 01 
C 
C Corrected and changed to differential equation with Euler and  
C Runge Kutta numerical integration scheme 
C 
C                                    01/03/02 Bernard A. Megrey 
C 
C Added observed and predicted size at age data 
C                                    01/12/02 Bernard A. Megrey 
C 
C Added YOY formulations per Arrhenius (1998) 
C                                    01/22/02 Bernard A. Megrey  
C 
C All relic code removed for general distribution at  
C Nemuro 2002 workshop 
C                                    01/25/02 Bernard A. Megrey 
C 
C 
C ------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
        program NemuroHerring 
       
   include 'stuff.cmn' 
   include 'state.cmn' 
   include 'sizeaa.cmn' 
   REAL NYEARS, NSTEPS, NSTEP 
 
        OPEN(UNIT=11,FILE='nemuro.txt',STATUS='unknown') 
        OPEN(UNIT=8,FILE='compareEuler.out',STATUS='unknown') 
        OPEN(UNIT=9,FILE='sizeatage.out',STATUS='unknown')  
C 
C-----read in the 3 zoop groups from Nemuro output (7th, 9th and 11th columns) 
C 
        do 45 ii=1,731 
        READ(11,999)id(ii),zop1(ii),zop2(ii),zop3(ii) 
999    FORMAT(1x,i3,1x,5(13x,1x),2(e13.6,1x,13x,1x),e13.6) 
C 
C-----   take the first year for now 
C 
        IF(ii.le.365)then 
           zoop1(ii)=zop1(ii) 
           zoop2(ii)=zop2(ii) 
           zoop3(ii)=zop3(ii) 
        endif 
131
45    continue 
 
C------convert Nemuro zoop in uM N/L to g ww/m3 
C------  tt1 is conversion from uM N/liter to g ww/m3 
C------  14 ug N/uM * 1.0e-6 g/ug * 1 g dw/0.07 g N dw  
C------   * 1 g ww/0.2 g dw *  
C------   1.e3 liters/m3 
      do 55 i=1,365 
        tt1=14.0*1.0e-6*(1.0/0.07)*(1.0/0.2)*1.0e3  
        zoop1(i)=zoop1(i)*tt1 
        zoop2(i)=zoop2(i)*tt1 
        zoop3(i)=zoop3(i)*tt1 
 
C----initial weight and age of newly metamphosed herring 
       x(1)=0.2 
        iage=0 
        maxage=0 
  55 continue 
C 
C --- number of state variables 
C 
      nstate=1 
C 
C - time initialization 
C 
        TZERO = 0.0 
        NYEARS = 11.0 
        NSTEPS = 100.0 
        TEND = 365.0*NYEARS 
        dt= 1/NSTEPS 
        TPRINT = 1.0 
        TEPS = 1.0E-05 
 
C 
C --- MAIN TIME LOOP 
C 
      NSTEP=0.0 
      DO WHILE (time .LT. TEND) 
        NSTEP=NSTEP+1.0 
        time= TZERO + NSTEP*dt 
        CALL EULER(x,xdot,nstate,dt,time) 
C       CALL KUTTA(x,xdot,nstate,dt,time) 
        iday=int(amod(time,365.0))+1 
        iyr=int(time/365.)+1 
C 
C-----   update age every time iday 365 goes by and  
C-----   after NSTEP have gone by 
C-----   the NSTEPS test is to avoid incrementing iage 
C-----   every dt 
C 
        IF(iday.eq.365 .and. amod(NSTEP,NSTEPS).eq.0) then 
132
         iage=iage+1 
        jpage(iage)=iage 
         psizeaa(iage)=x(1) 
         if(iage .gt. maxpage) maxpage=iage 
        endif 
C 
C --- check for time to print 
C 
       IF(ABS(AMOD(time,TPRINT)) .LT. TEPS) THEN 
       write(8,1001) time, x(1), wtemp, gcmax 
1001   format(1x,4(f9.3,1x)) 
C      ENDIF 
      ENDIF 
      END DO 
      kage=min(maxoage,maxpage) 
C 
C --- write predicted and observed size-at-age output 
C 
      do 73 i=1,kage 
 write(9,1002) i, psizeaa(i), osizeaa(i) 
73    continue 
1002  format(1x,i4,2(1x,f9.3)) 
 
      close(8) 
      close(9) 
      STOP 
      END 
     SUBROUTINE DER(x,xdot,time) 
 
C------------------------------------------------------ 
C 
C Herring bioenergetics differential equation process. 
C Prey base are in units of micromoles N /m^3 and are  
C converted 
C via converson factors 
C 
C    programmed by BAM 01/05/02 
C 
C Added YOY formulations per Arrhenius (1998) 
C                       01/22/02 Bernard A. Megrey 
C 
C------------------------------------------------------ 
      
    include 'stuff.cmn' 
    include 'state.cmn' 
       
C  WRITE(*,*) 'IN DER', time 
 
       
    iday=int(amod(time,365.0))+1 
    iyr=int(time/365.)+1 
133
C 
C zero out xdot 
C 
 DO 15 i=1,nstate 
 xdot(i)=0.0 
  15 CONTINUE 
C----  start age-0 on day 200 
C----  jday is julian day (1,..., 400) but goes past 365 
C----  iday is counter for day in model simulation 
C----- jjday is julian day (i.e., jday reset for >365) 
C----  I start on day 200; i you want different then change 200 
C---   below and 165, which 365 minus the start day. 
           jday=iday+200 
           IF(jday.le.365)then 
              jjday=jday 
           else 
              jjday=iday-165 
           endif 
 
C 
C-----  generate daily temperatures for a year -- made up 
C   
        t1=float(jjday) 
        t2=12.75-10.99*cos(0.0172*t1)-6.63*sin(0.0172*t1) 
        wtemp=t2-5.0 
        IF(wtemp.le.1.0)wtemp=1.0 
C write(*,*) "wtemp",wtemp 
C50    continue 
 
C 
C Herring = x(1) 
C 
 
C 
C----- set vulnerabilities and k values for 3 zoop groups 
C 
      vul(1)=1.0 
      vul(2)=1.0 
      vul(3)=1.0 
 
      k(1)=100.0 
      k(2)=10.0 
      k(3)=100.0 
C 
C-----if using constant p rather than functional response, set p 
C-----here 
C      p=0.6 
 
 
C-----  loop over years 
C      do 100 iyr=1,9 
134
C----    loop over days for each year 
C        do 200 iday=1,365 
C write(*,*) 'iday jday jjday', iday,jday,jjday 
 
C-----iiday is running value of days in simulation (1,...., 2000) 
C           iiday=(iyr-1)*365+iday 
 
           tt1=1.0/x(1) 
           t1=0.0033*tt1**0.227 
C write(*,*) 't1 tt1', x(1), t1, tt1 
 
c----***this is the new stuff from Arrhenius (1998) for YOY only*** 
c-----   The 5.258 puts resp is in units of g zoop/g fish/day 
c----- [13560 joules/gram oxygen]/4.18 joules/cal = 3244 cal/gO2 
c------[2580 joules/gram zoop]/4.18 joules/cal = 617 cal/g zoop 
c------ 3244/617 = 5.258 
 
           IF(iage.eq.0)then 
             IF(wtemp.le.15.0)then 
                v=5.76*EXP(0.0238*wtemp)*x(1)**0.386 
             endif 
             IF(wtemp.gt.15.0)then 
                v=8.6*x(1)**0.386 
             endif 
             a=EXP((0.03-0.0*wtemp)*v) 
             resp=t1*EXP(0.0548*wtemp)*a*5.258 
           endif 
c------***back to the old equations for respiration for age-1 and 
C------older *** 
           IF(iage.ge.1)then 
             IF(wtemp.le.9.0)then 
              u=3.9*x(1)**0.13*EXP(0.149*wtemp) 
             else 
              u=15.0*x(1)**0.13 
             endif 
             resp=t1*EXP(0.0548*wtemp)*EXP(0.03*u)*5.258 
           endif 
C write(*,*) 'after new stuff' 
C   IF(wtemp.lt.9.0)then 
C              u=3.9*x(1)**0.13* exp(0.149*wtemp) 
C           else 
C              u=15.0*x(1)**0.13 
C           endif 
c--   ---  13,560 joules/g O2  1 cal/4.18 joules  1 g ww/5533 cal 
C         resp=t1*EXP(0.0548*wtemp)*EXP(0.03*u)*0.59 
 
C 
C-----     Thornton and Lessem (1978)temperature effect 
c----**Arrhenius (1998) for age-0  changed te4 from 25 to 23 degrees*** 
           IF(iage.eq.0)then 
             xk1=0.1 
135
             xk2=0.98 
             xk3=0.98 
             xk4=0.01 
 
             te1=1.0 
             te2=15.0 
             te3=17.0 
             te4=23.0 
           endif 
C 
           IF(iage.eq.1)then 
             xk1=0.1 
             xk2=0.98 
             xk3=0.98 
             xk4=0.01 
 
             te1=1.0 
             te2=15.0 
             te3=17.0 
             te4=25.0 
           endif 
           IF(iage.gt.1)then 
             xk1=0.1 
             xk2=0.98 
             xk3=0.98 
             xk4=0.01 
 
             te1=1.0 
             te2=13.0 
             te3=15.0 
             te4=23.0 
           endif 
C 
C- non age dependent temperature effect on consumption 
C             xk1=0.1 
C             xk2=0.98 
C             xk3=0.98 
C             xk4=0.01 
C             te1=1.0 
C             te2=13.0 
C             te3=15.0 
C             te4=23.0 
 
           tt5=(1.0/(te2-te1)) 
           t5=tt5 * alog(0.98*(1.0-xk1)/(0.02*xk1)) 
           t4=exp(t5*(wtemp-te1)) 
 
           tt7 = 1.0/(te4-te3) 
           t7=tt7*alog(0.98*(1.0-xk4)/(0.02*xk4)) 
           t6=exp(t7*(te4-wtemp)) 
 
136
           gcta=(xk1*t4)/(1.0+xk1*(t4-1.0)) 
           gctb=xk4*t6/(1.0+xk4*(t6-1.0)) 
           gctemp=gcta * gctb 
           gcmax=0.642*tt1**0.256*gctemp 
C 
C----- no tempeature effect 
C           gcmax=0.642*tt1**0.256*1.0 
 
C-----  either use fixed p or call functional response 
C      con=p*gcmax 
C      write(*,*) 'der time iday iyr jjday zoop123',time,iday,  
C      iyr,  
C      jjday, zoop1(jjday),zoop2(jjday), zoop3(jjday) 
      cnum=zoop1(jjday)*vul(1)/k(1)+zoop2(jjday)*vul(2)/k(2) 
     $      +zoop3(jjday)*vul(3)/k(3) 
           c1=gcmax*zoop1(jjday)*vul(1)/k(1) 
           c2=gcmax*zoop2(jjday)*vul(2)/k(2) 
           c3=gcmax*zoop3(jjday)*vul(3)/k(3) 
           con1=c1/(1.0+cnum) 
           con2=c2/(1.0+cnum) 
           con3=c3/(1.0+cnum) 
           con=con1+con2+con3 
C 
C --- for comparison to Kenny's version 
C 
C           con=0.75*gcmax 
C 
C --- to tune to observed size at age data 
           con=0.48*gcmax 
C 
C --- egestion 
C 
           f=0.16*con 
C 
C --- excretion 
           e=0.1*(con-f) 
C 
C --- Specific Dynamic Action 
C 
c------   *******Arrhenius (1998)  changed SDA from 17.5% to 15% **** 
           IF(iage.eq.0)sda=0.15*(con-f) 
           IF(iage.ge.1)sda=0.175*(con-f) 
 
 
c-----   J/g ww 1 cal=4.18 J 
C  con1=con*2580.0/5533.0 
C write(*,*) 'der',con1,resp,xdot(1) 
C 
C --- bioenergetics differential equation 
C 
          xdot(1)=(con-resp-f-e-sda)*x(1)*2580./5533. 
137
 
          IF(wtemp.le.1.0)xdot(1)=0.0 
      t1=float(jjday) 
  if(amod(t1,365.0).ge.152.0.and.amod(t1,365.0).le.156.0) then 
          write(*,*) 'in spawn' 
   xdot(1)=(con-resp-f-e-sda-0.20)*x(1)*2580./5533. 
          endif 
 
 
c-----   update age every time day 365 goes by 
c         IF(iday.eq.365) then 
c   iage=iage+1 
c        jage(iage)=iage 
c           psizeaa(iage)=x(1) 
c            write(*,*)'iday, iyr, jjday, iage, maxage',iday, iyr, 
c     $      jjday, iage, maxage 
c           if(iage .gt. maxage) maxage=iagec 
c     endif 
 
C WRITE(*,*) 'OUT OF DER' 
      RETURN 
      END 
 SUBROUTINE EULER(x,xdot,nstate,dt,time) 
C------------------------------------------------------ 
C 
C USE THE EULER METHOD TO SOLVE A SYSTEM OF NONLINEAR  
C DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS. A SUBROUTINE DER IS NEEDED  
C TO COMPUTE THE DERIVATIVS OF THE STATE VARIBALES 
C 
C X - STATE VARIABLE ARRAY 
C XDOT - ARRAY OF DERIVATIVES OF STATE ARIABLES 
C NSTATE - NUMBER OF STATE VARIABLES 
C DT - TIME STEP 
C TIME - CURRENT TIME 
C 
C------------------------------------------------------ 
 include 'stuff.cmn' 
 include 'state.cmn' 
 
 
      INTEGER I 
 
       CALL DER(x,xdot,time)  
 
        DO 10 i=1, nstate 
   x(i) =x(i) + dt * xdot(i) 
  10  CONTINUE 
 
      RETURN 
      END 
 SUBROUTINE KUTTA(x,xdot,nstate,dt,time) 
138
C------------------------------------------------------ 
C 
C USE THE 4TH ORDER RUNGE KUTTA METHOD TO SOLVE A SYSTEM OF NONLINEAR  
C DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS. A SUBROUTINE DER IS NEEDED  
C TO COMPUTE THE DERIVATIVS OF THE STATE VARIBALES 
C 
C X - STATE VARIABLE ARRAY 
C XDOT - ARRAY OF DERVATIVES OF STATE VARIABLES 
C NSTATE - NUMBER OF STATE VARIABLES 
C DT - TIME STEP 
C TIME - CURRENT TIME 
C 
C programmed by Bernard A. Megrey 01/06/02 
C 
C 
C------------------------------------------------------ 
      include 'stuff.cmn' 
 include 'state.cmn' 
 
      INTEGER I 
      REAL SUMDX(16), DTO2, XPLUS(16) 
C WRITE(*,*) 'IN KUTTA' 
 
      DTO2 = dt/2.0 
 
      CALL DER(x,xdot,time)  
 
      DO 10 I=1, nstate 
   XPLUS(I) = x(I) + DT02 * xdot(I) 
   SUMDX(I)= xdot(I) 
  10  CONTINUE 
 
      CALL DER(XPLUS,xdot,time) 
 
      DO 20 I=1, nstate 
  XPLUS(I) = x(I) + DTO2 * xdot(I) 
  SUMDX(I) = SUMDX(I) + 2.0 * xdot(I) 
  20  CONTINUE 
 
      CALL DER(XPLUS,xdot,time) 
 
      DO 30 I=1, nstate 
  XPLUS(I) = x(I) + dt * xdot(I) 
  SUMDX(I) = SUMDX(I) + 2.0 * xdot(I) 
   30 CONTINUE 
 
      CALL DER(XPLUS,xdot,time) 
 
      DO 40 I=1, nstate 
  SUMDX(I) = SUMDX(I) + xdot(I) 
  x(I) = x(I) + dt * SUMDX(I) / 6.0 
139
   40 CONTINUE 
C      WRITE(*,*) 'OUT OF KUTTA' 
      RETURN 
      END 
 
 
C========================================================== 
C 
C Include file: state.cmn 
C state variable declarations 
C 
C  BAM 1/02/02 
C---------------------------------------------------------- 
      REAL*4 dt, time, x(1), xdot(1) 
      INTEGER*4 nstate 
 
 
C========================================================== 
C 
C Include file: stuff.cmn 
C miscellaneous common block variables 
C 
C  BAM 1/2/02 
C---------------------------------------------------------- 
      COMMON /ZOO/ zoop1(365), zoop2(365), zoop3(365) 
      COMMON /ISV/ wtemp, con, gcmax,f, e ,sda, con1, resp 
  COMMON /TIMER/ iday, jday, iyr, iage 
  REAL*4 zoop1,zoop2,zoop3,k(3),vul(3) 
      REAL*4 zop1(731),zop2(731),zop3(731) 
  INTEGER*4 id(731) 
 
 
C========================================================== 
C 
C Include file: sizeaa.cmn 
C Size at age common block 
C 
C   BAM 1/06/02 
C 
C---------------------------------------------------------- 
      COMMON /SIZEAA/joage(25),jpage(25),psizeaa(25),osizeaa(25), 
     $                 maxoage,maxpage 
C --- joage Observed age 
C --- jpage Predicted age 
C --- psizeaa Predicted size at age 
C --- osizeaa Observed size at age 
 
      INTEGER*4 joage, jpage, maxoage, maxpage 
      REAL*4 psizeaa, osizeaa 
      DATA maxoage /11/ 
      DATA joage /1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,14*0/ 
140
C 
C --- observed size at age Pacific herring  data (wt) from the C  
C --- 1973 year class  
C --- as supplied by Doug Hay 
C 
      DATA osizeaa /8.75,63.0,87.66,124.13,139.26,152.98,177.43, 
     $              185.78,187.64,195.0,208.73,14*0.0/ 
 
141
 
142
Appendix 3 Fully customized herring subroutine.  See Appendix 2 for main program and 
common block including files. 
 
SUBROUTINE DER(x,xdot,time) 
 
C------------------------------------------------------ 
C 
C Herring bioenergetics differential equation process. 
C Prey base are in units of micromoles N /m^3 and are converted 
C via converson factors 
C 
C    programmed by B.A. Megrey 01/05/02 
C 
C Added YOY formulations per Arrhenius 1998 
C                       01/22/02 B.A. Megrey 
 
C modifications and customizations by F.E.Werner and R.A.Klumb 1/26/02 
C while at the Nemuro workshop 
C 
C------------------------------------------------------ 
      
      include 'stuff.cmn' 
      include 'state.cmn' 
       
C 
C- calculate date and year 
C       
      iday=int(amod(time,365.0))+1 
 iyr=int(time/365.)+1 
C 
C zeroout xdot 
C 
 DO 15 i=1,nstate 
 xdot(i)=0.0 
   15 CONTINUE 
c 
c----  start age-0 on day 200 
c----       jday is julian day (1,..., 400) but goes past 365 
c----       iday is counter for day in model simulation 
c----       jjday is julian day (i.e., jday reset for >365) 
c----      I start on day 200; i you want different then change 200 
c----       below and 165, which 365 minus the start day. 
           jday=iday+200 
           IF(jday.le.365)then 
              jjday=jday 
           else 
              jjday=iday-165 
           endif 
C 
C-----  generate daily temperatures for a year -- made up 
C   
143
        t1=float(jjday)                                    ! BaseCase T 
        t2=12.75-10.99*cos(0.0172*t1)-6.63*sin(0.0172*t1)  ! BaseCase T 
        wtemp=t2-5.0                                       ! BaseCase T 
        IF(wtemp.le.1.0)wtemp=1.0                          ! BaseCase T 
 pi=acos(-1.) 
 wtemp=7.717+(5.6796*0.5*(1.-cos(2.*pi*(t1-30.)/365.))) 
C 
C--- Herring weight state variable = x(1) 
C--- weight affect on respiration 
C 
           tt1=1.0/x(1) 
           t1=0.0033*tt1**0.227 
C 
C --- *********this is the new stuff from Arrhenius (1998) for YOY only********* 
C --- The 5.258 puts resp (g oxygen/fish) into units of g zoop/g fish/day 
C --- [13560 joules/gram oxygen]/4.18 joules/cal = 3244 cal/gO2 
C --- [2580 joules/gram zoop]/4.18 joules/cal = 617 cal/g zoop 
C --- so respiration in grams/oxygen/g fish/day is multiplied  
C --- by 3244/617 = 5.258 
C --- to get food energy equivalents of a gram of oxygen respired 
C 
c           IF(iage.eq.0)then                           ! BASE 
c             IF(wtemp.le.15.0)then                      ! BASE 
c                v=5.76*EXP(0.0238*wtemp)*x(1)**0.386    ! BASE 
c             endif                                      ! BASE 
c             IF(wtemp.gt.15.0)then                      ! BASE 
c                v=8.6*x(1)**0.386                       ! BASE 
c             endif                                      ! BASE 
c             a=EXP((0.03-0.0*wtemp)*v)                  ! BASE 
c             resp=t1*EXP(0.0548*wtemp)*a*5.258          ! BASE 
c           endif                                        ! BASE 
C 
           IF(iage.eq.0)then                    !  R.A. Klumb (26 Jan 2002) 
       t1=0.00528*tt1**0.007             !  R.A. Klumb (26 Jan 2002) 
       resp=t1*EXP(0.083*wtemp)*5.258    !  R.A. Klumb (26 Jan 2002) 
    end if                               !  R.A. Klumb (26 Jan 2002) 
C 
C --- *********back to the old equations for respiration for age-1 and  
C --- older******** 
C 
           IF(iage.ge.1)then 
C Base             IF(wtemp.le.9.0)then 
             IF(wtemp.le.9.655)then 
              u=3.9*x(1)**0.13*EXP(0.149*wtemp) 
             else 
              u=15.0*x(1)**0.13 
             endif 
             resp=t1*EXP(0.0548*wtemp)*EXP(0.03*u)*5.258 
           endif 
C 
C --- Thornton and Lessem temperature effect 
144
C --- age dependent values 
C --- *******Arrhenius (1998)for age-0  changed te4 from 25 to 23 degrees****** 
C 
           IF(iage.eq.0)then 
             xk1=0.1 
             xk2=0.98 
             xk3=0.98 
             xk4=0.01 
 
C Base             te1=1.0 
C Base             te2=15.0 
C Base             te3=17.0 
C Base             te4=23.0 
       
             te1=8.0 
             te2=10.897 
             te3=11.310 
             te4=12.552 
           endif 
C 
           IF(iage.eq.1)then 
             xk1=0.1 
             xk2=0.98 
             xk3=0.98 
             xk4=0.01 
 
C Base             te1=1.0 
C Base             te2=15.0 
C Base             te3=17.0 
C Base             te4=25.0 
       
             te1=8.0 
             te2=10.897 
             te3=11.310 
             te4=12.966 
           endif 
     
           IF(iage.gt.1)then 
             xk1=0.1 
             xk2=0.98 
             xk3=0.98 
             xk4=0.01 
 
C Base             te1=1.0 
C Base             te2=13.0 
C Base             te3=15.0 
C Base             te4=23.0 
       
             te1=8.0 
             te2=10.483 
             te3=10.897 
145
             te4=12.552 
           endif 
 
           tt5=(1.0/(te2-te1)) 
           t5=tt5 * alog(0.98*(1.0-xk1)/(0.02*xk1)) 
           t4=exp(t5*(wtemp-te1)) 
 
           tt7 = 1.0/(te4-te3) 
           t7=tt7*alog(0.98*(1.0-xk4)/(0.02*xk4)) 
           t6=exp(t7*(te4-wtemp)) 
 
           gcta=(xk1*t4)/(1.0+xk1*(t4-1.0)) 
           gctb=xk4*t6/(1.0+xk4*(t6-1.0)) 
           gctemp=gcta * gctb 
           gcmax=0.642*tt1**0.256*gctemp 
C       
C --- multispecies functional response  
C --- usse either this or adjust little p 
C       
C----- set vulnerabilities and k values for 3 zoop groups 
C 
      vul(1)=1.0 
      vul(2)=1.0 
      vul(3)=1.0 
 
      k(1)=0.3638 
      k(2)=0.0364 
      k(3)=0.3638 
       
c      k(1)=2000.0 
c      k(2)=200.0 
c      k(3)=2000.0 
 
      cnum=zoop1(jjday)*vul(1)/k(1)+zoop2(jjday)*vul(2)/k(2) 
     $      +zoop3(jjday)*vul(3)/k(3) 
           c1=gcmax*zoop1(jjday)*vul(1)/k(1) 
           c2=gcmax*zoop2(jjday)*vul(2)/k(2) 
           c3=gcmax*zoop3(jjday)*vul(3)/k(3) 
           con1=c1/(1.0+cnum) 
           con2=c2/(1.0+cnum) 
           con3=c3/(1.0+cnum) 
           con=con1+con2+con3 
C 
C-----if using constant p rather than functional response, set p here 
C --- to tune to observed size at age data. If using functional response 
C --- comment the next line out 
C 
        con=0.6375*gcmax 
C 
C --- egestion 
C 
146
           f=0.16*con                    ! Base Case 
           IF(iage.eq.0)f=0.125*con      ! Age-dependent – R.A. Klumb (26 Jan 2002) 
C 
C --- excretion 
           e=0.1*(con-f)                 ! Base Case 
           IF(iage.eq.0)e=0.078*con      ! Age-dependent – R.A. Klumb (26 Jan 2002) 
C 
C --- Specific Dynamic Action 
C 
c------   *******Arrhenius (1998) age dependent SDA from 17.5% to 15% **** 
           IF(iage.eq.0)sda=0.15*(con-f)    ! Base Case 
           IF(iage.eq.0)sda=0.125*(con-f)   ! Age-dependent – R.A. Klumb (26 Jan 2002) 
           IF(iage.ge.1)sda=0.175*(con-f) 
C 
C --- use the ratio of calories/g of zoop (2580) to calories/g of fish (5533) 
C 
C --- bioenergetics differential equation - constant energy density for herring 
C 
C          xdot(1)=(con-resp-f-e-sda)*x(1)*2580./5533. ! Base Case 
C 
C    include seasonal variation of energy density for .ge. 2 yr olds 
C 
          if(iage.ge.2)then 
             enMar1=5750. 
             jdMar1=60 
             enOct1=9800. 
             jdOct1=274 
             if(jjday.lt.60)then 
        delen=(enMar1-enOct1)/151 
        en=enOct1+(90+jjday)*delen 
      end if 
      if(jjday.ge.60.and.jjday.lt.274)then 
        delen=(enOct1-enMar1)/(jdOct1-jdMar1) 
        en=enMar1+(jjday-jdMar1)*delen 
      end if 
      if(jjday.ge.274)then 
        delen=(enMar1-enOct1)/151 
        en=enOct1+(jjday-jdOct1)*delen 
      end if 
   else 
      en=4460. 
   end if    
          xdot(1)=(con-resp-f-e-sda)*x(1)*2580./en       
 
          IF(wtemp.le.1.0)xdot(1)=0.0 
C 
C --- Spawning section. Assume loose 20% of body weight/day 
C     t1=float(jjday) 
c  if(amod(t1,365.0) .ge. 152.0 .and.  
c     &             amod(t1,365.0) .le. 156.0) then 
c   xdot(1)=(con-resp-f-e-sda-0.20)*x(1)*2580./5533. 
147
c          endif 
  
      RETURN 
      END 
148
Appendix 4 NEMURO.FISH (NEMURO FORTRAN code supplied by Yasuhiro Yamanaka) 
with the herring bioenergetic model (base case) (supplied by Bernard Megrey and Ken Rose).  
The herring model is linked to NEMURO in a one-way static link. 
!*********************************************************************** 
!     NEMURO model     Jun 13, 2002  written by Yasuhiro Yamanaka 
!***********************************************************************      
 program NEMURO.FISH 
      implicit none 
!     ..... Control for Time Ingration ..... 
      character(19)     :: Cstart = '0001/07/20 00:00:00'  ! Starting date 
      character(19)     :: Cend   = '0011/07/21 00:00:00'  ! Ending date 
      character(19)     :: Cstep  = '0000/00/00 01:00:00'  ! Time step  
      character(19)     :: Cmon   = '0000/00/01 00:00:00'  ! Monitor Interval 
      character(19)     :: CTime 
      real(8)           :: dt, TTime, Tbefore, Season, Tmon 
      integer           :: Iyr, Imon, Iday, Ihour, Imin, Isec 
!     ..... scale conversion ..... 
      real(8),parameter :: d2s       = 86400.0d0    ! day ---> sec 
      real(8),parameter :: mcr       = 1.0d-6       ! micro 
!     ..... Prognostic Variables (with initial conditions) and Thier Source Term ..... 
      real(8)           :: TPS    =  0.1D-6, QPS    ! Small Phytoplankton [molN/l] 
      real(8)           :: TPL    =  0.1D-6, QPL    ! Large Phytoplankton 
      real(8)           :: TZS    =  0.1D-6, QZS    ! Small Zooplankton 
      real(8)           :: TZL    =  0.1D-6, QZL    ! Large Zooplankton 
      real(8)           :: TZP    =  0.1D-6, QZP    ! Pradatory Zooplankton 
      real(8)           :: TNO3   =  5.0D-6, QNO3   ! Nitrate 
      real(8)           :: TNH4   =  0.1D-6, QNH4   ! Ammmonium 
      real(8)           :: TPON   =  0.1D-6, QPON   ! Particulate Organic Nitrogen 
      real(8)           :: TDON   =  0.1D-6, QDON   ! dissolved Organic Nitrogen 
      real(8)           :: TSiOH4 = 10.0D-6, QSiOH4 ! Silicate 
      real(8)           :: TOpal  =  0.1D-7, QOpal  ! Particulate Opal 
!     ..... Prognostic Variables (with initial conditions) and Thier Source Term ..... 
!      real(8)           :: THrr   =  0.2D0,  QHrrl  ! Particulate Opal 
!     ...... Light Condition Parameters ....... 
      real(8),parameter :: alpha1   = 4.0D-2     ! Light Dissipation coefficient of sea water[/m] 
      real(8),parameter :: alpha2   = 4.0D4      ! PS+PL Selfshading coefficientS+PL      [l/molN/m] 
      real(8),parameter :: IoptS    = 0.15D0     ! PS Optimum Light Intensity  S          [ly/min] 
      real(8),parameter :: IoptL    = 0.15D0     ! PL Optimum Light Intensity             [ly/min] 
      integer,parameter :: LLN      = 10         ! Number of sublayer for calculating of Lfc 
      real(8)           :: LfcS                  ! Light factor for PS 
      real(8)           :: LfcL                  ! Light factor for PL 
      real(8)           :: kappa, Lint, dLint, LfcUS, LfcUL, LfcDS, LfcDL 
      integer           :: L 
!     ...... biological Parameters ...... 
      real(8),parameter :: VmaxS    = 0.4D0/d2s  ! PS Maximum Photosynthetic rate @0degC   [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KNO3S    = 1.0D-6     ! PS Half satuation constant for Nitrate  [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: KNH4S    = 0.1D-6     ! PS Half satuation constant for Ammonium [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: PusaiS   = 1.5D6      ! PS Ammonium Inhibition Coefficient      [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: KGppS    = 6.93D-2    ! PS Temp. Coeff. for Photosynthetic Rate [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: MorPS0   = 5.85D4/d2s ! PS Mortality Rate @0degC                [/s] 
149
      real(8),parameter :: KMorPS   = 6.93D-2    ! PS Temp. Coeff. for Mortality           [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: ResPS0   = 0.03D0/d2s ! PS Respiration Rate at @0degC           [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KResPS   = 0.0519D0   ! PS Temp. Coeff. for Respiration         [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: GammaS   = 0.135D0    ! PS Ratio of Extracell. Excret. to Photo.[(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: VmaxL    = 0.8D0/d2s  ! PL Maximum Photosynthetic rate @0degC   [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KNO3L    = 3.00D-6    ! PL Half satuation constant for Nitrate  [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: KNH4L    = 0.30D-6    ! PL Half satuation constant for Ammonium [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: KSiL     = 6.00D-6    ! PL Half satuation constant for Silicate [molSi/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: PusaiL   = 1.50D6     ! PL Ammonium Inhibition Coefficient      [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: KGppL    = 6.93D-2    ! PL Temp. Coeff. for Photosynthetic Rate [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: MorPL0   = 2.90D4/d2s ! PL Mortality Rate @0degC                [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KMorPL   = 6.93D-2    ! PL Temp. Coeff. for Mortality           [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: ResPL0   = 0.03D0/d2s ! PL Respiration Rate at @0degC           [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KResPL   = 0.0519D0   ! PL Temp. Coeff. for Respiration         [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: GammaL   = 0.135D0    ! PL Ratio of Extracell. Excret. to Photo.[(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxS   = 0.40D0/d2s ! ZS Maximum Rate of Grazing PS @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KGraS    = 6.93D-2    ! ZS Temp. Coeff. for Grazing             [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: LamS     = 1.40D6     ! ZS Ivlev constant                       [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: PS2ZSstar= 0.043D-6   ! ZS Threshold Value for Grazing PS       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: AlphaZS  = 0.70D0     ! ZS Assimilation Efficiency              [(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: BetaZS   = 0.30D0     ! ZS Growth Efficiency                    [(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: MorZS0   = 5.85D4/d2s ! ZS Mortality Rate @0degC                [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KMorZS   = 0.0693D0   ! ZS Temp. Coeff. for Mortality           [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxLps = 0.10D0/d2s ! ZL Maximum Rate of Grazing PS @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxLpl = 0.40D0/d2s ! ZL Maximum Rate of Grazing PL @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxLzs = 0.40D0/d2s ! ZL Maximum Rate of Grazing ZS @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KGraL    = 6.93D-2    ! ZL Temp. Coeff. for Grazing             [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: LamL     = 1.4000D6   ! ZL Ivlev constant                       [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: PS2ZLstar= 4.00D-8    ! ZL Threshold Value for Grazing PS       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: PL2ZLstar= 4.00D-8    ! ZL Threshold Value for Grazing PL       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: ZS2ZLstar= 4.00D-8    ! ZL Threshold Value for Grazing ZS       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: AlphaZL  = 0.70D0     ! ZL Assimilation Efficiency              [(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: BetaZL   = 0.30D0     ! ZL Growth Efficiency                    [(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: MorZL0   = 5.85D4/d2s ! ZL Mortality Rate @0degC                [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KMorZL   = 0.0693D0   ! ZL Temp. Coeff. for Mortality           [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxPpl = 0.20D0/d2s ! ZP Maximum rate of grazing PL @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxPzs = 0.20D0/d2s ! ZP Maximum rate of grazing ZS @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxPzl = 0.20D0/d2s ! ZP Maximum rate of grazing ZL @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KGraP    = 6.93D-2    ! ZP Temp. Coeff. for grazing             [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: LamP     = 1.4000D6   ! ZP Ivlev constant                       [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: PL2ZPstar= 4.00D-8    ! ZP Threshold Value for Grazing PL       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: ZS2ZPstar= 4.00D-8    ! ZP Threshold Value for Grazing ZS       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: ZL2ZPstar= 4.00D-8    ! ZP Threshold Value for Grazing ZL       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: PusaiPL  = 4.605D6    ! ZP Preference Coeff. for PL             [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: PusaiZS  = 3.010D6    ! ZP Preference Coeff. for ZS             [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: AlphaZP  = 0.70D0     ! ZP Assimilation Efficiency              [(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: BetaZP   = 0.30D0     ! ZP Growth Efficiency                    [(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: MorZP0   = 5.85D4/d2s ! ZP Mortality Rate @0degC                [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KMorZP   = 0.0693D0   ! ZP Temp. Coeff. for Mortality           [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: Nit0     = 0.03D0/d2s ! NH4 Nitrification Rate @0degC           [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KNit     = 0.0693D0   ! NH4 Temp. coefficient for Nitrification [/degC] 
150
      real(8),parameter :: VP2N0    = 0.10D0/d2s ! PON Decomp. Rate to Ammonium @0degC     [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KP2N     = 6.93D-2    ! PON Temp. Coeff. for Decomp. to Ammon.  [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: VP2D0    = 0.10D0/d2s ! PON Decomp. Rate to DON @0degC          [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KP2D     = 6.93D-2    ! PON Temp. Coeff. for Decomp. to DON     [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: VD2N0    = 0.20D0/d2s ! DON Decomp. Rate to Ammonium @0degC     [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KD2N     = 6.93D-2    ! DON Temp. Coeff. for Decomp. to Ammon.  [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: VO2S0    = 0.10D0/d2s ! Opal Decomp. Rate to Silicate @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KO2S     = 6.93D-2    ! Opal Temp. Coeff. for Decomp.to Silicate[/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: RSiN     = 2.0D0          !Si/N ratio                      [molSi/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: RCN      = 106.0D0/16.0D0 !C/N ratio                        [molC/molN] 
!     ..... bottom boundary Condition ..... 
      real(8),parameter :: setVPON  = 40.0D0/d2s ! Settling velocity of PON                [m/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: setVOpal = 40.0D0/d2s ! Settling velocity of Opal               [m/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: TNO3d   =  25.0d-6    ! Nitrate Concentraion in the Deep Layer  [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: TSiOH4d =  35.0d-6    ! Silicate Concentraion in the Deep Layer [molSi/l] 
!     ...... Paramters of ZL Vertical Migration ..... 
      character(19)     :: CZup ='0000/04/01 00:00:00' ! Date Coming up to the Euphotic Layer 
      character(19)     :: CZdwn='0000/09/01 00:00:00' ! Date Returning to the Deep Layer 
      real(8)           :: TZup, TZdwn, TZLd, SVRate=0.2D0 
      integer           :: IyrU, ImonU, IdayU ,IhourU, IminU, IsecU 
      integer           :: IyrD, ImonD, IdayD ,IhourD, IminD, IsecD 
! 
      real(8)           :: GppPSn,  GppNPSn, GppAPSn, RnewS, ResPSn,  MorPSn,  ExcPSn 
      real(8)           :: GppPLn,  GppNPLn, GppAPLn, RnewL, ResPLn,  MorPLn,  ExcPLn 
      real(8)           :: GppPLsi, GppSiPLsi,               ResPLsi, MorPLsi, ExcPLsi 
      real(8)           :: GraPS2ZSn, GraPS2ZLn,  GraPL2ZLn, GraPL2ZLsi, GraZS2ZLn 
      real(8)           :: GraPL2ZPn, GraPL2ZPsi, GraZS2ZPn, GraZL2ZPn 
      real(8)           :: EgeZSn, MorZSn, ExcZSn, EgeZLn, EgeZLsi, MorZLn, ExcZLn 
      real(8)           ::                         EgeZPn, EgeZPsi, MorZPn, ExcZPn 
      real(8)           :: DecP2N, DecP2D, DecD2N, DecO2S, Nit 
      real(8)           :: ExpPON, ExpOpal,ExcNO3, ExcSiOH4 
      integer           :: lt=0 , nt 
! 
!     ..... Environmental Condition ..... 
      real(8)           :: Temp                            ! Temperature [degC] 
      real(8)           :: Lint0                           ! Light Intencity at sea surface [ly/min] 
      real(8)           :: MLD = 30.0d0                    ! Mixed Layer Depth [m] 
      real(8)           :: ExcTime = 1.0d0 / (100.0d0*d2s) ! Exch. Coeff. between Sur-Deep [/s] 
!     ..... statement function & def. type of functions ..... 
      real(8)           :: cd2tt, nd2tt 
      character(19)     :: tt2cd 
      real(8)           :: Td, GraF, Mich, a, b, c 
      Td  (a,b)   = a * exp(b*Temp) 
      GraF(a,b,c) = MAX( 0.0D0, 1.0 - exp(a * (b - c))) 
      Mich(a,b)   = b / ( a + b ) 
! 
!     ***** Initial Setting ***** 
!     ..... for time control ..... 
      TTime = cd2tt(Cstart)                                ! Starting Date 
      CTime = TT2CD(TTime)                                 ! present time (charactor form) 
      dt    = cd2tt(Cstep) - cd2tt('0000/00/00 00:00:00')  ! Time Step (real8 form) 
151
      Tmon  = cd2tt(Cmon)  - cd2tt('0000/00/00 00:00:00')  ! Monitor Interval (real8 form) 
      nt = NINT( ( cd2tt(Cend) - cd2tt(Cstart) ) / dt )    ! Total Time Steps 
!     ..... for Vertical Migration ...... 
      TZup  = CD2TT( CZup  ) 
      TZdwn = CD2TT( CZdwn ) 
      call TT2ND(IyrU, ImonU, IdayU ,IhourU, IminU, IsecU ,TZup ) 
      call TT2ND(IyrD, ImonD, IdayD ,IhourD, IminD, IsecD ,TZdwn) 
      TZLd = TZL  ! ZL living in the deep layer at the initial condition 
      TZL  = 0.0 
!     ..... File Open for monitoring output ..... 
      open( 10, file='Results.csv', form='FORMATTED' ) 
      write(10,'(A,13(",", A))') 'Time(day)', & 
                    'NO3'   , 'NH4'     , 'PS'     , 'PL'      , & 
                    'ZS'    , 'ZL'      , 'ZP'     , 'PON'     , & 
                    'DON'   , 'SiOH4'   , 'Opal'   , 'TotalN'  , 'TotalSi' 
      write(10,'(A,11(",", F8.4))') CTime, & 
                    TNO3/mcr, TNH4  /mcr, TPS  /mcr, TPL /mcr, & 
                    TZS /mcr, TZL   /mcr, TZP  /mcr, TPON/mcr, & 
                    TDON/mcr, TSiOH4/mcr, TOpal/mcr 
      open( 11, file='Forcing.csv', form='FORMATTED' ) 
      write(11,'(A,13(",", A))') 'Time(day)','Lint0', 'TMP', 'MLD', 'ExcTime' 
      write(11,'(A,13(",", 1PE10.4))') CTime, Lint0, Temp, MLD, ExcTime*d2s 
! 
!     ****** Main Loop ***** 
      do lt = 1, nt 
!        ..... time control (Season : 0 to 1, parcentage in a year)..... 
         Tbefore = TTime                                 ! one step before present time 
         TTime   = TTime + dt                            ! present time (real8 form) 
         CTime = TT2CD(TTime)                            ! present time (charactor form) 
         CALL TT2ND(Iyr, Imon, Iday ,Ihour, Imin, Isec ,TTime) 
         Season = ( TTime                  - ND2TT(Iyr  ,1,1,0,0,0) )/  & 
                  ( ND2TT(Iyr+1,1,1,0,0,0) - ND2TT(Iyr  ,1,1,0,0,0) ) 
! 
!        ..... Example of Boundray condition ..... 
         Lint0 = 0.1d0 * ( 1.0D0 + 0.3d0 * cos( 2.0d0*3.1415926536d0*(Season - 0.50D0) ) ) 
         Temp  =           6.0D0 + 4.0d0 * cos( 2.0d0*3.1415926536d0*(Season - 0.65D0) ) 
         if (Temp .lt. 4.0 ) then 
            MLD = MLD + dt * (150.0d0 - MLD ) / ( 100.0d0 * d2s ) 
            ExcTime = ExcTime + dt * ( 1.0d0/( 40.0d0*d2s) - ExcTime ) / (100.0d0*d2s) 
         else 
            MLD = MLD + dt * ( 30.0d0 - MLD ) / (   5.0d0 * d2s ) 
            ExcTime = ExcTime + dt * ( 1.0d0/(100.0d0*d2s) - ExcTime ) / (  5.0d0*d2s) 
         end if 
! 
!        ..... Light Factors (LfcS, LfcL)..... 
         Lint = Lint0 
         LfcDS = Lint/IoptS * exp(1.0D0 - Lint/IoptS) 
         LfcDL = Lint/IoptL * exp(1.0D0 - Lint/IoptL) 
         LfcS  = 0.0D0 
         LfcL  = 0.0D0 
         Kappa = alpha1 + alpha2 * ( TPS + TPL ) 
152
         dLint = exp( -Kappa * (MLD/LLN) ) 
         do L = 1, LLN 
            LfcUS  = LfcDS 
            LfcUL  = LfcDL 
            Lint   = Lint       * dLint 
            LfcDS  = Lint/IoptS * exp( 1.0D0 - Lint/IoptS ) 
            LfcDL  = Lint/IoptL * exp( 1.0D0 - Lint/IoptL ) 
            LfcS   = LfcS + ( LfcUS + LfcDS ) * 0.5D0 / LLN 
            LfcL   = LfcL + ( LfcUL + LfcDL ) * 0.5D0 / LLN 
         end do 
!        ..... Photosynthesis of PS ..... 
         GppNPSn   = Mich( KNO3S, TNO3 ) * exp( - PusaiS * TNH4 ) 
         GppAPSn   = Mich( KNH4S, TNH4 ) 
         GppPSn    = Td(VmaxS, KGppS) * LfcS * TPS * ( GppNPSn + GppAPSn ) 
         RnewS     = GppNPSn / ( GppNPSn + GppAPSn ) 
         ResPSn    = Td( ResPS0, KResPS ) * TPS 
         MorPSn    = Td( MorPS0, KMorPS ) * TPS * TPS 
         ExcPSn    = GammaS               * GppPSn 
!        ..... Photosynthesis of PL ..... 
         GppNPLn   = Mich( KNO3L, TNO3   ) * exp( - PusaiL * TNH4 ) 
         GppAPLn   = Mich( KNH4L, TNH4   ) 
         GppSiPLsi = Mich( KSiL , TSiOH4 ) 
         GppPLn    = Td(VmaxL, KGppL) * LfcL * TPL * min( ( GppNPLn + GppAPLn ), GppSiPLsi ) 
         RnewL     = GppNPLn / ( GppNPLn + GppAPLn ) 
         ResPLn    = Td( ResPL0, KResPL ) * TPL 
         MorPLn    = Td( MorPL0, KMorPL ) * TPL * TPL 
         ExcPLn    = GammaL               * GppPLn 
!        ..... Grazing PS, PL, ZS, ZL --> ZS, ZL, ZP ..... 
         GraPS2ZSn = Td(GRmaxS,  KGraS) *GraF(LamS,PS2ZSstar,TPS) *TZS 
         GraPS2ZLn = Td(GRmaxLps,KGraL) *GraF(LamL,PS2ZLstar,TPS) *TZL 
         GraPL2ZLn = Td(GRmaxLpl,KGraL) *GraF(LamL,PL2ZLstar,TPL) *TZL 
         GraZS2ZLn = Td(GRmaxLzs,KGraL) *GraF(LamL,ZS2ZLstar,TZS) *TZL 
         GraPL2ZPn = Td(GRmaxPpl,KGraP) *GraF(LamP,PL2ZPstar,TPL) *TZP * exp( -PusaiPL *(TZL   
+ TZS)) 
         GraZS2ZPn = Td(GRmaxPzs,KGraP) *GraF(LamP,ZS2ZPstar,TZS) *TZP * exp( -PusaiZS * TZL ) 
         GraZL2ZPn = Td(GRmaxPzl,KGraP) *GraF(LamP,ZL2ZPstar,TZL) *TZP 
!        ..... Mortality, Excration, Egestion for Zooplanktons 
!        ..... Commented out after Saito-san Meeting at 19 Jun, 2000 ..... 
!        BetaZS = 0.3 ** (  1.0 + Mich( TPL, TPS )  ) 
         ExcZSn = (AlphaZS-  BetaZS)   * GraPS2ZSn 
         EgeZSn = (1.0    - AlphaZS)   * GraPS2ZSn 
         MorZSn = Td( MorZS0, KMorZS ) * TZS * TZS 
         ExcZLn = (AlphaZL-  BetaZL)   * (GraPS2ZLn+GraPL2ZLn+GraZS2ZLn) 
         EgeZLn = (1.0    - AlphaZL)   * (GraPS2ZLn+GraPL2ZLn+GraZS2ZLn) 
         MorZLn = Td( MorZL0, KMorZL ) * TZL * TZL 
         ExcZPn = (AlphaZP-  BetaZP)   * (GraPL2ZPn+GraZS2ZPn+GraZL2ZPn) 
         EgeZPn = (1.0    - AlphaZP)   * (GraPL2ZPn+GraZS2ZPn+GraZL2ZPn) 
         MorZPn = Td( MorZP0, KMorZP ) * TZP * TZP 
!        ..... Decomposition PON, DON, Opal ---> NH4, DON, SiOH4 ..... 
         DecP2N    = Td( VP2N0  , KP2N ) * TPON  
         DecP2D    = Td( VP2D0  , KP2D ) * TPON  
153
         DecD2N    = Td( VD2N0  , KD2N ) * TDON  
         DecO2S    = Td( VO2S0  , KO2S ) * TOpal 
         Nit       = Td( Nit0   , KNit ) * TNH4  
!        ..... silica fluxes ..... 
         GppPLsi    = GppPLn    * RSiN 
         ResPLsi    = ResPLn    * RSiN 
         MorPLsi    = MorPLn    * RSiN 
         ExcPLsi    = ExcPLn    * RSiN 
         GraPL2ZLsi = GraPL2ZLn * RSiN 
         GraPL2ZPsi = GraPL2ZPn * RSiN 
         EgeZLsi    = GraPL2ZLsi 
         EgeZPsi    = GraPL2ZPsi 
! 
!        ..... Tendency Terms for biological processes ..... 
         QNO3   = -( GppPSn - ResPSn ) * RnewS   & 
                  -( GppPLn - ResPLn ) * RnewL + Nit 
         QNH4   = -( GppPSn - ResPSn ) * (1.0 - RnewS)   & 
                  -( GppPLn - ResPLn ) * (1.0 - RnewL)   & 
                  - Nit + DecP2N + DecD2N + ExcZSn + ExcZLn + ExcZPn 
         QPS    = GppPSn - ResPSn - MorPSn - ExcPSn - GraPS2ZSn - GraPS2ZLn 
         QPL    = GppPLn - ResPLn - MorPLn - ExcPLn - GraPL2ZLn - GraPL2ZPn 
         QZS    = GraPS2ZSn - GraZS2ZLn - MorZSn - ExcZSn - EgeZSn - GraZS2ZPn 
         QZL    = GraPL2ZLn + GraZS2ZLn - MorZLn - ExcZLn - EgeZLn + GraPS2ZLn - GraZL2ZPn 
         QZP    = GraPL2ZPn + GraZS2ZPn - MorZPn - ExcZPn - EgeZPn + GraZL2ZPn 
         QPON   = MorPSn  + MorPLn  + MorZSn  + MorZLn + MorZPn   & 
                + EgeZPn  + EgeZSn  + EgeZLn  - DecP2N - DecP2D 
         QDON   = ExcPSn  + ExcPLn  + DecP2D  - DecD2N 
         QSiOH4 =-GppPLsi + ResPLsi + ExcPLsi + DecO2S 
         QOpal  = MorPLsi + EgeZLsi + EgeZPsi - DecO2S 
! 
!        ..... Exchange Fluxes between the Surface and Deep Layers ..... 
         ExpPON   = setVPON  / MLD * TPON 
         ExpOpal  = setVOpal / MLD * TOpal 
         ExcNO3   = ExcTime * ( TNO3d   - TNO3   ) 
         ExcSiOH4 = ExcTime * ( TSiOH4d - TSiOH4 ) 
         QNO3   = QNO3   + ExcNO3 
         QSiOH4 = QSiOH4 + ExcSiOH4 
         QPON   = QPON   - ExpPON 
         QOpal  = QOpal  - ExpOpal 
! 
!        ...... Time Integration with Forward Scheme ..... 
         TNO3   = TNO3   + dt * QNO3   
         TNH4   = TNH4   + dt * QNH4   
         TPS    = TPS    + dt * QPS    
         TPL    = TPL    + dt * QPL    
         TZS    = TZS    + dt * QZS    
         TZL    = TZL    + dt * QZL    
         TZP    = TZP    + dt * QZP    
         TPON   = TPON   + dt * QPON   
         TDON   = TDON   + dt * QDON   
         TSiOH4 = TSiOH4 + dt * QSiOH4 
154
         TOpal  = TOpal  + dt * QOpal 
! 
!        ..... Vertical Migration of ZL ..... 
         TZdwn = ND2TT(Iyr, ImonD, IdayD ,IhourD, IminD, IsecD ) 
         TZup  = ND2TT(Iyr, ImonU, IdayU ,IhourU, IminU, IsecU ) 
         if ( (Tbefore .lt. TZdwn).and.(TTime .ge. TZdwn) ) then 
            TZLd = TZL 
            TZL  = 0.0 
            write(*,*) '*** Down ***', CTime 
         end if 
         if ( (Tbefore .lt. TZup).and.(TTime .ge. TZup) ) then 
            TZL = SVRate * TZLd 
            write(*,*) '***  UP  ***', CTime 
         end if 
! 
         call Herring(TTime, Tbefore, TZS, TZL, TZP, Temp) 
! 
!        ..... Monitor ..... 
         if ( int(TTime/Tmon).ne. int(Tbefore/Tmon) ) then 
!           write(*,'(A,13(",", F8.4))') CTime, Season 
            write(10,'(A,11(",", F8.4))') CTime, & 
                    TNO3/mcr, TNH4  /mcr, TPS  /mcr, TPL /mcr, & 
                    TZS /mcr, TZL   /mcr, TZP  /mcr, TPON/mcr, & 
                    TDON/mcr, TSiOH4/mcr, TOpal/mcr 
            write(11,'(A,13(",", 1PE10.4))') CTime, Lint0, Temp, MLD, ExcTime*d2s 
         end if 
      end do 
! 
      close(10); close(11) 
! 
      stop 
      end 
!************************************************************************************ 
      Subroutine Herring(TTime, Tbefore, TZS, TZL, TZP, Temp) 
! 
      implicit none 
      real(8)           :: TTime, Tbefore, TZS, TZL, TZP, Temp 
      real(8),parameter :: d2s       = 86400.0d0    ! day ---> sec 
      integer           :: Iyr, Imon, Iday, Ihour, Imin, Isec 
      character(19)     :: CAge ='0000/07/19 00:00:00' ! Date of Aging ( JJday = 200 ) 
      character(19)     :: CTime 
      real(8)           :: TAge 
      integer           :: iage = 0 
      integer, save     :: IyrA, ImonA, IdayA ,IhourA, IminA, IsecA 
      integer           :: JJday 
      real(8)           :: ZooP1, ZooP2, ZooP3, tt1 
      real(8)           :: t1,t2,wtemp 
      real(8)           :: x(1) =0.2d0, xdot(1) 
      real(8)           :: cd2tt, nd2tt 
      character(19)     :: tt2cd 
      real(8)           :: vul(3), k(3) 
155
      integer(4)        :: id(365) 
      real(8)           :: zop1(365), zop2(365), zop3(365) 
      real(8):: v, a, u, resp 
     real(8) :: xk1,xk2,xk3,xk4,te1,te2,te3,te4,tt5,t5,t4,tt7,t7,t6, gcta,gctb,gctemp,gcmax 
     real(8) :: cnum,c1,c2,c3,con1,con2,con3,con 
     real(8) :: f,e, sda 
! 
      integer, save     :: First = 1 
! 
!     ==================  
      if ( First .eq. 1 ) then; First = 0 
         TAge  = CD2TT( CAge  ) 
         call TT2ND(IyrA, ImonA, IdayA ,IhourA, IminA, IsecA ,TAge ) 
         open( 20, file='Herring.csv', form='FORMATTED' ) 
! 
!!!!        OPEN(UNIT=111,FILE='nemuro.txt',STATUS='unknown') 
!!!!        -----read in the 3 zoop groups from Nemuro output last 3 columns 
!!!!        do JJday=1,365 
!!!!           READ(111,999)id(JJday),zop1(JJday),zop2(JJday),zop3(JJday) 
!!!!  999      FORMAT(1x,i3,1x,3(e13.6,1x)) 
!!!!        end do 
      end if 
!     ================== 
! 
      CTime = TT2CD(TTime)                                 ! present time (charactor form) 
      CALL TT2ND(Iyr, Imon, Iday ,Ihour, Imin, Isec ,TTime) 
      JJday = 1 + ( TTime - ND2TT(Iyr  ,1,1,0,0,0) ) / d2s 
! 
!------convert Nemuro zoop in uM N/L to g ww/m3 
!------  tt1 is conversion from uM N/liter to g ww/m3 
!------  14 ug N/uM * 1.0e-6 g/ug * 1 g dw/0.07 g N dw * 1 g ww/0.2 g dw * 
!------      1.0e3 liters/m3 
! 
      tt1=14.0*1.0e-6*(1.0/0.07)*(1.0/0.2)*1.0e3 
      zoop1 = TZS*tt1 *1.0d6  
      zoop2 = TZL*tt1 *1.0d6  
      zoop3 = TZP*tt1 *1.0d6  
!!!!     zoop1 = zop1(JJday) * tt1 
!!!!     zoop2 = zop2(JJday) * tt1 
!!!!     zoop3 = zop3(JJday) * tt1 
! 
!     ..... Temperature Seting ..... 
! 
      t1=float(jjday) 
      t2=12.75-10.99*cos(0.0172*t1)-6.63*sin(0.0172*t1) 
      wtemp=t2-5.0 
      IF(wtemp.le.1.0)wtemp=1.0 
 
!      write(*,*) TT2CD(cd2tt('0002/01/01 00:00:00')+200.0*86400.0) 
!      stop 
!     ..... Aging of Herring ...... 
156
      TAge = ND2TT(Iyr, ImonA, IdayA ,IhourA, IminA, IsecA ) 
      if ( (Tbefore .lt. TAge).and.(TTime .ge. TAge) ) then 
            write(*,*) '*** Aging +1 of Herring ***', CTime 
            iage = iage + 1 
       end if 
! 
!--- Herring weight state variable = x(1) 
! 
!----- set vulnerabilities and k values for 3 zoop groups 
! 
      vul(1) =   1.0; vul(2) =  1.0; vul(3) =   1.0 
      k  (1) = 0.3638; k  (2) = 0.0364; k  (3) = 0.3638 
! 
! --- weight affect on respiration 
! 
      tt1 = 1.0 / x(1) 
      t1  = 0.0033 * tt1**0.227 
! --- *********this is the new stuff from Ahhrenius for YOY only********* 
! --- The 5.258 puts resp (g oxygen/fish) into units of g zoop/g fish/day 
! --- [13560 joules/gram oxygen]/4.18 joules/cal = 3244 cal/gO2 
! --- [2580 joules/gram zoop]/4.18 joules/cal = 617 cal/g zoop 
! --- so respiration in grams/oxygen/g fish/day is multiplied by 3244/617 = 5.258 
! --- to get food energy equivalents of a gram of oxygen respired 
! 
      IF (iage .eq. 0 )then 
         IF(wtemp.le.15.0)then 
            v = 5.76 * exp( 0.0238 * wtemp ) * x(1)**0.386 
         else 
            v = 8.6 * x(1)**0.386 
         endif 
         a=EXP((0.03-0.0*wtemp)*v) 
         resp=t1*EXP(0.0548*wtemp)*a*5.258 
! --- *********back to the old equations for respiration for age-1 and older******** 
      else   ! (iage .gt. 0) 
         IF (wtemp.le.9.0)then 
            u=3.9*x(1)**0.13*EXP(0.149*wtemp) 
         else 
            u=15.0*x(1)**0.13 
         endif 
            resp=t1*EXP(0.0548*wtemp)*EXP(0.03*u)*5.258 
      endif 
!C 
!C --- Thornton and Lessem temperature effect 
!C --- age dependent values 
!C --- *******Arrhenius for age-0 he changed te4 from 25 to 23 degrees****** 
!C 
      if ( iage .eq. 0 ) then 
         xk1 = 0.1;  xk2 = 0.98;  xk3 = 0.98;  xk4 = 0.01 
         te1 = 1.0;  te2 = 15.0;  te3 = 17.0;  te4 = 23.0 
      else if ( iage .eq. 1 ) then 
         xk1 = 0.1;  xk2 = 0.98;  xk3 = 0.98;  xk4 = 0.01 
157
         te1 = 1.0;  te2 = 15.0;  te3 = 17.0;  te4 = 25.0 
      else if( iage .gt. 1 ) then 
         xk1 = 0.1;  xk2 = 0.98;  xk3 = 0.98;  xk4 = 0.01 
         te1 = 1.0;  te2 = 13.0;  te3 = 15.0;  te4 = 23.0 
      endif 
! 
      tt5 = ( 1.0 / ( te2 - te1 ) ) 
      t5  = tt5 * log( 0.98 * ( 1.0 - xk1 ) / ( 0.02 * xk1 ) ) 
      t4  = exp( t5 * ( wtemp - te1 ) ) 
! 
      tt7 = 1.0 /( te4 - te3 ) 
      t7  = tt7 * log( 0.98 * ( 1.0 - xk4 ) / ( 0.02 * xk4 ) ) 
      t6  = exp( t7 * ( te4 - wtemp ) ) 
! 
      gcta  = ( xk1 * t4 ) / ( 1.0 + xk1 * ( t4 - 1.0 ) ) 
      gctb  = xk4 * t6 / ( 1.0 + xk4 * ( t6 - 1.0 ) ) 
      gctemp= gcta * gctb 
      gcmax = 0.642 * tt1**0.256 * gctemp 
! 
! --- multispecies functional response  
! --- usse either this or adjust little p 
!       
      cnum=zoop1 * vul(1)/k(1) + zoop2*vul(2)/k(2) +zoop3 * vul(3)/k(3) 
      c1=gcmax*zoop1*vul(1)/k(1) 
      c2=gcmax*zoop2*vul(2)/k(2) 
      c3=gcmax*zoop3*vul(3)/k(3) 
      con1=c1/(1.0+cnum) 
      con2=c2/(1.0+cnum) 
      con3=c3/(1.0+cnum) 
      con= con1+con2+con3 
! 
!-----if using constant p rather than functional response, set p here 
! --- to tune to observed size at age data 
!     con=0.425*gcmax 
! 
! --- egestion 
! 
           f=0.16*con 
! 
! --- excretion 
           e=0.1*(con-f) 
! 
! 
! --- Specific Dynamic Action 
! 
!c------   *******Arrhenius age dependent SDA from 17.5% to 15% **** 
           IF ( iage .eq. 0 ) then 
              sda=0.15*(con-f) 
           else 
              sda=0.175*(con-f) 
           end if 
158
!C 
!C --- use the ratio of calories/g of zoop (2580) to calories/g of fish (5533) 
!C 
!C --- bioenergetics differential equation 
!C 
          xdot(1)=(con-resp-f-e-sda)*x(1)*2580./5533. 
! 
          IF(wtemp.le.1.0)xdot(1)=0.0 
!C 
!C --- Spawning section. Assume loose 20% of bosy weight/day 
!C     t1=float(jjday) 
!      if( mod(JJday,365) .ge. 152.0 .and. mod(JJday,365) .le. 156.0) then 
!          xdot(1)=(con-resp-f-e-sda-0.20)*x(1)*2580./5533. 
!          write(*,*) '### Spawning ###' 
!      endif 
! 
!     if (iage .eq. 1 ) then 
!      write(*,*) JJday, wtemp, x(1), xdot(1) 
!      stop 
!      end if 
!      write(*,'(A,I4,3(1PE14.5))') Ctime, JJday, wtemp, x(1), xdot(1) 
! 
!     Time Integration 
! 
      x(1) = x(1) + 3600.0d0 /d2s * xdot(1) 
! 
!     ..... for Check ..... 
     if ( int(TTime/d2s) .ne. int(Tbefore/d2s) ) then 
!!        write(*,'(A,I4,3(1PE14.5))') Ctime, JJday, wtemp, x(1), xdot(1) 
!!         stop 
!!      write(*,*) TZS, zop1(JJday), TZL,zop2(JJday), TZP,zop3(JJday) 
!!      write(*,*) TZP*1.0d6, zop3(JJday) 
        write(20,'(A,11(",", F12.4))') CTime, x(1), wtemp, gcmax 
      end if 
! 
      return 
! 
      stop 
      end 
!************************************************************************************ 
!* Utilities for Date Control  Writtien by Yasuhiro Yamanaka (galapen@ees.hokudai.ac.jp) * 
!************************************************************************************ 
!     exp. 1997/12/31 23:59:59 --> 6.223158719900000E+10 
!     exp. 0000/01/01 00:00:00 --> 0.000000000000000E+00 
!************************************************************************************ 
      real(8) function CD2TT( Cdate ) 
! 
      integer       :: Iyr, Imon, Iday , Ihour, Imin, Isec 
      real(8)       :: ND2TT 
      character(19) :: Cdate 
! 
159
      if ( len( Cdate ) .ne. 19 ) then 
         write(*,*) '### Length of date is no good ###' 
         stop 
      end if 
      read (Cdate( 1: 4),*)  Iyr 
      read (Cdate( 6: 7),*)  Imon 
      read (Cdate( 9:10),*)  Iday 
      read (Cdate(12:13),*)  Ihour 
      read (Cdate(15:16),*)  Imin 
      read (Cdate(18:19),*)  Isec 
! 
      CD2TT = ND2TT(Iyr, Imon, Iday , Ihour, Imin, Isec) 
! 
      return 
      end function 
!*********************************************************************** 
!     exp. 6.223158719900000E+10 --> 1997/12/31 23:59:59 
!*********************************************************************** 
      character(19) function TT2CD(tt) 
! 
      integer :: Iyr, Imon, Iday , Ihour, Imin, Isec 
      real(8) :: tt 
! 
      call TT2ND( Iyr, Imon, Iday, Ihour, Imin, Isec , tt ) 
! 
      write(TT2CD,'(I4.4,5(A,I2.2))') Iyr, '/', Imon, '/', Iday, & 
                               ' ', Ihour, ':', Imin, ':', Isec 
! 
      return 
      end function 
!*********************************************************************** 
!     exp. 1997,12,31,23,59,59 --> 6.223158719900000E+10 
!*********************************************************************** 
      real(8) function ND2TT(Iyr, Imon, Iday, Ihour, Imin, Isec) 
! 
      integer   :: IM2D(12,0:1) = & 
         reshape( (/ 0,31,59,90,120,151,181,212,243,273,304,334,  & 
                     0,31,60,91,121,152,182,213,244,274,305,335  /), (/12,2/) ) 
      integer   :: Iyr, Imon, Iday, Ihour, Imin, Isec 
      integer   :: Iy4, Iy1, Ileap, Im, Itt 
! 
! 
      Iy4 = 1461 * ( Iyr / 4 ) 
      Iy1 = 365 * mod( Iyr, 4 ) 
! 
      if ( mod( Iyr, 4 ) .ne. 0 ) then 
         Ileap = 0 
      else 
         Ileap = 1 
      end if 
      Im = IM2D( Imon, Ileap) 
160
! 
      Itt = Iy4 + Iy1 + Im + Iday - Ileap 
! 
      ND2TT = Ihour * 3600 + Imin * 60 + Isec 
      ND2TT = ND2TT + Itt * 86400.0D0 
! 
      return 
      end function 
!*********************************************************************** 
!     exp. 6.223158719900000E+10 --> 1997,12,31,23,59,59 
!*********************************************************************** 
      subroutine TT2ND(                                        & 
                 Iyr   , Imon  , Iday   , Ihour, Imin, Isec,   & !O & I 
                 tt    ) 
! 
      integer :: Iyr, Imon, Iday , Ihour, Imin, Isec 
      integer :: Itt, Iy, Iy4, Iyd, Iy1, Ileap, Imd, Im, Its 
      integer   :: IM2D(12,0:1) = & 
         reshape( (/ 0,31,59,90,120,151,181,212,243,273,304,334,  & 
                     0,31,60,91,121,152,182,213,244,274,305,335  /), (/12,2/) ) 
      integer :: IY2D(4) = (/0,366,731,1096/) 
      real(8) :: tt, tt0, ND2TT 
! 
! 
!     ..... ITT [day] ..... 
      Itt = 1 + tt / 86400.0D0 
! 
      Iy4   = (Itt-1) / 1461 
      Iyd   = Itt - Iy4 * 1461 
      do IY = 1, 4 
         if ( IY2D(Iy) + 1 .le. Iyd ) then 
            Iy1 = Iy 
         end if 
      end do 
! 
      Iyr   = Iy4 * 4 + Iy1 - 1 
      if ( mod(Iyr,4) .ne. 0 ) then 
         Ileap = 0 
      else 
         Ileap = 1 
      end if 
      IMD = IYD - IY2D(IY1) 
! 
      do IM = 1, 12 
         if ( IM2D(IM,ILEAP)+1 .le. IMD ) then 
            IMON = IM 
         end if 
      end do 
      IDAY = IMD - IM2D(IMON,ILEAP) 
! 
      TT0 = ND2TT(IYR, IMON, IDAY ,0,0,0) 
161
      ITS = nint(  TT - TT0 ) 
      Ihour = ITS / 3600 
      Imin  = ( ITS - Ihour * 3600 ) / 60 
      Isec  = ITS - Ihour * 3600 - Imin * 60 
! 
      return 
      end subroutine 
! 
162
Appendix 5 NEMURO.FISH (NEMURO FORTRAN code supplied by Yasuhiro Yamanaka) 
with the saury bioenergetic model (base case) (supplied by Bernard Megrey and Ken Rose and 
modified by “team saury”).  The saury model is linked to NEMURO in a one-way static link. 
 
!************************************************************************************ 
!     NEMURO model     Jun 13, 2002  written by Yasuhiro Yamanaka 
!                                    modified by Masahiko Fujii 
!                                                Shin-ichi Ito 
!************************************************************************************ 
      program NEMURO 
      implicit none 
!     ..... Control for Time Ingration ..... 
      character(19)     :: Cstart = '0001/02/01 00:00:00'  ! Starting date 
      character(19)     :: Cend   = '0003/02/01 00:00:00'  ! Ending date 
      character(19)     :: Cstep  = '0000/00/00 01:00:00'  ! Time step  
      character(19)     :: Cmon   = '0000/00/01 00:00:00'  ! Monitor Interval 
      character(19)     :: CTime 
      real(8)           :: dt, TTime, Tbefore, Season, Tmon 
      integer           :: Iyr, Imon, Iday, Ihour, Imin, Isec 
!     ..... scale conversion ..... 
      real(8),parameter :: d2s       = 86400.0d0    ! day ---> sec 
      real(8),parameter :: mcr       = 1.0d-6       ! micro 
!     ..... Prognostic Variables (with initial conditions) and Thier Source Term ..... 
      real(8)           :: TPS    =  0.1D-6, QPS    ! Small Phytoplankton [molN/l] 
      real(8)           :: TPL    =  0.1D-6, QPL    ! Large Phytoplankton 
      real(8)           :: TZS    =  0.1D-6, QZS    ! Small Zooplankton 
      real(8)           :: TZL    =  0.1D-6, QZL    ! Large Zooplankton 
      real(8)           :: TZP    =  0.1D-6, QZP    ! Pradatory Zooplankton 
      real(8)           :: TNO3   =  5.0D-6, QNO3   ! Nitrate 
      real(8)           :: TNH4   =  0.1D-6, QNH4   ! Ammmonium 
      real(8)           :: TPON   =  0.1D-6, QPON   ! Particulate Organic Nitrogen 
      real(8)           :: TDON   =  0.1D-6, QDON   ! dissolved Organic Nitrogen 
      real(8)           :: TSiOH4 = 10.0D-6, QSiOH4 ! Silicate 
      real(8)           :: TOpal  =  0.1D-7, QOpal  ! Particulate Opal 
!     ..... Prognostic Variables (with initial conditions) and Thier Source Term ..... 
!      real(8)           :: THrr   =  0.2D0,  QHrrl  ! Particulate Opal 
!     ...... Light Condition Parameters ....... 
      real(8),parameter :: alpha1   = 4.0D-2     ! Light Dissipation coefficient of sea water[/m] 
      real(8),parameter :: alpha2   = 4.0D4      ! PS+PL Selfshading coefficientS+PL      [l/molN/m] 
      real(8),parameter :: IoptS    = 0.15D0     ! PS Optimum Light Intensity  S          [ly/min] 
      real(8),parameter :: IoptL    = 0.15D0     ! PL Optimum Light Intensity             [ly/min] 
      integer,parameter :: LLN      = 10         ! Number of sublayer for calculating of Lfc 
      real(8)           :: LfcS                  ! Light factor for PS 
      real(8)           :: LfcL                  ! Light factor for PL 
      real(8)           :: kappa, Lint, dLint, LfcUS, LfcUL, LfcDS, LfcDL 
      integer           :: L 
!     ...... biological Parameters ...... 
      real(8),parameter :: VmaxS    = 0.4D0/d2s  ! PS Maximum Photosynthetic rate @0degC   [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KNO3S    = 1.0D-6     ! PS Half satuation constant for Nitrate  [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: KNH4S    = 0.1D-6     ! PS Half satuation constant for Ammonium [molN/l] 
163
      real(8),parameter :: PusaiS   = 1.5D6      ! PS Ammonium Inhibition Coefficient      [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: KGppS    = 6.93D-2    ! PS Temp. Coeff. for Photosynthetic Rate [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: MorPS0   = 5.85D4/d2s ! PS Mortality Rate @0degC                [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KMorPS   = 6.93D-2    ! PS Temp. Coeff. for Mortality           [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: ResPS0   = 0.03D0/d2s ! PS Respiration Rate at @0degC           [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KResPS   = 0.0519D0   ! PS Temp. Coeff. for Respiration         [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: GammaS   = 0.135D0    ! PS Ratio of Extracell. Excret. to Photo.[(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: VmaxL    = 0.8D0/d2s  ! PL Maximum Photosynthetic rate @0degC   [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KNO3L    = 3.00D-6    ! PL Half satuation constant for Nitrate  [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: KNH4L    = 0.30D-6    ! PL Half satuation constant for Ammonium [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: KSiL     = 6.00D-6    ! PL Half satuation constant for Silicate [molSi/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: PusaiL   = 1.50D6     ! PL Ammonium Inhibition Coefficient      [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: KGppL    = 6.93D-2    ! PL Temp. Coeff. for Photosynthetic Rate [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: MorPL0   = 2.90D4/d2s ! PL Mortality Rate @0degC                [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KMorPL   = 6.93D-2    ! PL Temp. Coeff. for Mortality           [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: ResPL0   = 0.03D0/d2s ! PL Respiration Rate at @0degC           [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KResPL   = 0.0519D0   ! PL Temp. Coeff. for Respiration         [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: GammaL   = 0.135D0    ! PL Ratio of Extracell. Excret. to Photo.[(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxS   = 0.40D0/d2s ! ZS Maximum Rate of Grazing PS @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KGraS    = 6.93D-2    ! ZS Temp. Coeff. for Grazing             [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: LamS     = 1.40D6     ! ZS Ivlev constant                       [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: PS2ZSstar= 0.043D-6   ! ZS Threshold Value for Grazing PS       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: AlphaZS  = 0.70D0     ! ZS Assimilation Efficiency              [(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: BetaZS   = 0.30D0     ! ZS Growth Efficiency                    [(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: MorZS0   = 5.85D4/d2s ! ZS Mortality Rate @0degC                [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KMorZS   = 0.0693D0   ! ZS Temp. Coeff. for Mortality           [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxLps = 0.10D0/d2s ! ZL Maximum Rate of Grazing PS @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxLpl = 0.40D0/d2s ! ZL Maximum Rate of Grazing PL @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxLzs = 0.40D0/d2s ! ZL Maximum Rate of Grazing ZS @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KGraL    = 6.93D-2    ! ZL Temp. Coeff. for Grazing             [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: LamL     = 1.4000D6   ! ZL Ivlev constant                       [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: PS2ZLstar= 4.00D-8    ! ZL Threshold Value for Grazing PS       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: PL2ZLstar= 4.00D-8    ! ZL Threshold Value for Grazing PL       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: ZS2ZLstar= 4.00D-8    ! ZL Threshold Value for Grazing ZS       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: AlphaZL  = 0.70D0     ! ZL Assimilation Efficiency              [(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: BetaZL   = 0.30D0     ! ZL Growth Efficiency                    [(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: MorZL0   = 5.85D4/d2s ! ZL Mortality Rate @0degC                [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KMorZL   = 0.0693D0   ! ZL Temp. Coeff. for Mortality           [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxPpl = 0.20D0/d2s ! ZP Maximum rate of grazing PL @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxPzs = 0.20D0/d2s ! ZP Maximum rate of grazing ZS @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: GRmaxPzl = 0.20D0/d2s ! ZP Maximum rate of grazing ZL @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KGraP    = 6.93D-2    ! ZP Temp. Coeff. for grazing             [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: LamP     = 1.4000D6   ! ZP Ivlev constant                       [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: PL2ZPstar= 4.00D-8    ! ZP Threshold Value for Grazing PL       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: ZS2ZPstar= 4.00D-8    ! ZP Threshold Value for Grazing ZS       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: ZL2ZPstar= 4.00D-8    ! ZP Threshold Value for Grazing ZL       [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: PusaiPL  = 4.605D6    ! ZP Preference Coeff. for PL             [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: PusaiZS  = 3.010D6    ! ZP Preference Coeff. for ZS             [l/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: AlphaZP  = 0.70D0     ! ZP Assimilation Efficiency              [(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: BetaZP   = 0.30D0     ! ZP Growth Efficiency                    [(nodim)] 
      real(8),parameter :: MorZP0   = 5.85D4/d2s ! ZP Mortality Rate @0degC                [/s] 
164
      real(8),parameter :: KMorZP   = 0.0693D0   ! ZP Temp. Coeff. for Mortality           [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: Nit0     = 0.03D0/d2s ! NH4 Nitrification Rate @0degC           [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KNit     = 0.0693D0   ! NH4 Temp. coefficient for Nitrification [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: VP2N0    = 0.10D0/d2s ! PON Decomp. Rate to Ammonium @0degC     [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KP2N     = 6.93D-2    ! PON Temp. Coeff. for Decomp. to Ammon.  [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: VP2D0    = 0.10D0/d2s ! PON Decomp. Rate to DON @0degC          [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KP2D     = 6.93D-2    ! PON Temp. Coeff. for Decomp. to DON     [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: VD2N0    = 0.20D0/d2s ! DON Decomp. Rate to Ammonium @0degC     [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KD2N     = 6.93D-2    ! DON Temp. Coeff. for Decomp. to Ammon.  [/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: VO2S0    = 0.10D0/d2s ! Opal Decomp. Rate to Silicate @0degC    [/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: KO2S     = 6.93D-2    ! Opal Temp. Coeff. for Decomp.to Silicate[/degC] 
      real(8),parameter :: RSiN     = 2.0D0          !Si/N ratio                      [molSi/molN] 
      real(8),parameter :: RCN      = 106.0D0/16.0D0 !C/N ratio                        [molC/molN] 
!     ..... bottom boundary Condition ..... 
      real(8),parameter :: setVPON  = 40.0D0/d2s ! Settling velocity of PON                [m/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: setVOpal = 40.0D0/d2s ! Settling velocity of Opal               [m/s] 
      real(8),parameter :: TNO3d   =  25.0d-6    ! Nitrate Concentraion in the Deep Layer  [molN/l] 
      real(8),parameter :: TSiOH4d =  35.0d-6    ! Silicate Concentraion in the Deep Layer [molSi/l] 
!     ...... Paramters of ZL Vertical Migration ..... 
      character(19)     :: CZup ='0000/04/01 00:00:00' ! Date Coming up to the Euphotic Layer 
      character(19)     :: CZdwn='0000/09/01 00:00:00' ! Date Returning to the Deep Layer 
      real(8)           :: TZup, TZdwn, TZLd, SVRate=0.2D0 
      integer           :: IyrU, ImonU, IdayU ,IhourU, IminU, IsecU 
      integer           :: IyrD, ImonD, IdayD ,IhourD, IminD, IsecD 
! 
      real(8)           :: GppPSn,  GppNPSn, GppAPSn, RnewS, ResPSn,  MorPSn,  ExcPSn 
      real(8)           :: GppPLn,  GppNPLn, GppAPLn, RnewL, ResPLn,  MorPLn,  ExcPLn 
      real(8)           :: GppPLsi, GppSiPLsi,               ResPLsi, MorPLsi, ExcPLsi 
      real(8)           :: GraPS2ZSn, GraPS2ZLn,  GraPL2ZLn, GraPL2ZLsi, GraZS2ZLn 
      real(8)           :: GraPL2ZPn, GraPL2ZPsi, GraZS2ZPn, GraZL2ZPn 
      real(8)           :: EgeZSn, MorZSn, ExcZSn, EgeZLn, EgeZLsi, MorZLn, ExcZLn 
      real(8)           ::                         EgeZPn, EgeZPsi, MorZPn, ExcZPn 
      real(8)           :: DecP2N, DecP2D, DecD2N, DecO2S, Nit 
      real(8)           :: ExpPON, ExpOpal,ExcNO3, ExcSiOH4 
      integer           :: lt=0 , nt 
! 
!     ..... Environmental Condition ..... 
      real(8)           :: Temp                            ! Temperature [degC] 
      real(8)           :: Lint0                           ! Light Intencity at sea surface [ly/min] 
      real(8)           :: MLD = 30.0d0                    ! Mixed Layer Depth [m] 
      real(8)           :: ExcTime = 1.0d0 / (100.0d0*d2s) ! Exch. Coeff. between Sur-Deep [/s] 
!     ..... statement function & def. type of functions ..... 
      real(8)           :: cd2tt, nd2tt 
      character(19)     :: tt2cd 
      real(8)           :: Td, GraF, Mich, a, b, c 
      Td  (a,b)   = a * exp(b*Temp) 
      GraF(a,b,c) = MAX( 0.0D0, 1.0 - exp(a * (b - c))) 
      Mich(a,b)   = b / ( a + b ) 
! 
!     ***** Initial Setting ***** 
!     ..... for time control ..... 
165
      TTime = cd2tt(Cstart)                                ! Starting Date 
      CTime = TT2CD(TTime)                                 ! present time (charactor form) 
      dt    = cd2tt(Cstep) - cd2tt('0000/00/00 00:00:00')  ! Time Step (real8 form) 
      Tmon  = cd2tt(Cmon)  - cd2tt('0000/00/00 00:00:00')  ! Monitor Interval (real8 form) 
      nt = NINT( ( cd2tt(Cend) - cd2tt(Cstart) ) / dt )    ! Total Time Steps 
!     ..... for Vertical Migration ...... 
      TZup  = CD2TT( CZup  ) 
      TZdwn = CD2TT( CZdwn ) 
      call TT2ND(IyrU, ImonU, IdayU ,IhourU, IminU, IsecU ,TZup ) 
      call TT2ND(IyrD, ImonD, IdayD ,IhourD, IminD, IsecD ,TZdwn) 
      TZLd = TZL  ! ZL living in the deep layer at the initial condition 
      TZL  = 0.0 
!     ..... File Open for monitoring output ..... 
      open( 10, file='Results.csv', form='FORMATTED' ) 
      write(10,'(A,13(",", A))') 'Time(day)', & 
                    'NO3'   , 'NH4'     , 'PS'     , 'PL'      , & 
                    'ZS'    , 'ZL'      , 'ZP'     , 'PON'     , & 
                    'DON'   , 'SiOH4'   , 'Opal'   , 'TotalN'  , 'TotalSi' 
      write(10,'(A,11(",", F8.4))') CTime, & 
                    TNO3/mcr, TNH4  /mcr, TPS  /mcr, TPL /mcr, & 
                    TZS /mcr, TZL   /mcr, TZP  /mcr, TPON/mcr, & 
                    TDON/mcr, TSiOH4/mcr, TOpal/mcr 
      open( 11, file='Forcing.csv', form='FORMATTED' ) 
      write(11,'(A,13(",", A))') 'Time(day)','Lint0', 'TMP', 'MLD', 'ExcTime' 
      write(11,'(A,13(",", 1PE10.4))') CTime, Lint0, Temp, MLD, ExcTime*d2s 
! 
!     ****** Main Loop ***** 
      do lt = 1, nt 
!        ..... time control (Season : 0 to 1, parcentage in a year)..... 
         Tbefore = TTime                                 ! one step before present time 
         TTime   = TTime + dt                            ! present time (real8 form) 
         CTime = TT2CD(TTime)                            ! present time (charactor form) 
         CALL TT2ND(Iyr, Imon, Iday ,Ihour, Imin, Isec ,TTime) 
         Season = ( TTime                  - ND2TT(Iyr  ,1,1,0,0,0) )/  & 
                  ( ND2TT(Iyr+1,1,1,0,0,0) - ND2TT(Iyr  ,1,1,0,0,0) ) 
! 
!        ..... Example of Boundray condition ..... 
         Lint0 = 0.1d0 * ( 1.0D0 + 0.3d0 * cos( 2.0d0*3.1415926536d0*(Season - 0.50D0) ) ) 
         Temp  =           6.0D0 + 4.0d0 * cos( 2.0d0*3.1415926536d0*(Season - 0.65D0) ) 
         if (Temp .lt. 4.0 ) then 
            MLD = MLD + dt * (150.0d0 - MLD ) / ( 100.0d0 * d2s ) 
            ExcTime = ExcTime + dt * ( 1.0d0/( 40.0d0*d2s) - ExcTime ) / (100.0d0*d2s) 
         else 
            MLD = MLD + dt * ( 30.0d0 - MLD ) / (   5.0d0 * d2s ) 
            ExcTime = ExcTime + dt * ( 1.0d0/(100.0d0*d2s) - ExcTime ) / (  5.0d0*d2s) 
         end if 
! 
!        ..... Light Factors (LfcS, LfcL)..... 
         Lint = Lint0 
         LfcDS = Lint/IoptS * exp(1.0D0 - Lint/IoptS) 
         LfcDL = Lint/IoptL * exp(1.0D0 - Lint/IoptL) 
166
         LfcS  = 0.0D0 
         LfcL  = 0.0D0 
         Kappa = alpha1 + alpha2 * ( TPS + TPL ) 
         dLint = exp( -Kappa * (MLD/LLN) ) 
         do L = 1, LLN 
            LfcUS  = LfcDS 
            LfcUL  = LfcDL 
            Lint   = Lint       * dLint 
            LfcDS  = Lint/IoptS * exp( 1.0D0 - Lint/IoptS ) 
            LfcDL  = Lint/IoptL * exp( 1.0D0 - Lint/IoptL ) 
            LfcS   = LfcS + ( LfcUS + LfcDS ) * 0.5D0 / LLN 
            LfcL   = LfcL + ( LfcUL + LfcDL ) * 0.5D0 / LLN 
         end do 
!        ..... Photosynthesis of PS ..... 
         GppNPSn   = Mich( KNO3S, TNO3 ) * exp( - PusaiS * TNH4 ) 
         GppAPSn   = Mich( KNH4S, TNH4 ) 
         GppPSn    = Td(VmaxS, KGppS) * LfcS * TPS * ( GppNPSn + GppAPSn ) 
         RnewS     = GppNPSn / ( GppNPSn + GppAPSn ) 
 
         ResPSn    = Td( ResPS0, KResPS ) * TPS 
         MorPSn    = Td( MorPS0, KMorPS ) * TPS * TPS 
         ExcPSn    = GammaS               * GppPSn 
!        ..... Photosynthesis of PL ..... 
         GppNPLn   = Mich( KNO3L, TNO3   ) * exp( - PusaiL * TNH4 ) 
         GppAPLn   = Mich( KNH4L, TNH4   ) 
         GppSiPLsi = Mich( KSiL , TSiOH4 ) 
         GppPLn    = Td(VmaxL, KGppL) * LfcL * TPL * min( ( GppNPLn + GppAPLn ), GppSiPLsi ) 
         RnewL     = GppNPLn / ( GppNPLn + GppAPLn ) 
         ResPLn    = Td( ResPL0, KResPL ) * TPL 
         MorPLn    = Td( MorPL0, KMorPL ) * TPL * TPL 
         ExcPLn    = GammaL               * GppPLn 
!        ..... Grazing PS, PL, ZS, ZL --> ZS, ZL, ZP ..... 
         GraPS2ZSn = Td(GRmaxS,  KGraS) *GraF(LamS,PS2ZSstar,TPS) *TZS 
         GraPS2ZLn = Td(GRmaxLps,KGraL) *GraF(LamL,PS2ZLstar,TPS) *TZL 
         GraPL2ZLn = Td(GRmaxLpl,KGraL) *GraF(LamL,PL2ZLstar,TPL) *TZL 
         GraZS2ZLn = Td(GRmaxLzs,KGraL) *GraF(LamL,ZS2ZLstar,TZS) *TZL 
         GraPL2ZPn = Td(GRmaxPpl,KGraP) *GraF(LamP,PL2ZPstar,TPL) *TZP * exp( -PusaiPL *(TZL 
+ TZS)) 
         GraZS2ZPn = Td(GRmaxPzs,KGraP) *GraF(LamP,ZS2ZPstar,TZS) *TZP * exp( -PusaiZS * TZL ) 
         GraZL2ZPn = Td(GRmaxPzl,KGraP) *GraF(LamP,ZL2ZPstar,TZL) *TZP 
!        ..... Mortality, Excration, Egestion for Zooplanktons 
!        ..... Commented out after Saito-san Meeting at 19 Jun, 2000 ..... 
!        BetaZS = 0.3 ** (  1.0 + Mich( TPL, TPS )  ) 
         ExcZSn = (AlphaZS-  BetaZS)   * GraPS2ZSn 
         EgeZSn = (1.0    - AlphaZS)   * GraPS2ZSn 
         MorZSn = Td( MorZS0, KMorZS ) * TZS * TZS 
         ExcZLn = (AlphaZL-  BetaZL)   * (GraPS2ZLn+GraPL2ZLn+GraZS2ZLn) 
         EgeZLn = (1.0    - AlphaZL)   * (GraPS2ZLn+GraPL2ZLn+GraZS2ZLn) 
         MorZLn = Td( MorZL0, KMorZL ) * TZL * TZL 
         ExcZPn = (AlphaZP-  BetaZP)   * (GraPL2ZPn+GraZS2ZPn+GraZL2ZPn) 
         EgeZPn = (1.0    - AlphaZP)   * (GraPL2ZPn+GraZS2ZPn+GraZL2ZPn) 
167
         MorZPn = Td( MorZP0, KMorZP ) * TZP * TZP 
!        ..... Decomposition PON, DON, Opal ---> NH4, DON, SiOH4 ..... 
         DecP2N    = Td( VP2N0  , KP2N ) * TPON  
         DecP2D    = Td( VP2D0  , KP2D ) * TPON  
         DecD2N    = Td( VD2N0  , KD2N ) * TDON  
         DecO2S    = Td( VO2S0  , KO2S ) * TOpal 
         Nit       = Td( Nit0   , KNit ) * TNH4  
!        ..... silica fluxes ..... 
         GppPLsi    = GppPLn    * RSiN 
         ResPLsi    = ResPLn    * RSiN 
         MorPLsi    = MorPLn    * RSiN 
         ExcPLsi    = ExcPLn    * RSiN 
         GraPL2ZLsi = GraPL2ZLn * RSiN 
         GraPL2ZPsi = GraPL2ZPn * RSiN 
         EgeZLsi    = GraPL2ZLsi 
         EgeZPsi    = GraPL2ZPsi 
! 
!        ..... Tendency Terms for biological processes ..... 
         QNO3   = -( GppPSn - ResPSn ) * RnewS   & 
                  -( GppPLn - ResPLn ) * RnewL + Nit 
         QNH4   = -( GppPSn - ResPSn ) * (1.0 - RnewS)   & 
                  -( GppPLn - ResPLn ) * (1.0 - RnewL)   & 
                  - Nit + DecP2N + DecD2N + ExcZSn + ExcZLn + ExcZPn 
         QPS    = GppPSn - ResPSn - MorPSn - ExcPSn - GraPS2ZSn - GraPS2ZLn 
         QPL    = GppPLn - ResPLn - MorPLn - ExcPLn - GraPL2ZLn - GraPL2ZPn 
         QZS    = GraPS2ZSn - GraZS2ZLn - MorZSn - ExcZSn - EgeZSn - GraZS2ZPn 
         QZL    = GraPL2ZLn + GraZS2ZLn - MorZLn - ExcZLn - EgeZLn + GraPS2ZLn - GraZL2ZPn 
         QZP    = GraPL2ZPn + GraZS2ZPn - MorZPn - ExcZPn - EgeZPn + GraZL2ZPn 
         QPON   = MorPSn  + MorPLn  + MorZSn  + MorZLn + MorZPn   & 
                + EgeZPn  + EgeZSn  + EgeZLn  - DecP2N - DecP2D 
         QDON   = ExcPSn  + ExcPLn  + DecP2D  - DecD2N 
         QSiOH4 =-GppPLsi + ResPLsi + ExcPLsi + DecO2S 
         QOpal  = MorPLsi + EgeZLsi + EgeZPsi - DecO2S 
! 
!        ..... Exchange Fluxes between the Surface and Deep Layers ..... 
         ExpPON   = setVPON  / MLD * TPON 
         ExpOpal  = setVOpal / MLD * TOpal 
         ExcNO3   = ExcTime * ( TNO3d   - TNO3   ) 
         ExcSiOH4 = ExcTime * ( TSiOH4d - TSiOH4 ) 
         QNO3   = QNO3   + ExcNO3 
         QSiOH4 = QSiOH4 + ExcSiOH4 
         QPON   = QPON   - ExpPON 
         QOpal  = QOpal  - ExpOpal 
! 
!        ...... Time Integration with Forward Scheme ..... 
         TNO3   = TNO3   + dt * QNO3   
         TNH4   = TNH4   + dt * QNH4   
         TPS    = TPS    + dt * QPS    
         TPL    = TPL    + dt * QPL    
         TZS    = TZS    + dt * QZS    
         TZL    = TZL    + dt * QZL    
168
         TZP    = TZP    + dt * QZP    
         TPON   = TPON   + dt * QPON   
         TDON   = TDON   + dt * QDON   
         TSiOH4 = TSiOH4 + dt * QSiOH4 
         TOpal  = TOpal  + dt * QOpal 
! 
!        ..... Vertical Migration of ZL ..... 
         TZdwn = ND2TT(Iyr, ImonD, IdayD ,IhourD, IminD, IsecD ) 
         TZup  = ND2TT(Iyr, ImonU, IdayU ,IhourU, IminU, IsecU ) 
         if ( (Tbefore .lt. TZdwn).and.(TTime .ge. TZdwn) ) then 
            TZLd = TZL 
            TZL  = 0.0 
            write(*,*) '*** Down ***', CTime 
         end if 
         if ( (Tbefore .lt. TZup).and.(TTime .ge. TZup) ) then 
            TZL = SVRate * TZLd 
            write(*,*) '***  UP  ***', CTime 
         end if 
! 
         call Saury(TTime, Tbefore, TZS, TZL, TZP, Temp) 
! 
!        ..... Monitor ..... 
         if ( int(TTime/Tmon).ne. int(Tbefore/Tmon) ) then 
!           write(*,'(A,13(",", F8.4))') CTime, Season 
            write(10,'(A,11(",", F8.4))') CTime, & 
                    TNO3/mcr, TNH4  /mcr, TPS  /mcr, TPL /mcr, & 
                    TZS /mcr, TZL   /mcr, TZP  /mcr, TPON/mcr, & 
                    TDON/mcr, TSiOH4/mcr, TOpal/mcr 
            write(11,'(A,13(",", 1PE10.4))') CTime, Lint0, Temp, MLD, ExcTime*d2s 
         end if 
      end do 
! 
      close(10); close(11) 
! 
      stop 
      end 
!************************************************************************************ 
      Subroutine Saury(TTime, Tbefore, TZS, TZL, TZP, Temp) 
! 
      implicit none 
      real(8)           :: TTime, Tbefore, TZS, TZL, TZP, Temp 
      real(8),parameter :: d2s       = 86400.0d0    ! day ---> sec 
      integer           :: Iyr, Imon, Iday, Ihour, Imin, Isec 
      character(19)     :: CAge ='0000/03/01 00:00:00' ! Date of Aging ( JJday = 200 ) 
      character(19)     :: CTime 
      character(19)     :: CAge2 ='0000/07/01 00:00:00' ! Date of Aging ( JJday = 200 ) 
      character(19)     :: CTime2 
      real(8)           :: TAge 
      real(8)           :: TAge2 
      integer           :: iage = 0 
      integer, save     :: IyrA, ImonA, IdayA ,IhourA, IminA, IsecA 
169
      integer, save     :: IyrB, ImonB, IdayB ,IhourB, IminB, IsecB 
      integer           :: JJday 
      real(8)           :: ZooP1, ZooP2, ZooP3, tt1 
      real(8)           :: t1,t2,wtemp 
      real(8)           :: x(1) =0.2d0, xdot(1) 
      real(8)           :: cd2tt, nd2tt 
      character(19)     :: tt2cd 
      real(8)           :: vul(3), k(3) 
      integer(4)        :: id(365) 
      real(8)           :: zop1(365), zop2(365), zop3(365) 
      real(8):: v, a, u, resp 
     real(8) :: xk1,xk2,xk3,xk4,te1,te2,te3,te4,tt5,t5,t4,tt7,t7,t6, gcta,gctb,gctemp,gcmax 
     real(8) :: cnum,c1,c2,c3,con1,con2,con3,con 
     real(8) :: f,e, sda 
     real(8) :: phalf 
! 
      integer, save     :: First = 1 
! 
      PHalf=0.100 
 
!     ==================  
      if ( First .eq. 1 ) then; First = 0 
         TAge  = CD2TT( CAge  ) 
         call TT2ND(IyrA, ImonA, IdayA ,IhourA, IminA, IsecA ,TAge ) 
         TAge2  = CD2TT( CAge2  ) 
         call TT2ND(IyrB, ImonB, IdayB ,IhourB, IminB, IsecB ,TAge2 ) 
         open( 20, file='saury.csv', form='FORMATTED' ) 
 
! 
!!!!        OPEN(UNIT=111,FILE='nemuro.txt',STATUS='unknown') 
!!!!        -----read in the 3 zoop groups from Nemuro output last 3 columns 
!!!!        do JJday=1,365 
!!!!           READ(111,999)id(JJday),zop1(JJday),zop2(JJday),zop3(JJday) 
!!!!  999      FORMAT(1x,i3,1x,3(e13.6,1x)) 
!!!!        end do 
      end if 
!     ================== 
 
! 
      CTime = TT2CD(TTime)                                 ! present time (charactor form) 
      CALL TT2ND(Iyr, Imon, Iday ,Ihour, Imin, Isec ,TTime) 
      JJday = 1 + ( TTime - ND2TT(Iyr  ,1,1,0,0,0) ) / d2s 
! 
!------convert Nemuro zoop in uM N/L to g ww/m3 
!------  tt1 is conversion from uM N/liter to g ww/m3 
!------  14 ug N/uM * 1.0e-6 g/ug * 1 g dw/0.07 g N dw * 1 g ww/0.2 g dw 
!------      1.0e3 liters/m3 
! 
      tt1=14.0*1.0e-6*(1.0/0.07)*(1.0/0.2)*1.0e3 
      zoop1 = TZS*tt1 *1.0d6  
      zoop2 = TZL*tt1 *1.0d6  
170
      zoop3 = TZP*tt1 *1.0d6  
!!!!     zoop1 = zop1(JJday) * tt1 
!!!!     zoop2 = zop2(JJday) * tt1 
!!!!     zoop3 = zop3(JJday) * tt1 
! 
!     ..... Temperature Seting ..... 
! 
      t1=float(jjday) 
      t2=12.75-10.99*cos(0.0172*t1)-6.63*sin(0.0172*t1) 
      wtemp=t2-5.0 
      IF(wtemp.le.1.0)wtemp=1.0 
 
!      write(*,*) TT2CD(cd2tt('0002/01/01 00:00:00')+200.0*86400.0) 
!      stop 
!     ..... Aging of saury ...... 
      TAge = ND2TT(Iyr, ImonA, IdayA ,IhourA, IminA, IsecA ) 
      if ( (Tbefore .lt. TAge).and.(TTime .ge. TAge) .and. (iage.eq.0)) then 
            write(*,*) '*** Aging +1 of saury ***', CTime 
            iage = iage + 1 
      end if 
      TAge2 = ND2TT(Iyr, ImonB, IdayB ,IhourB, IminB, IsecB ) 
      if ( (Tbefore .lt. TAge2).and.(TTime .ge. TAge2) .and. (iage.eq.1) ) then 
            write(*,*) '*** Aging +1 of saury ***', CTime 
            iage = iage + 1 
      end if 
! 
!--- saury weight state variable = x(1) 
! 
!----- set vulnerabilities and k values for 3 zoop groups 
! 
      if ( iage .eq. 0 ) then 
        vul(1) =   1.0; vul(2) =  0.0; vul(3) =   0.0 
        k  (1) = phalf; k  (2) = phalf; k  (3) = phalf 
      else if ( iage .eq. 1 ) then 
        vul(1) =   1.0; vul(2) =  1.0; vul(3) =   0.0 
        k  (1) = phalf; k  (2) = phalf; k  (3) = phalf 
      else 
        vul(1) =   0.0; vul(2) =  1.0; vul(3) =   1.0 
        k  (1) = phalf; k  (2) = phalf; k  (3) = phalf 
      endif 
!    
! --- weight affect on respiration 
! 
      tt1 = 1.0 / x(1) 
      t1  = 0.0033 * tt1**0.227 
! --- *********this is the new stuff from Ahhrenius for YOY only********* 
! --- The 5.258 puts resp (g oxygen/fish) into units of g zoop/g fish/day 
! --- [13560 joules/gram oxygen]/4.18 joules/cal = 3244 cal/gO2 
! --- [2580 joules/gram zoop]/4.18 joules/cal = 617 cal/g zoop 
! --- so respiration in grams/oxygen/g fish/day is multiplied by 3244/617 = 5.258 
! --- to get food energy equivalents of a gram of oxygen respired 
171
! 
!ccc      IF (iage .eq. 0 )then 
!ccc         IF(wtemp.le.15.0)then 
!ccc            v = 5.76 * exp( 0.0238 * wtemp ) * x(1)**0.386 
!ccc         else 
!ccc            v = 8.6 * x(1)**0.386 
!ccc         endif 
!ccc         a=EXP((0.03-0.0*wtemp)*v) 
!ccc         resp=t1*EXP(0.0548*wtemp)*a*5.258 
! --- *********back to the old equations for respiration for age-1 and older******** 
!ccc      else   ! (iage .gt. 0) 
!c         IF (wtemp.le.9.0)then 
         IF (wtemp.le.12.0)then 
!C            u=3.9*x(1)**0.13*EXP(0.149*wtemp) 
            u=2.0*x(1)**0.33*EXP(0.149*wtemp) 
         else 
!c            u=15.0*x(1)**0.13 
            u=11.7*x(1)**0.33 
         endif 
            resp=t1*EXP(0.0548*wtemp)*EXP(0.03*u)*5.258 
!ccc      endif 
!C 
!C --- Thornton and Lessem temperature effect 
!C --- age dependent values 
!C --- *******Arrhenius for age-0 he changed te4 from 25 to 23 degrees****** 
!C 
      if ( iage .eq. 0 ) then 
!c         xk1 = 0.1;  xk2 = 0.98;  xk3 = 0.98;  xk4 = 0.01 
!c         te1 = 1.0;  te2 = 15.0;  te3 = 17.0;  te4 = 23.0 
         xk1 = 0.1;  xk2 = 0.98;  xk3 = 0.98;  xk4 = 0.5 
         te1 = 5.0;  te2 = 20.0;  te3 = 26.0;  te4 = 30.0 
      else if ( iage .eq. 1 ) then 
!c         xk1 = 0.1;  xk2 = 0.98;  xk3 = 0.98;  xk4 = 0.01 
!c         te1 = 1.0;  te2 = 15.0;  te3 = 17.0;  te4 = 25.0 
         xk1 = 0.1;  xk2 = 0.98;  xk3 = 0.98;  xk4 = 0.5 
         te1 = 5.0;  te2 = 16.0;  te3 = 20.0;  te4 = 30.0 
      else if( iage .gt. 1 ) then 
!c         xk1 = 0.1;  xk2 = 0.98;  xk3 = 0.98;  xk4 = 0.01 
!c         te1 = 1.0;  te2 = 13.0;  te3 = 15.0;  te4 = 23.0 
         xk1 = 0.1;  xk2 = 0.98;  xk3 = 0.98;  xk4 = 0.5 
         te1 = 5.0;  te2 = 16.0;  te3 = 20.0;  te4 = 30.0 
      endif 
! 
      tt5 = ( 1.0 / ( te2 - te1 ) ) 
      t5  = tt5 * log( xk2 * ( 1.0 - xk1 ) / ( (1.0-xk2) * xk1 ) ) 
      t4  = exp( t5 * ( wtemp - te1 ) ) 
! 
      tt7 = 1.0 /( te4 - te3 ) 
      t7  = tt7 * log( xk3 * ( 1.0 - xk4 ) / ( (1.0-xk3) * xk4 ) ) 
      t6  = exp( t7 * ( te4 - wtemp ) ) 
! 
172
      gcta  = ( xk1 * t4 ) / ( 1.0 + xk1 * ( t4 - 1.0 ) ) 
      gctb  = xk4 * t6 / ( 1.0 + xk4 * ( t6 - 1.0 ) ) 
      gctemp= gcta * gctb 
!c      gcmax = 0.642 * tt1**0.256 * gctemp 
      gcmax = 0.6 * tt1**0.256 * gctemp 
! 
! --- multispecies functional response  
! --- usse either this or adjust little p 
!       
      cnum=zoop1 * vul(1)/k(1) + zoop2*vul(2)/k(2) +zoop3 * vul(3)/k(3) 
      c1=gcmax*zoop1*vul(1)/k(1) 
      c2=gcmax*zoop2*vul(2)/k(2) 
      c3=gcmax*zoop3*vul(3)/k(3) 
      con1=c1/(1.0+cnum) 
      con2=c2/(1.0+cnum) 
      con3=c3/(1.0+cnum) 
      con= con1+con2+con3 
! 
!-----if using constant p rather than functional response, set p here 
! --- to tune to observed size at age data 
!     con=0.425*gcmax 
! 
! --- egestion 
! 
           f=0.16*con 
! 
! --- excretion 
           e=0.1*(con-f) 
! 
! 
! --- Specific Dynamic Action 
! 
!c------   *******Arrhenius age dependent SDA from 17.5% to 15% **** 
           IF ( iage .eq. 0 ) then 
              sda=0.15*(con-f) 
           else 
              sda=0.175*(con-f) 
           end if 
!C 
!C --- use the ratio of calories/g of zoop (2580) to calories/g of fish (5533) 
!C 
!C --- bioenergetics differential equation 
!C 
          xdot(1)=(con-resp-f-e-sda)*x(1)*2580./5533. 
! 
          IF(wtemp.le.1.0)xdot(1)=0.0 
!C 
!C --- Spawning section. Assume loose 20% of bosy weight/day 
!C     t1=float(jjday) 
!      if( mod(JJday,365) .ge. 152.0 .and. mod(JJday,365) .le. 156.0) then 
!          xdot(1)=(con-resp-f-e-sda-0.20)*x(1)*2580./5533. 
173
!          write(*,*) '### Spawning ###' 
!      endif 
! 
!     if (iage .eq. 1 ) then 
!      write(*,*) JJday, wtemp, x(1), xdot(1) 
!      stop 
!      end if 
!      write(*,'(A,I4,3(1PE14.5))') Ctime, JJday, wtemp, x(1), xdot(1) 
! 
!     Time Integration 
! 
      x(1) = x(1) + 3600.0d0 /d2s * xdot(1) 
! 
!     ..... for Check ..... 
     if ( int(TTime/d2s) .ne. int(Tbefore/d2s) ) then 
!!        write(*,'(A,I4,3(1PE14.5))') Ctime, JJday, wtemp, x(1), xdot(1) 
!!         stop 
!!      write(*,*) TZS, zop1(JJday), TZL,zop2(JJday), TZP,zop3(JJday) 
!!      write(*,*) TZP*1.0d6, zop3(JJday) 
        write(20,'(A,11(",", F12.4))') CTime, x(1), wtemp, gcmax 
      end if 
! 
      return 
! 
      stop 
      end 
!************************************************************************************ 
!* Utilities for Date Control  Writtien by Yasuhiro Yamanaka (galapen@ees.hokudai.ac.jp) * 
!************************************************************************************ 
!     exp. 1997/12/31 23:59:59 --> 6.223158719900000E+10 
!     exp. 0000/01/01 00:00:00 --> 0.000000000000000E+00 
!************************************************************************************ 
      real(8) function CD2TT( Cdate ) 
! 
      integer       :: Iyr, Imon, Iday , Ihour, Imin, Isec 
      real(8)       :: ND2TT 
      character(19) :: Cdate 
! 
      if ( len( Cdate ) .ne. 19 ) then 
         write(*,*) '### Length of date is no good ###' 
         stop 
      end if 
      read (Cdate( 1: 4),*)  Iyr 
      read (Cdate( 6: 7),*)  Imon 
      read (Cdate( 9:10),*)  Iday 
      read (Cdate(12:13),*)  Ihour 
      read (Cdate(15:16),*)  Imin 
      read (Cdate(18:19),*)  Isec 
! 
      CD2TT = ND2TT(Iyr, Imon, Iday , Ihour, Imin, Isec) 
! 
174
      return 
      end function 
!*********************************************************************** 
!     exp. 6.223158719900000E+10 --> 1997/12/31 23:59:59 
!*********************************************************************** 
      character(19) function TT2CD(tt) 
! 
      integer :: Iyr, Imon, Iday , Ihour, Imin, Isec 
      real(8) :: tt 
! 
      call TT2ND( Iyr, Imon, Iday, Ihour, Imin, Isec , tt ) 
! 
      write(TT2CD,'(I4.4,5(A,I2.2))') Iyr, '/', Imon, '/', Iday, & 
                               ' ', Ihour, ':', Imin, ':', Isec 
! 
      return 
      end function 
!*********************************************************************** 
!     exp. 1997,12,31,23,59,59 --> 6.223158719900000E+10 
!*********************************************************************** 
      real(8) function ND2TT(Iyr, Imon, Iday, Ihour, Imin, Isec) 
! 
      integer   :: IM2D(12,0:1) = & 
         reshape( (/ 0,31,59,90,120,151,181,212,243,273,304,334,  & 
                     0,31,60,91,121,152,182,213,244,274,305,335  /), (/12,2/) ) 
      integer   :: Iyr, Imon, Iday, Ihour, Imin, Isec 
      integer   :: Iy4, Iy1, Ileap, Im, Itt 
! 
! 
      Iy4 = 1461 * ( Iyr / 4 ) 
      Iy1 = 365 * mod( Iyr, 4 ) 
! 
      if ( mod( Iyr, 4 ) .ne. 0 ) then 
         Ileap = 0 
      else 
         Ileap = 1 
      end if 
      Im = IM2D( Imon, Ileap) 
! 
      Itt = Iy4 + Iy1 + Im + Iday - Ileap 
! 
      ND2TT = Ihour * 3600 + Imin * 60 + Isec 
      ND2TT = ND2TT + Itt * 86400.0D0 
! 
      return 
      end function 
!*********************************************************************** 
!     exp. 6.223158719900000E+10 --> 1997,12,31,23,59,59 
!*********************************************************************** 
      subroutine TT2ND(                                        & 
                 Iyr   , Imon  , Iday   , Ihour, Imin, Isec,   & !O & I 
175
                 tt    ) 
! 
      integer :: Iyr, Imon, Iday , Ihour, Imin, Isec 
      integer :: Itt, Iy, Iy4, Iyd, Iy1, Ileap, Imd, Im, Its 
      integer   :: IM2D(12,0:1) = & 
         reshape( (/ 0,31,59,90,120,151,181,212,243,273,304,334,  & 
                     0,31,60,91,121,152,182,213,244,274,305,335  /), (/12,2/) ) 
      integer :: IY2D(4) = (/0,366,731,1096/) 
      real(8) :: tt, tt0, ND2TT 
! 
! 
!     ..... ITT [day] ..... 
      Itt = 1 + tt / 86400.0D0 
! 
      Iy4   = (Itt-1) / 1461 
      Iyd   = Itt - Iy4 * 1461 
      do IY = 1, 4 
         if ( IY2D(Iy) + 1 .le. Iyd ) then 
            Iy1 = Iy 
         end if 
      end do 
! 
      Iyr   = Iy4 * 4 + Iy1 - 1 
      if ( mod(Iyr,4) .ne. 0 ) then 
         Ileap = 0 
      else 
         Ileap = 1 
      end if 
      IMD = IYD - IY2D(IY1) 
! 
      do IM = 1, 12 
         if ( IM2D(IM,ILEAP)+1 .le. IMD ) then 
            IMON = IM 
         end if 
      end do 
      IDAY = IMD - IM2D(IMON,ILEAP) 
! 
      TT0 = ND2TT(IYR, IMON, IDAY ,0,0,0) 
      ITS = nint(  TT - TT0 ) 
      Ihour = ITS / 3600 
      Imin  = ( ITS - Ihour * 3600 ) / 60 
      Isec  = ITS - Ihour * 3600 - Imin * 60 
! 
      return 
      end subroutine 
! 
 
176
