 
 
 
 
 
 
PICES Scientific Report No. 21 
2002 
 
 
 
 
PICES-GLOBEC INTERNATIONAL PROGRAM ON 
CLIMATE CHANGE AND CARRYING CAPACITY 
 
 
 
REPORT OF  
THE PICES 2002 VOLUNTEER OBSERVING SHIP WORKSHOP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Edited by 
Charles B. Miller 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
August 2002 
Secretariat / Publisher 
North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES) 
c/o Institute of Ocean Sciences, P.O. Box 6000, Sidney, B.C., Canada. V8L 4B2 
E-mail:  secretariat@pices.int        Home Page:  http://www.pices.int 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 Page 
 
Executive Summary.......................................................................................................................v 
 
Workshop overview .......................................................................................................................1 
 
Instrumentation and cost ..............................................................................................................5 
 
Proposal development....................................................................................................................7 
 
Potential funding sources ..............................................................................................................8 
 
Appendix 1 
Current status of the Pacific CPR program................................................................................9 
 
Appendix 2 
Marine environmental monitoring using ferries in Japan........................................................11 
 
Appendix 3 
Evaluation of upstream location of sampled water using model ship experiments.................15 
 
Appendix 4 
Summary of the operations of the EU FP5 project “Ferry-Box”.............................................23 
 
Appendix 5 
List of participants ...................................................................................................................37 
 
 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
PICES and the Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Trustee Council’s Gulf Ecosystem Monitoring (GEM) 
program presently sponsor a plankton monitoring program in the subarctic Pacific, that uses 
commercial “volunteer observing ships” (VOS) to tow a Continuous Plankton Recorder (CPR) 
along repeated routes from southern California to Alaska, and from British Columbia to Japan.  
Value of the CPR data would be greatly enhanced by additional underway measurements from 
the VOS. 
 
A workshop to identify and evaluate potential add-on sensor and archival modules was held on 
April 4-5, 2002, in Seattle.  The recommended system would include one group of instruments 
making measurements of water from the ship’s engine room sea-water intake, and a second 
group of instruments (mounted on or near the bridge) making optical, acoustic, and sea-state 
measurements, and perhaps deploying expendable subsurface profiling probes (XBT or XCTD).  
Total price for the acquisition and testing of the first unit would probably be under US$250,000.  
Subsequent units could be assembled for about US$150,000. 
 
Workshop participants recommend that a technical proposal for funding such a system be 
developed, and seek endorsement by PICES and approval to proceed with proposal development 
as an official PICES activity. 
 
 
David L. Mackas 
MONITOR Task Team Co-Chairman 
 
REPORT OF THE PICES 2002 VOLUNTEER OBSERVING SHIP 
WORKSHOP 
 
 
Workshop overview 
 
On April 4-5, 2002, the PICES MONITOR 
Task Team, the PICES Continuous Plankton 
Recorder (CPR) Advisory Panel, and the 
Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Trustee Council’s 
Gulf Ecosystem Monitoring (GEM) program 
convened a workshop in Seattle, U.S.A., to 
consider enhanced instrumentation for 
volunteer observing ships (VOS), 
particularly instruments to complement CPR 
data.  Ships instrumented to gather 
oceanographic data secondarily to their main 
mission can range from fishing vessels to 
the largest commercial ships on long trans-
oceanic runs.  The focus of the workshop 
was the latter, with the expectation that 
suitably instrumented ships could obtain 
data from the farthest ocean reaches on a 
frequent and recurring basis for long 
periods. 
 
The rationale is old, simple and excellent.  
The long time scales of significant oceanic 
environmental events, such as coupled 
changes of climatic and fishery regimes, 
require long time series of data to document 
them.  There is also continuous need for 
“sea-truth” measurements for comparison to 
satellite observations.  In the subarctic North 
Pacific, there are interannual variations in 
timing of seasonal events that are keys to 
understanding its ecology.  At the present 
time, expedition style cruises aboard 
dedicated research ships are too expensive 
and too irregular to accomplish this, 
particularly far from shore where only 
reasonably large, expensive vessels can 
venture.  Therefore, the workshop 
participants aimed to review developments 
in instrumentation that can be used to 
provide rich data sets when coupled to 
commercial vessel sea chests.  Large vessels 
move many cubic meters of water per 
minute through their intake systems for 
cooling and other purposes.  Our 
instrumental requirements will be liters per 
minute and can readily and safely be 
coupled to these larger flows. 
 
Relevant experience was represented among 
the workshop participants (see group photo 
on the next page) as follows: 
 
Drs. Sonia D. Batten and David W. Welch 
manage the PICES Continuous 
Plankton Recorder operations on 
tankers running between Valdez, 
Alaska, and Long Beach, California, 
and from Vancouver to Japan. 
Dr. David Hydes has experience with the 
European Union “Ferry Box” program 
that instruments several ferries 
operating around Europe. 
Dr. Akira Harashima is instrumenting ferries 
operating in Japanese waters and 
crossing to Korea, Hong Kong and 
Malaysia. 
Dr. David Cutchin has experience with 
installing, maintaining and retrieving 
data from thermosalinograph and XBT 
systems on commercial ships.  
Dr. Ronald Zaneveld is working with a 
range of optical instruments suitable 
for sea chest instrumentation. 
Dr. Ricardo Letelier is familiar with 
fluorometers and fast repetition rate 
fluorometers which could be utilized 
on VOS. 
Capt. Robert Decker manages data transfer 
communications for several NOAA 
operations. 
 
 
 
Participants of the PICES MONITOR VOS Workshop:  front row from left - Sei-ichi Saitoh 
(PICES MONITOR Task Team, University of Hokkaido, Japan), David Cutchin (Scripps 
Institution of Oceanography, U.S.A.), Ricardo Letelier (Oregon State University, U.S.A.), David 
Mackas (PICES MONITOR Task Team, Institute of Ocean Sciences, Canada, Workshop 
Chairman), Akira Harashima (National Institute for Environmental Studies, Japan);  back row 
from left - Robert Decker (NOAA SEAS, U.S.A.), Phillip Mundy (Exxon Valdez Oil Spill 
Trustee Council, U.S.A.), Warren Wooster (University of Washington, U.S.A., local host), 
Ronald Zaneveld (Oregon State University, U.S.A.), Charles Miller (PICES CPR, Oregon State 
University, U.S.A.), David Welch (PICES CPR, Pacific Biological Station, Canada), Sonia 
Batten (PICES CPR, Sir Alister Hardy Foundation for Ocean Science, UK), David Hydes 
(National Environmental Research Council, Southampton Oceanography Centre, UK);  Not in 
picture:  Jeffrey Napp (National Marine Fisheries Service, U.S.A.). 
 
 
Dr. Phillip Mundy is responsible for the 
EVOS Gulf Ecosystem Monitoring 
(GEM) initiative, concerned with the 
ecosystem health of the Gulf of 
Alaska. 
Dr. Sei-ichi Saitoh is expert in satellite 
oceanography. 
The other participants are oceanographers 
interested in time-series sampling. 
 
The workshop opened with a presentation by 
Dr. Batten on the status of a PICES VOS 
program now in operation.  That is the 
spring-summer CPR sampling aboard 
tankers of the Polar Corporation running 
from Valdez to Long Beach, and a once per 
year CPR tow from Seaboard International 
Ltd. ships running from Vancouver to Japan 
via the Bering Sea.  Her written report on 
progress of the PICES CPR program is 
attached as Appendix 1.  In brief, three years 
of CPR data from the Valdez-Long Beach 
line have shown large interannual variations 
in developmental timing and abundance of 
dominant Gulf of Alaska zooplankton 
species (principally copepods of the genus 
Neocalanus).  CPR results demonstrate 
extended seaward transport of coastal 
plankton stocks (Acartia spp., Calanus 
marshallae) by the Haida eddy and other 
large coastal eddies along the coasts of 
British Columbia and southeast Alaska.  The 
CPR data also appear to represent plankton 
abundance changes associated with the 
possible regime shift of 1998-99. 
 
A forthcoming addition to the east-west 
CPR run is a seabird observer to be directed 
by Dr. William Sydeman of the Point Reyes 
Bird Observatory (4990 Shoreline Highway 
Stinson Beach, CA).  Subsequent to the 
VOS meeting, insurance considerations 
were successfully negotiated with Seaboard 
International Ltd. for placement of an 
observer.  The primary concern is the 
possibility that ship time would be lost if an 
observer were to require diversion because 
of sickness or injury.  From this experience 
we are learning the problems and 
possibilities of placing scientists on board 
VOS, which eventually may be as valuable 
as bird data.  
 
In addition to producing some actual PICES 
science, the CPR program shows that 
shipping companies are willing to help with 
well-designed oceanographic observations 
which do not interfere with their transport 
operations.  While the workshop was not 
convened to consider improvements to the 
CPR, the participants recognize that an 
expanded and improved CPR program has 
been endorsed by both PICES and LMR-
GOOS.  We heartily second this 
endorsement. 
 
Next, currently active VOS instrumentation 
systems operating in Japan and Europe were 
reviewed.  The Japanese program is 
managed by the Center for Global 
Environmental Research (CGER) and 
Marine Environmental Research Laboratory 
(MERL) of the Japanese National Institute 
for Environmental Studies (NIES).  Dr. 
Harashima of MERL/NIES reported on 
instrument suites making continuous 
computerized records of data on a number of 
runs, including one from Tokyo to Malaysia.  
Instrumentation includes:  temperature, 
salinity, pH, fluorescence, dissolved oxygen, 
periodic automated filtration and sample 
storage for shoreside analysis of nutrients 
(NO
3
, NO
2
, NH
4
, PO
4
, Si(OH)
4
), and 
preserved whole water sampling for 
microscopic analysis of phytoplankton.  
Other than this work, CGER/NIES is 
conducting a monitoring program to 
evaluate the CO
2
 flux across the surface of 
the North Pacific using a VOS.  A report by 
Dr. Harashima on the Japanese VOS 
sampling program is presented as  
Appendix 2. 
 
An important result of tow basin and 
numerical modeling research by Dr. 
Harashima and colleagues is that intake 
water on a large ship can be displaced 
downward from its original position near the 
ocean surface by several meters.  That is, 
intakes do not sample water that was 
originally at their depth below the surface, 
but effectively sample somewhat higher in 
the water column.  Appendix 3 details the 
model basin and numerical simulation of 
displacement of water approaching hull 
intakes. 
 
Dr. Hydes reported that the European Union 
is supporting a wide array of different ferry 
instrumentation efforts, under an umbrella 
organization called the “E.U. Ferry Box 
Program”.  The common effort is to examine 
data comparability and to push forward with 
addition of pollutant identification 
instrumentation.  Various systems include:  
temperature, salinity, turbidity, fluorescence, 
and CO
2
.  A system under development by 
Dr. Hydes at the Southampton 
Oceanography Centre determines nutrients 
on a relatively high frequency basis, 
operating on water drawn from an intake 
stream with a reagent addition and 
colorimetry system comparable to 
autoanalyzers but compact and fully 
automated.  Good stability has been 
achieved, but frequent checks with standards 
remain an essential part of establishing and 
sustaining data reliability.  Indeed, the 
standard checks are included in his system’s 
automation scheme.  Such gear is becoming 
available from several other laboratories 
around the world and is nearly ready for 
commercialization.  Details provided in 
writing by Dr. Hydes are presented as 
Appendix 4.  Particularly interesting is the 
use of cell phone technology for data 
transfer in coastal regions.  For U.S. 
applications access can probably be obtained 
from Iridium phone service. 
 
Japanese and European ferry systems are 
also carrying various bridge instrumentation, 
including radiometers, both upward looking 
(sky and total downward radiance) and 
water-leaving radiance meters.  The latter 
are much more problematic, according to 
Dr. Zaneveld, because the results are 
extremely sensitive to angle of the 
instrument relative to the sea surface (which 
is hard to hold constant) and to bubbles that 
are copiously, but variably, produced by 
both waves and the instrumented ship. 
 
Dr. Cutchin and Capt. Decker reported on 
bridge wing XBT operations.  These involve 
automated or manual launch from ships at 
regular locations along standard routes.  One 
example is the WOCE program on ships 
running between Hawaii and Alaska.  
Expense of the expendable probes is a 
significant issue, with current prices of 
US$40 each for XBT probes and US$600 
for XCT (conductivity) probes.  The latter 
have proved prohibitive for all but very 
special operations. 
 
Dr. Saitoh reported on satellite remotely-
sensed data which could usefully be collated 
with the VOS trackline data.  Examples 
include surface temperature and ocean color, 
surface roughness (a proxy for wind speed), 
and sea-surface elevation (a proxy for 
geostrophic current fields).  Benefits of this 
collation are mutual:  the remotely-sensed 
data provide a broader spatial view that 
greatly aids interpretation of features 
observed by the VOS, while the VOS 
provides valuable open-ocean sea-truth 
sampling needed for calibration of satellite 
algorithms. 
 
The group discussed a wide range of issues 
regarding gear installation on VOS.  Cabling 
between engine room instruments and 
bridge instruments to gather data in a 
common computer came in for particular 
attention.  Experience (Cutchin, Hydes, 
Decker, others) shows that running cable 
can be difficult and, therefore, expensive.  
Cabling and all other aspects of installation 
depend upon excellent relations with the 
shipping company and ship’s personnel at 
all levels.  This takes negotiating skill and 
constant attention to relationships 
throughout any VOS program.  Positive 
relationships are as important to success as 
reliable equipment and good maintenance 
when the ships reach port. 
 
A highly specific discussion followed, of 
available instruments, the value of the data 
they produce and the problems they present.  
Potential instrumentation discussed divides 
into engine room (water intake) and bridge 
measurements.  The following box shows 
the lists which appear to workshop members 
to be the practical, meaningful measure-
ments available “off the shelf” at the present 
time.  Participants felt that, if at all possible, 
the instruments at each location should be 
combined into two reasonably compact 
packages that could be transported, 
mechanically installed, and wired as 
modular units.  In order to represent input 
and cooperation throughout PICES, we 
dubbed these the PICES Ferry box and 
PICES VOS Wing Pod.  We will gladly 
name it after any agency or other entity 
willing to fund development (e.g., the 
PICES/GEM Ferry Box). 
 
 
 
 
The Ferry Box and Wing Pod systems must 
be coupled with suitable and redundant 
computing and recording capability to 
archive the substantial data sets that will be 
produced, and to maintain accurate time 
marks for all observations, accounting for 
varying instrumental delays (those of 
automated nutrient analysis, for example).  
Several options for frequent or real-time 
telemetry of data to shore exist, including 
application of Iridium satellite phone 
technology.  A variety of computational and 
communications hardware and software 
issues are involved in this aspect of the 
design.  All of them have solutions.  A 
rough cost estimate, with adequate 
engineering money included, suggested that 
the first system could be assembled for 
around US$250,000.  Subsequent, 
installable copies of the Mark I would run 
about US$130,000 each. 
 
Instrumentation and cost  
 
Further evaluations of each component 
instrument and selections among available 
designs will be part of the engineering 
effort.  Expertise available at the workshop 
provided preliminary knowledge of 
frequently used systems and costs.  We list 
that preliminary data here (all costs are in 
US dollars): 
 
 
 
Components of proposed VOS Data Systems 
 
Ferry Box     Wing Pod 
 Flow-through T and S    XBT launcher 
 T via hull conductance (+0.1ºC)  Downwelling irradiance 
 Fluorometer     Recording of ship high frequency
 Transmissometry      echosounder and Doppler speed log
 OPC      Meteorology package 
 Spectral absorbance (AC-9)   Navigation (GPS) 
  Nutrient concentration   Accelerometer (sea state)  
 Colored-DOM fluorescence    
PICES Ferry Box – An engine room system to be coupled to VOS sea chests: 
Flow-through temperature and salinity (thermosalinograph) 
SeaBird $8,000 
SST via hull conductance (+ 0.1ºC) $500 
Fluorometer, flowthrough - general level of phytoplankton biomass 
Turner Designs $3,000 
Transmissometer - light beam C (attenuation) and particle concentration 
Seatech $3,000 
Optical Plankton Counter - evaluation of zooplankton abundance and size distribution 
Full description at http://www.focaltech.ns.ca/ product-opc.html 
Focal Technologies  $12,000 
Spectral absorbance (AC9) - evaluation of relative abundance of absorbing pigments and, thus, 
of phytoplankton composition by measuring light absorbance at 9 wavelengths. 
SeaLabs AC9 $16,000 
Nutrient concentrations – NO
3
, PO
4
, Si(OH)
4
, Several systems in test phases 
 $15,000 
CDOM fluorescence – measure of colored dissolved organic matter;  varies strongly in inshore-
offshore direction, a measure of “neriticity”.  Measure is blue fluorescence excited with UV. 
Adapted Turner Designs Fluorometer $3,000 
 
Instrument component cost - $60,500 
 
Pumps, plumbing, housing, safety alarms and other fittings will cost ~ $10,000. 
Instrument control and data storage computer systems should cost about $5,000. 
 
Total cost ~ $75,000 
 
PICES Wing Pod – for deployment on the bridge wing: 
XBT launcher – spaced vertical profiles of ocean temperature 
Sippican $3,000 
Downwelling irradiance – measure of light intensity above the ship 
LiCor, several others $8,000 
Recording of ship’s high frequency echosounder – read out cable required 
Recording of ship’s Doppler log – readout cable required 
Meteorology package - air temperature, humidity, apparent wind speed 
Several systems  $5,000 
Navigation (dedicated GPS) 
Many manufacturers $3,000 
Vertical Acceleration (sea state) – response will vary from ship to ship 
 $5,000 
 
Instrument component cost - $24,000 
 
Attachments, housings, data storage ~ $10,000 
 
Total cost ~ $ 35,000 
Dr. Zaneveld has noted in reviewing a draft 
of this report, that a FerryBox system 
including an AC9 spectral absorbance 
system will not require a chlorophyll 
fluorometer.  The AC9 will measure 
chlorophyll absorption as [a(676) - a(6650)], 
which is better correlated with extracted 
chlorophyll than standard fluorometer 
output, since the quantum efficiency of 
fluorescence is not involved.  The AC9 
transmission at 650 nm also replaces the 
standard transmissometer, which measures 
at 650 nm.  He also stated that with some 
plumbing the AC9 can alternately pass water 
filtered at 0.2 m to obtain a measure of 
colored dissolved organic matter (CDOM), 
which by subtraction provides a measure of 
light absorption by particles.  The AC9 can 
thus reduce costs by about $8,000. 
 
In the future, the PICES Ferry Box could be 
upgraded to include fast repetition rate 
fluorometry (FRRF, potentially a 
photosynthesis rate measurement), a 100-
wavelength spectro-photometer, a FlowCam 
for accumulating particle images and the 
pollutant sensors under development in 
Europe.  The PICES WingPod could 
eventually include a downlooking LIDAR 
system to profile chlorophyll.  Both Ferry 
Box and Wing Pod should include physical 
space and data capacity for new 
instrumentation not yet developed even in 
concept.  It is possible that the biggest 
contribution of the PICES VOS systems 
could be stimulation of completely new 
measurements. 
 
Workshop participants recognize that 
development of the PICES VOS systems 
must include careful computer hardware 
selection and detailed software design for 
data logging.  Data formats suitable to 
NODC or other data archiving organizations 
should be used.  Computer media and 
formats should adhere to standards likely to 
last or remain accessible long into the future.  
In addition to storing raw instrumental 
output (volts, counts, etc.), data streams 
logged at sea should, when possible, be 
converted to standard units (engineering, SI, 
or oceanographic such as PSU) for parallel 
storage.  Data storage should be redundant.  
Calibration and data quality control 
protocols should be part of system design as 
well as operation.  It may be desirable for 
the systems to provide regular telemetry to 
the deploying laboratories.  For example, 
shore-based inspection of near-real-time 
data from the VOS would allow prompt 
detection and diagnosis of most foreseeable 
instrument faults, and would greatly aid on-
board or “next port call” repair.  Use of 
satellite phone (Iridium) facilities seems 
possible and likely to be inexpensive.  
(Iridium facilities were recently acquired by 
the U.S. government and are available for 
qualified scientific applications.) 
 
Expertise to develop and assemble 
components and software is likely to cost in 
the order of $100,000.  Initial deployments 
will require that the systems be accompanied 
at sea by a technical expert.  This will incur 
costs for insurance, passage, sea pay, 
transport home, etc.  This might run to 
$20,000.  Unanticipated contingencies might 
cost $30,000.  Thus, both the Ferry Box 
and Wing Pod could be developed for 
approximately $250,000 or less.  Second 
and later copies could be produced for about 
$150,000 each, perhaps less. 
 
Proposal development 
 
Members of the PICES CPR Advisory Panel 
will prepare a detailed proposal to develop 
these VOS systems in the near future.  It is 
our hope that PICES will take a strong 
interest in supporting development of the 
PICES Ferry Box and PICES Wing Pod.  
The currently active European and Japanese 
programs for ferry instrumentation show 
that complex, long-term and frequent data 
strongly indicative of ecosystem conditions 
can be generated by VOS programs.  The 
full extent of the North Pacific can be 
sampled in this way at very reasonable cost. 
 
Potential funding sources 
 
It is obvious that sources of funding must be 
identified to develop and sustain VOS data 
collection in the North Pacific.  The 
following agencies should be interested in 
this work: 
 
U.S. NOAA, National Marine Fisheries 
Service 
U.S. NOAA and other entities involved in 
Global Ocean Observing System 
development 
U.S. NASA - SeaWIFS, MODIS, EOS and 
other programs needing comparative 
sea surface data   
Fisheries and Oceans Canada 
Environment Canada 
Gulf Environmental Monitoring (GEM) 
program of the Exxon Valdez Oil Spill 
Trustee Council 
Sloan Foundation Census of Marine Life 
Packard Foundation 
Japan Ministry of Education, Science and 
Technology (MEXT)  
Japan Ministry of the Environment (MOE) 
 
Since instrumentation will partly come from 
small business concerns, it is likely that 
some support can be obtained from the U.S. 
Small Business Innovative Research 
Program.  It is possible that shipping (e.g., 
Maersk-SeaLand, Columbus Lines, 
Seaboard International) and ferry (Alaska 
Marine Highway) companies would assist 
with costs in return for publicity or 
shipboard data displays. 
 
Appendix 1 
Current status of the Pacific CPR program 
 
Sonia D. Batten 
Sir Alistair Hardy Foundation for Ocean Science, 1, Walker Terrace, The Hoe, Plymouth, UK.  
PL1 3BN  E-mail:  soba@wpo.nerc.ac.uk 
 
 
By the end of 2001, a total of 13 CPR 
deployments had been made along two 
transects (Fig 1).  Sampling success was 
high and processing of selected samples for 
plankton abundance has now been 
completed. 
 
Highlights of some of the data analyses were 
presented at the workshop.  The monthly 
distribution of the copepods Neocalanus 
plumchrus/flemingeri (one of the most 
abundant copepods in surface waters during 
spring/early summer) along the Alaska to 
California transect were shown.  A similar 
pattern was evident in both 2000 and 2001.  
Highest abundances occurred in May and 
throughout all months abundances were 
higher in the central portion of the transect.  
There was some evidence that the peak 
distribution had shifted further south in 
2001.  Stage composition analysis also 
suggested that development was faster, or 
occurred earlier, in 2001 than in 2000.  
 
24th June-3rd July 2000
 10th-20th June 2001
2000               2001  
21
st
 –26
th
 March      22
nd
-27
th
 April   
29
th
 April-5
th
 May    20
th
-25
th
 May   
17
th
-22
nd
 June         27
th 
June-2
nd
 July  
19
th
-24
th
 July            10
th
-16
th
 August 
23
rd
-29
th
 August      21
st
-25
th
 September    
1997 
21st July-6th August 
 
Fig. 1 Upper panel shows the N/S transect, run 5 times in 2000 and 2001, and once in 1997.  
Lower panel shows the E/W transect, run once in 2000 and 2001.  Symbols indicate sample 
positions. 
Estimates of total mesozooplankton 
abundance for 1°-latitude bands along the 
Alaska to California transect showed a 
recurring peak between about 39-42°N.  The 
peak was sometimes an order of magnitude 
higher than the abundances at adjacent 
latitudes.  Satellite images of chlorophyll 
concentration (from SeaWiFS) show a 
region of high chlorophyll on the shelf and 
extending over the slope, with a noticeable 
front perpendicular to the coast in this area.  
It is likely that the peak in abundance 
coincides with the point at which the CPR 
transect intersects this front, as it approaches 
the coast from the open ocean.  
 
A trial sampling of the Alaska to California 
transect was carried out in summer 1997.  
Comparisons of abundance for the same 
periods in 2000 and 2001 show that 
abundances were much lower, particularly in 
the open Gulf of Alaska, and in fact at no 
time in 2000 and 2001 were such high 
abundances found along the whole transect 
as in 1997.  The cause may be climate 
related, since 1997 was an El Niño year and 
2000/2001 witnessed more normal 
conditions, however as yet a mechanism 
remains unclear.  If estimates of biomass 
prove to be as variable as the abundances, 
then implications for other trophic levels 
will be considerable. 
 
Community composition along the single, 
annual, Vancouver to Japan transect showed 
that distinct regional variations in 
community structure exist.  Furthermore, the 
regional variability appears stronger than the 
interannual variability, at least in the two 
years sampled so far.  Further funding 
should enable the sampling of this transect 
more frequently in 2002, so that within-year 
variability can be determined. 
The Alaska to California transect sampled 
within, or close to, large (~200 km diameter) 
anticyclonic eddies that form along the 
western continental shelf edge in the winter.  
These eddies are clearly visible in sea 
surface altimetry maps from TOPEX/ 
POSEIDON/ERS satellites.  Samples in the 
region of the eddies contained significant 
numbers of coastal or shelf-origin plankton 
taxa.  The oceanic occurrence of these taxa 
appears to be related to the strength of these 
eddies, since occurrences on CPR samples 
were more frequent in 2000, when the eddy 
was stronger, than in 2001.  
 
To summarise, the data analyses described 
show that the three years of CPR data 
(including the trial in 1997) have provided 
large-scale distribution data for key plankton 
taxa.  Some information on within year 
variability is also available, at least for 
spring through summer.  Interannual 
changes are already proving to be 
considerable.  Satellite imagery has proved 
useful in linking the observed abundances 
and species distributions with the mesoscale 
features that may explain them.  
 
Additional funding has been obtained for 
2002, which will enable further sampling 
(autumn and winter baseline data can be 
acquired as well as additional east to west 
sampling) and further data analyses.  It is 
also hoped that the CPR program will be 
supplemented in 2002 by the addition of a 
thermosalinograph (and fluorometer) to the 
vessel operating the Alaska to California 
transect.  A trial Vancouver to Japan transect 
is also planned which will include a marine 
bird/cetacean observer on board. 
 
 
Appendix 2 
Marine environmental monitoring using ferries in Japan 
 
Akira Harashima 
National Institute for Environmental Studies (NIES), 16-2 Onogawa, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8506, 
Japan.  E-mail:  harashim@nies.go.jp 
 
 
Since 1991, NIES has been conducting a 
marine monitoring program by deploying 
flow-through equipment on the continuous 
seawater intake system of the ships of 
opportunity, to get the temporal/spatial 
variation of marine environmental variables 
with high temporal/spatial resolution 
(Harashima et al. 1997), targeting the 
detection and the evaluation of 
anthropogenic impacts to the seas, as well as 
the development of monitoring techniques.  
The tracks (Fig. 1) and periods of each leg 
were:  
Line-1: Kobe - Seto Inland Sea - Tsushima 
Strait - Pusan, 1991 - 1993; 
Line-2: Osaka - Seto Inland Sea - Beppu, 
1994 - ongoing; 
Line-3: Osaka - Naha, 1994 - 1998; 
 
We extended this program to the Asian 
marginal seas by using container ships, 
whose route was: 
 
Line-4: Japan - Hong Kong - Singapore - 
Port Kelang.  
125KE 130KE
135KE
140KE
145KE
25KN
30KN
35KN
Line 1
3.
Line 2
Line  4
Line 3, 3'
Line 1: Ferry "Dan-Noh" ( Pusan - Kobe ) 1991-93
Line 3 & 3': Ferry "Kuroshio" ( Osaka - Okinawa ) 1994-98
Line 2: Ferry "Sunflower" ( Seto Inland Sea ) 1994- ongoing  
Line 4 : Container Ship "Aligator Hope" or "ACX-LILY"  
                   ( Japan - Hong Kong or Port Kelang )  1997 - 
Osaka Bay
Bisan Seto
Beppu Bay
KORDI's Line : Ferry "SEMO"  ( Incheon - Cheju )  1998 - 
KORDI's Line
 
 
Fig. 1 Tracks of ferries used for monitoring. 
One of the technical points worth special 
mention is that we constructed an opened 
system that consists of a measurement tank 
containing several sensors with free water 
surface in it, and a sampling faucet on a sink 
on Line-1, 2 and 3, and that we deployed 
automated filtration samplers to obtain filter 
papers and filtered water samples to be 
analyzed in the laboratory on Line-1 and 2, 
instead of the closed system usually 
designed for measuring only T, S and in vivo 
fluorescence.  On Line-4, seawater was 
sampled manually by the ship crew 
following an instruction chart showing how 
to take and filtrate by expendable syringes, 
fix and reserve the samples for analyzing 
dissolved inorganic nutrients and 
phytoplankton community structures.  These 
setups allowed us to investigate multiple 
kinds of items such as those described in the 
following papers by multiple authors 
compiled in a comprehensive report 
(Harashima and Kinugi, 2000): 
 
 
Paper-1:   Marine environmental monitoring and related studies using ferry boats -
 Description of the decadal experience and synthesis of the products  
Paper-2: Technical points in designing and maintaining the unattended marine environmental 
monitoring system deployed on ferryboats  
Paper-3: A model ship experiment on the original depth of the seawater taken for the 
monitoring system deployed on ferryboats  
Paper-4: Inter-comparison between the ocean color from satellite mapping and the in vivo 
fluorescence from ferry monitoring 
Paper-5: Advancement in the online evaluation of the health of the sea and the detection of 
plankton using ship of opportunity 
Paper-6: Development of a flow-through measurement of pCO
2
 with high time response  
Paper-7: Temporal/spatial variation of nutrients and silica deficit  
Paper-8: Method of phytoplankton analysis for evaluation of marine environmental quality 
Paper-9: Measurement of size spectra of phytoplankton by a bio-particle counter 
Paper-10: Measurement of biogenic sulfur compounds in the marine environment 
Paper-11: Observation of the marine environmental change before and after the passage of a 
typhoon 
Paper-12: Observation of marine pollution with hazardous chemicals using ferries 
Paper-13: Monitoring of organo-tin species in seawater of the Seto Inland Sea 
Paper-14: Comprehensive monitoring of the Seto Inland Sea to detect global change 
Paper-15: Possibility of a short-term prediction model using biogeochemical data obtained by 
ferry monitoring 
 
Results of Paper-3 by Ship Research 
Institute
 
(Hinatsu et al. 2000) showed that 
the seawater taken into the flow-through 
system via the inlet comes from near the sea 
surface even if the inlet is located at around 
-5 m, because of the lowering of streamlines  
beside the hull with model ship experiments 
and CFD (Computational Fluid Dynamics), 
which is referred to here as one of the basics 
to evaluate the outcomes from flow-through 
systems.  
 
 
References 
 
Harashima, A. et al. (1997): Monitoring 
algal blooms and related biogeochemical 
changes with a flow-through system 
deployed on ferries in the in Kahru, M. 
and Brown, C. B. (eds.) Monitoring 
Algal Blooms – New Techniques for 
Detecting Large Scale Environmental 
Change-, 85-112, Springer. 
 
Harashima, A. and Kunugi, M. (Eds.) 
Comprehensive Report on Marine 
Environmental Monitoring and Related 
Studies Using Ferry Boats, 38-45, 
CGER-Report CGER-M007-2000, 
Center for Global Environmental 
Research, National Institute for 
Environmental Studies, 180pages (in 
Japanese with abstracts and figure 
captions in English).  
 
Hinatsu, M. et al. (2000): A model ship 
experiment on the original depth of the 
seawater taken for the monitoring 
system deployed on ferryboats, in 
Reference
2)
, 38-45.  
 
Appendix 3 
Evaluation of upstream location of sampled water using model ship 
experiments 
 
Munehiko Hinatsu
1
, Yoshiaki Tsukada
1
, Yoshimasa Minami
1
, Hiroshi Tomita
1
 and Akira 
Harashima
2 
1
 Ship Research Institute, 6-38-1 Shinkawa, Mitaka, Tokyo 181-0004, Japan.  E-mail: 
hinatsu@srimot.go.jp 
2 
National Institute for Environmental Studies, 16-2 Onogawa, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0053, 
Japan.  E-mail:  harashim@nies.go.jp 
 
 
Abstract 
 
In the monitoring of sea healthiness using a 
voluntary observation ship (hereafter 
abbreviated as VOS), information of the 
original depth of sampled water is very 
important for sampled water analyses.  The 
objective of the research is to develop a 
method to estimate the original depth of 
sampled water.  In order to do that, first of 
all, we use a model ship experiment.  In the 
experiment, we inject a dye from the 
upstream of the ship and pick the water up 
from the inlet, then the occupation rate of 
dye in the picked up water is analyzed using 
a spectrophotometer.  The occupation rate is 
mapped onto the position of dye injection 
and will thus show the original location of 
sampled water as a contour map.  Further, 
numerical simulation of flow around the 
ship is done and streamline tracing is carried 
out.  Thus the water trajectories that pass 
near the inlet are roughly estimated.  These 
results agree with the experiment. 
 
Introduction 
 
Recently, the importance of environmental 
safeguards of the ocean has been 
recognized, and along this trend, the 
National Institute for Environmental Studies 
(NIES) has been carrying out sea healthiness 
monitoring using VOS, such as container 
ships and ferry ships, which are operated in 
Asia and the Seto Inland Sea.  In the 
monitoring, sampled seawater is obtained 
through an inlet located on the ship hull.  
However, in order to evaluate the sea 
healthiness through the chemical analyses of 
sampled water, it is important to know the 
original depth of the sampled water. 
 
This study is related to the experimental 
estimation of the original upstream location 
of sampled water which is obtained through 
an inlet set on the ship hull.   
 
Experiment 
 
In order to evaluate the original location of 
sampled water, we shed dye tracer from the 
upstream of the ship and suck water from 
the inlet hole set on the ship hull.  Sampled 
water is then analyzed through a 
spectrophotometer, so the concentration of 
dye in the sampled water can be determined.  
The contour map of the concentration of dye 
contained in the sampled water and the 
location of the dye shedding position show 
the original location of sampled water.  
Figure 1 shows the setup of the experiment.  
In the study, we used potassium 
permanganate (KMnO
4
) as dye tracer.  Here 
we name this method the “dye concentration 
method”. 
 
The 2 m-long model ship used in the 
experiment is in a training ship hull form, 
not exactly the same as the VOS hull form, a 
car ferry ship operating in the Seto Inland 
Sea - because the hull form of VOS is 
confidential.  The location of inlet is roughly 
the same as that set on the VOS, that is 
22.5% of ship length in front of the A.P. 
(rudder post) and 52% of draft upper from 
the bottom.  We also added another inlet at 
the bottom in the same lengthwise location.  
 
The model ship is towed with the velocities 
of 0.5 m/sec and 1.377 m/sec.  Sampled 
water is sucked by a computer-controlled 
injector.   
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1 Schematic setup of experiment. 
 
 
The rate of suction is set to 0.536 ml/sec and 
the injector and the inlet are connected with 
the pipe whose inner diameter is 1 mm.  Dye 
is shed through 3 mm-diameter pipe.  The 
dye is stored in a container set on the towing 
carriage of the model ship, and it is shed 
only by gravitational force.  The outlet of 
dye is set at 5% of the ship length upstream 
from the bow (F.P.).  
 
Estimation of ship flow 
 
The flow around the model ship is computed 
using CFD, and streamlines that start near 
the bow are simulated as shown in Figure 2.  
In the figure, we look up the ship from an 
oblique angle beneath the ship stern.  The 
tracers shed around the ship bow near the 
waterplane go down to the bottom around 
midship, and go up toward the waterplane 
around the stern.  This is a general trend for 
ship flows.  Therefore, we can roughly 
expect that the sampled water sucked from 
the mid-draft at the stern would originally 
exist near the waterplane. 
 
Result of experiments 
Preliminary investigation on dye diffusion 
 
At first, in order to investigate to what 
extent the dye diffuses, we shed dye and 
suck it in a uniform flow without the model 
ship.  The distance between the dye-shed 
outlet and inlet for dye-suck is set at 1650 
  
Fig. 2 Trajectories of streamlines starting 
from around ship bow. 
 
 
Fig. 3a Vertical distribution of diffused 
dye under uniform flow. 
 
 
 
Fig. 3b Horizontal distribution of diffused 
dye under uniform flow. 
mm, corresponding to the distance between 
the dye outlet and the inlet set on the hull in 
the model ship test.  In Figure 3, result of the 
diffusion is shown.  Here the velocity of 
uniform flow is 0.5 m/sec and the depth of 
outlet is 60 mm.  The vertical and horizontal 
diffusion are shown in Figures 3a and 3b, 
respectively.  The vertical axis means the 
ratio of concentration of dye in %.  The area 
of diffusion can be estimated to be not more 
than a circle of a 50 mm radius.  
 
Original location of sampled water 
collected through side inlet 
 
The results are shown in Figures 4 to 7.  
Figures 4 and 5 show the result at a ship 
speed of 0.5 m/sec and Figures 6 and 7 are 
at 1.377 m/sec.  In Figure 4, we show the 
contour map of the concentration of dye in 
the sampled water.  The peak point of this 
map means that we can recover the dye most 
when the dye is shed from that point.  In 
other words, we can say that the sampled 
water must come from around the peak point 
in all probability. 
 
In the figure, the center of the circle is the 
gravitational center of the concentration of 
the dye, and the area of the circle is 
equivalent to that obtained by dividing the 
total amount of dye concentration by the 
maximum value of concentration.  In Figure 
5, the arrows show the horizontally 
integrated values of the concentration.  
Therefore the vertical position of the longest 
arrow shows the most probable location 
where the sampled water comes from.  From 
these figures, we can find out that the 
sampled water collected at the side inlet 
mainly exists near the free surface 
originally.  This result is consistent with the 
result of CFD. 
 
In case of higher ship speed, the same trend 
can be obtained as shown in Figures 6 and 7. 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4 Contour of percentage of dye in sample water picked up from side inlet (V
m
=0.5 m/s, 
thick line 0.1%, contour interval 0.02%). 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5 Integrated percentage of dye in sample water along horizontal direction (side inlet, 
V
m
=0.5 m/s). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6 Contour of percentage of dye in sample water picked up from side inlet (V
m
=1.377 m/s, 
thick line 0.1%, contour interval 0.02%). 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7 Integrated percentage of dye in sample water along horizontal direction (side inlet, 
V
m
=1.377 m/s). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 8 Contour of percentage of dye in sample water picked up from bottom inlet (V
m
=0.5 
m/s, Thick Line 0.1%, contour interval 0.02%). 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 9 Integrated percentage of dye in sample water along horizontal direction (bottom inlet, 
V
m
=0.5 m/s). 
 
 
Original location of sampled water 
collected through bottom inlet 
 
In Figures 8 and 9, contour maps of the 
concentration of dye in the sampled water 
are shown.  The ship speed is 0.5 m/sec in 
this case.  Since the streamlines starting 
from under the bulbous bow run beneath the 
bottom along the symmetry plane of the 
ship, much more dye is recovered when dye 
is shed near the bulbous bow.  Further, the 
contour map is narrower than that in the case 
of the side inlet.  This trend holds even when 
the ship speed is higher.  From this, we may 
say that the inlet to collect sample water 
should be set on the centerline of the bottom 
because the original location of sampled 
water must be much more limited.  
 
Concluding remarks and future work 
 
Through the experiment to estimate the 
original location of sampled water, we got 
the following results: 
1. The original location of sampled water 
can be estimated quantitatively by use of 
the “dye concentration method”. 
 
2. When we use the side inlet, mostly water 
at the depth of 13.1% of draft was 
recovered.  This depth may correspond 
to 0.71 m for VOS, although the shape 
of the model ship hull is different from 
VOS operating in the Seto Inland Sea.  
 
We still have the following future works to 
consider: 
 
1. The dependence of Reynolds number on 
the result must be considered. 
 
2. The development of an estimation 
method based on CFD technique is also 
necessary. 
 
3. The effect of ship motion in waves on 
the result must be evaluated. 

Appendix 4 
Summary of the operations of the EU FP5 project “Ferry-Box” 
 
David Hydes 
National Environmental Research Council, Southampton Oceanography Centre, European Way, 
Empress Dock, Southampton, UK.  SO14 3ZH.  E-mail:  djh@soc.soton.ac.uk 
 
 
Introduction 
 
This document briefly outlines the plans of 
Southampton Oceanography Centre and the 
European FerryBox consortium, to work 
with the operators of merchant vessels to 
install scientific instrumentation onto ferries 
with the aim of greatly increasing our 
knowledge and the stability of the marine 
ecosystem.  It is essential to have the 
knowledge to be able to separate variability 
in the marine system from permanent 
change. 
 
The European FerryBox consortium 
 
The European FerryBox consortium is a 
group of 11 partners who are working 
together to develop operational 
oceanographic products based on data 
collected from ferries.  They are:  GKSS - 
Research Centre Geesthacht GmbH, 
Southampton Oceanography Centre, 
Netherlands Institute for Sea Research, 
Finnish Institute of Marine Research, 
National Centre for Marine Research 
(Greece), Proudman Oceanographic 
Laboratory, Norwegian Institute for Water 
Research, HYDROMOD Scientific 
Consulting (Germany), Chelsea Instruments 
(England), Instituto Español de 
Oceanografía, and Estonian Marine Institute.  
The consortium combines SMEs, scientific, 
operational and policy-oriented institutions.  
By collaborating in the FerryBox project, 
the partners will be setting about the task of 
defining the relative variability of important 
ecosystem components in the whole range of 
European marine environments.  This will 
encompass the oligotrophic eastern 
Mediterranean to hyper-nutrified northern 
European estuaries, as well as the full range 
of physical forcing from low (Mediterranean 
and Baltic) to high tidal mixing (North and 
Irish Seas), and from low (coastal, Baltic) to 
high (Mediterranean) salinity waters. 
 
FerryBox routes  
 
The selection of the FerryBox lines (Fig. 1) 
is based on representing the wide range of 
European marine systems from oligotrophic 
to hyper-nutrified, and the large range in 
hydrodynamic conditions and processes.  
Each of the routes has end users who will be 
making use of the products of the FerryBox 
project. 
 
The main interests of the FerryBox lines are: 
 
R1  Baltic Sea (closed sea) 
Eutrophication, (blue)-algal blooms, 
sampling strategy 
R2  Skagerrak (shelf sea) 
Validation of satellite data, combination 
in situ and satellite data (RS)  
R3  Southern North Sea 
Nutrient input, eutrophication, algal 
classification, ground truth 
R4  Wadden Sea (tidal sea) 
Water currents, sediment transport 
R5  Irish Sea (shelf sea) 
Transport and mixing on western 
Scottish shelf, algal growth 
 
Fig. 1 Map of routes to be operated in the Ferry-Box project. 
 
 
R6  Solent (UK) (estuary) 
Transport from river to sea, estuarine 
eutrophication 
R7  Bay of Biscay (oceanic) 
Water mass exchange shelf - ocean, 
range of plankton environments 
R8  Mediterranean Sea (oligotrophic) 
Nutrient gradients, upwelling, data 
assimilation with buoys systems 
 
Definitions:  Operational oceanography, 
GOOS, EuroGOOS and FerryBox 
 
Operational oceanography is best described 
by the diagram on the next page (Fig. 2).  It 
is essentially the systematic and long-term 
collection of oceanographic data in ways 
that minimises aliasing in the observations.  
The data is then fed directly into an 
established system to provide useful 
products.  These may be nowcasts of present 
conditions or it is assimilated into numerical 
models to produce forecasts.  Such 
systematic collection of data is essential for 
distinguishing climate and ecosystem 
variability from permanent change. 
 
GOOS (Global Ocean Observing System):  
The aim of the organisations signing up to 
the GOOS concept is to contribute to 
establishing a permanent global system for 
observations, modelling and analysis of 
marine and ocean variables to support 
operational ocean services world-wide.   
 
Fig. 2 Elements of operational oceanography. 
 
GOOS will provide accurate descriptions of 
the present state of the oceans, including 
living resources;  continuous forecasts of the 
future conditions of the sea for as far ahead 
as possible;  and the basis for forecasts of 
climate change (IOC 1998, IOC 2000). 
 
EuroGOOS is the European division of 
GOOS.  It is subdivided into action groups.  
The best developed of these is BalticGOOS 
which has started work on the strong base of 
activities co-ordinated by HELCOM.  A 
MediterraneanGOOS pilot project is 
underway and a scheme for a North West 
European Shelf was published in November 
2001, as the NOOS action plan (Droppert et 
al., 2000) 
 
FerryBox:  A practical approach to the 
establishment of cost effectively monitoring 
systems is the use of ships-of-opportunity to 
carry sets of scientific instruments (boxes).  
The most useful data are those which are 
collected in a regular fashion.  They are 
easier to interpret and are suitable for 
assimilation into numerical models.  Ships 
which travel in this manner are ferries - 
hence FERRYBOX.  EuroGOOS has 
highlighted the fact that over 800 ferry 
routes are operating in European waters. 
 
Aims and objectives of the FerryBox 
consortium 
 
A serious hindrance to understanding marine 
systems is the lack of monitoring systems 
that provide continuous observations.  
Currently observations mostly lack spatial 
coverage and temporal resolution required to 
determine a true view of the state of the 
marine environment and changes within it.  
Moves to overcome this problem are being 
championed world-wide by the GOOS 
initiative and in Europe by EuroGOOS.   
 
The FerryBox consortium plans to show 
how ferries can be used for automatic high 
quality measurements of environmentally 
important parameters.  Emphasis is on the 
comparability of the data, and on the use of 
data to solve scientific and applied 
problems.  The main problems that will be 
addressed in the first stage are 
eutrophication and its effects on water 
quality, and water and sediment transport.  It 
will show that the accuracy of prognostic 
numerical models (such as those predicting 
storm surge) can be improved by 
assimilation of FerryBox data.  It will 
demonstrate the reliability of the system for 
monitoring at all times of year, and the 
potential for improving management of 
European waters of different oceanographic 
character.  It will recommend to the 
European marine community how future 
FerryBoxes can be operated and show the 
benefits to operational services of additional 
sensors, enhanced coverage and information 
density.  It offers opportunities for the 
European marine industry to exploit. 
 
The project will demonstrate that ship-borne 
instrumentation packages (FerryBoxes) can 
cost effectively deliver information of 
immediate scientific value, based on a co-
ordinated approach and the development of 
standardisation procedures.  It will quantify 
environmental variability on a European-
wide scale and improve understanding of 
water quality-related processes, specifically 
eutrophication, transport of water sediments 
and contaminants. 
 
Programme of work 
 
A key element of the GOOS approach is that 
data is easily and rapidly available after 
collection to the user community whether 
they are scientists, managers or the general 
public.  Data are worthless if their quality 
are unknown.  Therefore before the partners 
exchange data, all partners will collaborate 
on developing a standard scheme for 
validating the accuracy and precision of all 
data that is used in the FerryBox project, 
both from Ferry Boxes, other collection 
methods or archived records.  It is important 
that FerryBox data are data “that can stand 
the test of time”.  We will set up the 
procedures for the rapid exchange of data 
that is accompanied by all the appropriate 
meta-data.  This will be web based and use 
“Marine XML”. 
 
We will concentrate on 3 scientific areas 
relevant to issues of water quality, 
ecosystem dynamics and climate variability 
and change.  These will be: 
 
1. Eutrophication including plankton 
productivity and variability in 
productivity in relation to physical and 
bio-geochemical constraints.  
2. Transport of sediments (and associated 
contaminants) over long and short 
spatial and temporal scales.  
 
3. Determination of the stability and 
transport of water masses in the 
Mediterranean, Baltic, and on and 
adjacent to the Western European shelf.  
 
The work will be based on analysis of 
FerryBox data in conjunction with other 
time series data in adjacent waters, including 
remote sensing observations where this 
exists by:  (i) statistical presentation of the 
data, and (ii) recognition of patterns in the 
data which test our hypotheses about 
specific processes.   
 
There will be emphasis on the quantification 
of horizontal gradients and their variability 
in space and time, and on seasonal variations 
and events.  The latter in particular, for 
instance, blooms or the effects of storms / 
high river discharges, have not in general 
been adequately sampled.   
 
An important aspect of the GOOS initiative 
is the development of prognostic numerical 
models for marine systems, that can be run 
using the assimilation of observations to 
improve their accuracy as is the practice in 
weather forecasts.  Work on numerical 
models will involve experiments in data-
assimilation of FerryBox data into existing 
models, to produce recommendations on the 
strengths and weaknesses of assimilation 
schemes and their benefits.  In addition, 
coupled hydrodynamic-biological models 
will be used in studies to explore 
interactions between processes (e.g. spring-
neap tidal modulation of coastal plume 
stratification; algal blooms triggered by 
mixing events), and enhance the 
interpretative studies carried out  by direct 
data analysis. 
 
Advances expected from the FerryBox 
project 
 
Major advances 
1. The project will move of the study of 
water quality issues from national efforts to 
a truly pan-European effort.  The FerryBox 
project will demonstrate the feasibility of, 
and provide the basis for, a trans-European 
operational co-operative network of 
operators and end-users.  This is a very 
major advance.  For the first time, data free 
from the aliasing inherent in normal 
infrequent spot surveys will be replaced by 
high frequency data of known comparability 
across European waters. 
 
2. A Europe-wide assessment of variability 
in process relating to eutrophication, water, 
sediment and contaminant transport will be 
done.  This will provide a baseline against 
which future and past changes in ecosystem 
stability can be judged. 
 
3. The accuracy of pre-operational models 
will be improved by the assimilation of 
FerryBox data.  Improved scientific 
understanding of processes (particularly 
eutrophication, sediment resuspension and 
water mass mixing) will be derived through 
the use of a combination of data analysis and 
process modelling. 
 
Examples of other advances 
 
1. Demonstration of the benefits of being 
able to link FerryBox data (which gives 
wide area and detailed cover) to existing less 
frequent time series measurements. 
 
2. Detailed measurement of sediment 
transport in relation to water flow and 
forcing by weather (storms). 
 
3. Measurement of production and biomass 
in a range of environments - near shore 
plumes, open waters and at fronts, effects of 
storm stirring. 
 
4. Contribution to the development of 
Ecological Quality objectives for 
eutrophication (EEA, OSPAR). 
 
5. Database for a pilot project for the North 
Sea on the Ecosystem approach to Fisheries 
management (under the guidance of ICES, 
IOC and EuroGOOS). 
 
6. An effective system for calibration and 
verification of Ferry-Box and related data, 
and recommendations for maintenance anti-
fouling procedures. 
 
7. An effective procedure for the rapid 
transfer of meta-data and quality controlled 
data using a web based approach. 
 
Forward look 
 
In addition to its value in supporting the 
development of prognostic models, the 
future expansion of the FerryBox concept 
has two natural developments.  Firstly, an 
increase in the numberof routes operated.  
New routes will arise from user (scientific 
and management) requirements for 
additional data.  Experience gained in the 
FerryBox project will enable the choice of 
future routes to be optimised.  Secondly, an 
increase in the number of standard variables 
measured.  A range of new sensors have and 
are being developed, some of which, e.g. 
sensors for O
2
, CO
2
, nutrients and active 
fluorescence, will be tested by FerryBox 
operators during this project.  Future 
applications will be determined by the type 
of information needed by the data users.  
Water quality managers within the EU water 
framework directive might be expected to 
require measurements of nutrients and 
dissolved oxygen in waters which are, or are 
potentially, eutrophic.  A combination of 
measurements of plankton productivity and 
algal type may enable harmful algal blooms 
to be forecast.   
 
Southampton Oceanography Centre’s 
(SOC) first FerryBox operation:  
Southampton-Isle of Wight Ferry on the 
Red Funnel - Red Falcon 
 
FerryBoxes are packages of instruments 
(Boxes) mounted in the engine rooms of 
merchant ships working regular routes 
(mostly ferries).  They sub-sample the ships’ 
cooling water intake.  Standard 
measurements on a number of European 
FerryBoxes are temperature, salinity, 
transmission (clarity/suspended solids), and 
chlorophyll-fluorescence (plankton).  These 
are the instruments on the SOC’s first 
FerryBox installed in 1999, on the Red 
Funnel Group ferry the Red Falcon.  The 
purpose of this system is to provide detailed 
monitoring of the growth of plankton in 
Southampton Water and the Solent.  A big 
question mark against many scientific 
findings is - were enough observations made 
for the data to represent the true situation?  
This is a common problem in oceanography 
where the costs of using purpose built 
research vessels to gather data are very high.  
The FerryBox systems can provide a cost-
effective solution to this problem.  We can 
now see when plankton really grows in 
Southampton Water gather than having to 
gathering data when we think it might in 
growing. 
 
Relatively calm water, plentiful sunlight and 
supplies of dissolved nitrogen compounds 
and phosphate in the water are essential for 
the growth of plankton.  The Southampton 
water system receives large loads of the 
essential chemical nutrients for plant growth 
nitrogen and phosphorus from run off of 
agricultural fertilisers and from discharges 
from sewage works.  The Southampton 
Water/Solent system is hypernutrified but it 
is debatable at the moment whether or not 
the system is “eutrophic”.   Eutrophic is a 
term that implies that the ecosystem is being 
damaged by an excessive supply of 
nutrients.  Signs of “eutrophication” (very 
noticeable prolonged blooms of plankton 
and reduced concentration of oxygen in the 
water) were seen in the 1980’s but have not 
occurred recently.  
 
Data from the Red Falcon are being used to 
look in greater detail than has previously 
been possible, at how the growth of plankton 
in the spring and summer is controlled by 
the complex relationships between sunlight, 
concentrations of nutrients and the tidal 
energy of the system, that controls the rate at 
which growing colonies of plankton are 
stirred up and dispersed.  The FerryBox data 
show that plankton growth starts in late 
spring in the less tidally stirred and clearer 
waters of the Solent.  The first bloom will 
occur when good weather at this time of 
year coincides with neap tidal conditions.  
Then throughout the summer into 
September, significant accumulations of 
plankton will occur during neap tides.  In 
exceptional circumstance of good weather, 
plankton will continue to accumulate more 
quickly than they are dispersed during a 
spring tide.  The area of the estuary affected 
moves into Southampton Water in the 
summer towards the source of nutrients 
being supplied by the rivers. 
 
Southampton Oceanography Centre’s 
second FerryBox operation:  Portsmouth 
to Bilbao on the P&O European Ferries - 
Pride of Bilbao 
 
In April 2002, SOC started running a second 
FerryBox on the P&O European Ferry’s 
vessel, the Pride of Bilbao.  This ferry 
operates all year round between Portsmouth  
 
and Bilboa.  It will link the observations we 
are now making in Southampton Water to 
the Atlantic Ocean - the source of the high 
salinity waters in the English Channel.  The 
wealth of data that will be collected on the 
ferry has the potential to improve our 
understanding of a wide range of 
oceanographic processes occurring in the 
Atlantic Ocean and the English Channel.  An 
important objective is to set up a durable, 
reliable and cost effective system that will 
have a sufficiently long life to provide 
baseline information on the influence of 
climatic variability through the region. 
 
Scientific tasks of the Portsmouth Bilboa 
Ferry Box extend from the local to the 
global.  They include:  
 
Local  
null Dispersion of sediments, nutrients 
and other contaminants from the 
Solent into the English Channel. 
null The occurrence and movement of 
plankton blooms between open 
channel waters and the Solent. 
 
Wider area 
null Scaling of the patchiness of plankton 
blooms in regions with different 
hydrographic characteristics along 
the route.  Including the influence of 
fronts in maintaining blooms. 
null Scaling of the frequency and 
intensity of the features related to 
internal waves. 
null Assessment of the transport of water 
masses from the shelf break into the 
English Channel, and the control of 
transport processes on the supply of 
nutrients from the Atlantic Ocean 
into shelf sea waters. 
 
 
Global 
Study of the winter mixing processes which: 
null Transfer heat from the oceans. 
null Control the amount of nutrients in 
the surface layer of the ocean 
controlling the productivity of the 
spring bloom and the draw down of 
carbon. 
null Provide the nutrient supply to shelf 
waters. 
 
Technical development associated with 
the SOC FerryBoxes 
 
Technical development associated with the 
SOC FerryBoxes include: 
 
1. Rapid ship-to-shore communication of 
data from ship to shore so that it can be used 
operationally in numerical models and for 
guiding detailed sampling by research ships. 
 
2. Extension of the analyses performed 
automatically to include surveying of 
biologically produced green house gasses.  A 
major problem in assessing the role of these 
gasses in global warming is a lack of 
knowledge about variability through the 
year of their production rates in the oceans. 
 
3. Use of advanced fluorometric techniques 
to gather physiological information about 
plankton.  On the base of which blooms may 
be predicted and detailed estimates of the 
variation in productivity can be made. 
 
References 
 
Droppert, L.J., Cattle, H., Stel, J.H. Behrens 
H.W.A. (eds) 2000. “The NOOS Plan: 
North West Shelf Operational 
Oceanographic System, 2002-2006”.  
EuroGOOS Publication No.18, 
Southampton Oceanography Centre, 
Southampton. ISBN 0-904175-46-4. 
IOC, 1998.  The GOOS 1998 Prospectus.  
IOC, Paris, 168pp 
IOC, 2000.  The Strategic Design Plan for 
the coastal Component of GOOS.  
GOOS Report 90, IOC, Paris. 
 
Details of EU FerryBox project routes 
(The numbering follows the map on Figure 
1.) 
 
R1 Routes of the FIMR (Finland) Algaline 
project 
 
FerryBox measurements have been made 
operationally by FIMR since 1992.  The 
Algaline project has three sets of FerryBox 
equipment on merchant ships and one on a 
Coast Guard vessel.  FerryBoxes are run in 
co-operation with other research institutes.  
Algaline (FIMR) is co-ordinating the 
project.  Each institute is responsible for the 
maintenance of a given system, practical 
work and laboratory analyses.  FIMR 
provides help on technical problems.  The 
equipment is owned chiefly by FIMR and by 
the other institutes. 
 
The amount of data collected on the ferries 
in the framework of Algaline project is large 
(1.5 million observations annually).  Data is 
quality controlled and inter-calibrated 
annually within the project. 
 
On the ships, salinity, temperature and 
chlorophyll-a fluorescence are measured at 
ca. 5 m depth and in ca. 100 m intervals.  
The samples are considered to represent the 
upper layer. 
 
Route:  Helsinki-Travemunde 
Ship:  cargo ship Finnpartner 
Responsible institute:  FIMR 
Parameters measured onboard:  S, T, Chl-a 
fluorescence 
Lab analyses:  Phytoplankton species, Chl-a, 
nutrients (PO
4
, NO
3
, NH
4
, Si, Total P, 
Total N) 
 
Route:  Helsinki-Stockholm 
Ship:  passenger ship Silja Serenade 
Responsible institute:  Uusimaa Regional 
Environment Centre, Finland 
Parameters measured onboard:  S, T, Chl-a 
fluorescence 
Lab analyses:  Chl-a, nutrients (PO
4
, NO
3
, 
NH
4
, Si, Total P, Total N), turbidity, 
phytoplankton species from some 
samples 
 
Route:  Helsinki-Tallinn-Rostock-Tallinn-
Helsinki (samples taken between Tallinn 
and Helsinki) 
Ship:  passenger ship Finnjet 
Responsible institutes:  City of Helsinki 
Environment Centre, and Finland, 
Estonian Marine Institute 
(phytoplankton analyses) 
Parameters measured onboard:  S, T, Chl-a 
fluorescence 
Lab analyses:  Phytoplankton species, Chl-a, 
nutrients (PO
4
, NO
3
, NH
4
, Si, Total P, 
Total N), turbidity 
 
Route:  Archipelago Sea (2001 first year of 
measurements, good data from two months) 
Ship:  Finnish Coast Guard vessel Telkkä 
Responsible institute:  Southwest Finland 
Regional Environment Centre 
Parameters measured onboard:  S, T, Chl-a 
fluorescence  
Lab analyses:  Chl-a 
 
Potential operations 
Southeast Finland Regional Environment 
Centre is in the project and has FerryBox 
equipment, but does not have them on a 
ship.  Was used on a route in the Eastern 
Gulf of Finland, and they are trying to find a 
new ship. 
 
West Finland Regional Environment Centre 
is also in the project and has FerryBox 
equipment but no ship at present.  They will 
receive EU-Life “Bothnian Bay Project” 
funding for three years starting 2002, this 
should be enough to set up a new route in 
the Gulf of Bothnia.  Equipment was bought 
to the Environmental Centre by local 
industrial companies. 
 
Zooplankton 
FIMR tested a traditional CPR in 
zooplankton monitoring on the route Hanko-
Lubeck in years 1998-1999.  In 2001, the 
shipping company Transfennica bought a 
traditional CPR to FIMR.  It will be used on 
the route Lubeck-Hanko or Trelleborg-
Hanko starting 2002.  The ship crew can 
operate the CPR, but one scientist or 
technical assistant has to take care of the 
maintenance and get the samples.  The goal 
is to have operational zooplankton 
monitoring, which Juha Flinkman is 
developing.  Additionally, U-tow is used on 
the research vessel Aranda.  From 2000 and 
2001, there is data on vertical distribution of 
zooplankton in several sea regions of the 
Baltic. 
 
Uses and dissemination 
Data are used for monitoring and 
assessments, scientific projects, calibration 
and verification of models, and for 
interpreting satellite images.  Quick 
dissemination of information on  HABs and 
phytoplankton species in general to the 
public via faxes, Internet etc., has been very 
important.  Results are presented on the 
Internet in four languages (Finnish, 
Swedish, English and Estonian) on the web 
site made in co-operation with several 
research institutes (for details see 
http://meri.fimr.fi).  Web site will be 
renewed in spring 2002. 
 
Linked operations 
FIMR has co-operation with Finnish Coast 
Guard.  In addition to the flow-through 
system onboard Telkkä, CTD measurements 
are made and samples for oxygen 
concentration analysis are taken in the Gulf 
of Finland on guard ship Merikarhu.  
Additionally, Coast Guard pilots and crew 
of several guard ships make visual 
observations of algal blooms.  Visual 
observations of algal blooms are also made 
by the crew of Transfennica cargo ships.  At 
FIMR, the Ice Service takes care of sea 
surface temperature measurements using 
hull thermometers in cargo ships. 
 
Contact: 
Phytoplankton:  Johanna Argillander and 
Algaline group (E-mail:  
algaline@fimr.fi) 
Zooplankton: Juha Flinkman (E-mail:  
juha.flinkman@fimr.fi) 
http://meri.fimr.fi 
http://meri.fimr.fi/Algaline/eng/EnPublicAlg
alineDB.nsf/ByMeasurementParameter/
52A9CE436C3D8969C22567A1003A4
4F7?OpenDocument 
http://meri.fimr.fi/Algaline/eng/EnPublicAlg
alineDB.nsf/cdee4ceb7a446ce6c22565d
0003d850e/02ebb944bbb8479ac22567eb
0034e8e2?OpenDocument 
 
 
R2 Norwegian Institute for Water 
Research (Norway) 
 
Route:  Oslo (Norway) to Hirtshals 
(Denmark) 
Ship:  Color line Color Festival 
First installed September 2001. 
Measurements continuous since start 
(approx.). 
Journey time:  8-12 hours;  Oslo-Hirtshals 
18:30 - 7:00 (night), return 9:00 -17:00 
(day). 
Measurements:  T and S (Seabird), turbidity 
and chlorophyll-fluorescence (Seapoint), 
light (PAR) (Li-Cor).   
Logging interval is 1 per minute.  Remote 
data transfer continuous over satellite 
link (Internet)  (1 obs./minute). 
Instrument control:  about 1 per week.  
Calibration interval is not decided yet 
(testing). 
Automatic water sampler (ISCO) released at 
pre-installed waypoints and is used for 
control measurements and sampling of 
phytoplankton and nutrients etc. 
 
Purpose 
Constructing and testing the system.  Use it 
in combination with satellite observations 
(calibration of sensors).  Explore the system 
as an early warning system for toxic algae 
blooms. 
 
Contact 
Project leader:  Jan Magnusson (E-mail:  
jan.magnusson@niva.no) 
Co-operator:  Kai Sørensen (E-mail:  
(kai.sorensen@niva.no) 
http://www.niva.no 
 
 
R3 GKSS – Research Centre Geesthacht 
GmbH (Germany) 
 
Route:  Cuxhaven (D) to Harwich (GB) 
(before March 2002 from Hamburg to 
Harwich)  
Ship:  Scandinavian Seaways (Copenhagen, 
DK) Admiral of Scandinavia 
First on installed November 2001  
Journey time:  16h 45min (600 km) (before 
March 2002 - 20h (700 km)).  3-4 return 
voyages per week.  Measurement season 
year around. 
Measurements:  T and S (FSI; USA), 
turbidity (Endress&Hauser; D + 
Turner;USA), pH and O
2
 
(Endress&Hauser; D), fluorescence 
(Turner; USA) 
Algae Classes (bbe; D), NO
3
, NH
4
, PO
4
, 
SiO
2
 (pump photometer: ME; D), NO
3
 
(UV detection; TRIOS; D) 
Measurement rate 0.1 Hz (exception 
nutrients: 10-15 min time interval).  
Logged on board, remote control and 
download (several times per week) by 
cell phone link 
Special features:  Automatic start/stop of the 
system controlled by GPS position, 
extensive  cleaning procedures (after 
each voyage: high pressure flushing of 
certain  sensors (O
2
, pH, fluorometer) 
and flushing with acidified water of the 
whole  system), storage of housekeeping 
data (pressure, flow rates etc.)  
Instruments serviced:  1 per week and 
calibration samples collected. 
 
Purpose  
Monitoring of nutrient load, algae blooms 
(including algae classes) in the southern 
North Sea, validation of remote sensing 
(ENVISAT), calibration of ecological 
models 
 
Developments in 2002 
Check and improvement of algorithms for 
algae classes and calibration with laboratory 
measurements, test of UV-NO
3
 detection, 
test of long time stability, optimisation of 
maintenance intervals 
 
Contact  
Wilhelm Petersen (E-mail:  
wilhelm.petersen@gkss.de) 
Friedhelm Schroeder (E-mail:  
friedhelm.schroeder@gkss.de) 
http://www.gkss.de 
http://coast.gkss.de/projects/ferrybox/ 
 
 
 
R4 Netherlands Institute for Sea Research 
(The Netherlands) 
 
Route:  Texel (Wadden Sea island) to den 
Helder (mainland of the Netherlands)  
Ship:  TESO ferry Schulpengat (since 1998) 
Distance:  4 km 
Travel time:  15 minutes;  Ferry runs from 
06.00 am to 22.00 pm, each 30 minutes, 
thus 30 transects per day 
Sensors in a throughflow system measure 
temperature, salinity and fluorescence at 
1Hz 
ADCP attached near the keel measures 
currents and echo-intensity with a 
frequency of 2 Hz 
Data are transferred to the nearby research 
institute by telemetry each time when the 
ferry is in the harbour on Texel. 
Data are directly shown to the public on a 
screen in the passenger lounge 
 
Contact 
Logistic manager:  Theo Hillebrand (E-mail:  
hill@nioz.nl) 
Software manager:  Frans Eijgenraam  
(E-mail:  eijg@nioz.nl) 
Scientist in charge:  Herman Ridderinkhof  
(E-mail:  rid@nioz.nl) 
http://www.nioz.nl/en/deps/fys/niozteso/enht
ml/niozteso.html 
http://www.nioz.nl/en/deps/fys/niozteso/enht
ml/results.html 
 
 
R5 Proudman Oceanographic Laboratory 
(Liverpool, UK) 
 
Plans for 2002/3 
Route:  Liverpool – Douglas (Isle of Man)  
Ship:  Isle of Man Steam Packet Company 
Lady of Mann 
Winter months only  (October - March) 
Journey time:  4 hours, twice per day, 5 days 
a week (not mid-week) 
Instruments:  Idronaut CTD, Sea-Point 
turbidity and Chelsea Instruments 
MINItracka II fluorimeter & Flow rate 
monitor. 
Status of equipment - being installed 
 
Plan to transmit data (+GPS) by GSM phone 
/ Iridium, instrument a Sea-Cat, measure 
nutrients. 
 
Purpose  
Monitoring of blooms and Mersey plume in 
the eastern Irish Sea 
 
Contact 
Scientist in charge:  John Howarth (E-mail:  
mjh@pol.ac.uk) 
http://www.pol.ac.uk 
 
 
R6 Southampton Oceanography Centre 
(UK) 
 
Route:  Southampton to Cowes (Isle of 
Wight) 
Ship:  Red Funnel Lines Red Falcon 
First installed on April 1999 
Measurement season:  April to October 
Journey time:  1 hour (17 miles), up to 8 
return voyages per day.  
Measurements:  Temperature, conductivity, 
and turbidity (pressure to check flow in 
system) (WS Ocean Systems UMI data 
sonde), Chlorophyll-fluorescence (CI 
Aquatraka) 
Measurement rate:  1 Hz logged on board 
down loaded weekly 
Remote data transfer:  Sample of data 
averaged for 1 minute sent ashore by cell 
phone link at 15-minute intervals 
Instruments serviced:  1 per week and 
calibration samples collected 
 
Plan to extend measurements to nitrate using 
solid state UV based method. 
 
Purpose  
Monitoring of intensity, timing and duration 
of algal blooms in a hyper-nutrified estuary  
 
Contact 
System manager:  Susan Hartman (E-mail:  
suh@soc.soton.ac.uk) 
http://soc.soton.ac.uk 
http://www.soc.soton.ac.uk/GDD/Sonus/ani
mation.htm 
 
 
R7 Southampton Oceanography Centre 
(UK) with Instituto Español de 
Oceanografía Santander, Spain 
 
Routes:  Portsmouth (UK) – Bilbao (Spain) 
(& Portsmouth - Cherbourg) 
Ship:  P & O Eurpean Ferries Ltd Pride of 
Bilbao 
Installed 12 April 2002 
Measurement season:  year round except 
January when ship in refit 
Journey time:  Portsmouth – Bilbao - 34 
hours, 2 per week;  Portsmouth – 
Cherbourg - 10 hours, 1 per week 
Measurements:  Temperature, conductivity, 
Chlorophyll fluorescence (Chelsea 
Instruments Mini-Pack), water flow, 
turbidity (from May 2002) 
Measurement rate:  1 Hz logged on board 
down loaded weekly 
Remote data transfer and control:  Data will 
be transferred to shore using an 
ORBCOMM satellite link.  The effective 
data transfer rate will depend on the 
efficiency of connection to the satellites 
and will only be known when the system 
is operational.  The interface unit being 
developed will allow remote control of 
the instruments – (remote re-boot and 
changes in sampling rates) 
Instruments serviced:  1 per week and 
calibration samples collected 
In 2002, samples for nutrients and 
chlorophyll will be collected manually on 1 
crossing per month. 
 
Plan to extend measurements to nitrate using 
solid state UV based method. 
 
Purpose  
Monitoring of intensity, timing and duration 
of algal blooms, detailed observations of 
mixing events particularly in winter and 
“up-welling” at shelf break front in summer.  
Ground truthing of satellite observations of 
frontal features and changes in “bio-mass”.  
Estimation of events producing significant 
water movement on shelf and the through 
the English Channel.   
 
Developments in 2002 
Development of data interface and satellite 
communications 
Testing of use of a Fast Repetition Rate 
Fluorimeter (Chelsea Instruments 
Fasttraka) 
Work on autonomous (wet chemical) 
nutrient measurements 
 
Contact 
Scientist in change:  David Hydes (E-mail:  
djh@soc.soton.ac.uk) 
Data manager:  Susan Hartman (E-mail:  
suh@soc.soton.ac.uk) 
Control system developments:  Nick Crisp  
(E-mail:  ncr@soc.soton.ac.uk) 
Satellite communications:  Jon Campbell  
(E-mail:  joc@soc.soton.ac.uk) 
 
Pride of Bilbao section will be 
complemented by monthly surveys along the 
Northern Iberian Shelf.  
 
Scientists in chage:  Alicia Lavin and César 
González-Pola (Spain) (E-mail:  
Cesar.Pola@gi.ieo.es) 
 
R.V. José Rioja. Instituto Español de 
Oceanografía (Santander, SPAIN). 
 
To be installed spring-early summer 2002. 
Monthly track along coast and three 
standard perpendicular to coast sections. 
 
Route:  Santander-Gijón-Cudillero (~260 
km) 
Measurements:  Temperature and 
conductivity (SBE21), Chlorophyll-
fluorescence and spectral algae class 
determination (Bbe Fluoroprobe, 
Moldaenke) 
Data will be downloaded monthly when 
finishing the cruises (no real time data 
transmission ). 
 
Purpose 
Study physical features at the southern Bay 
of Biscay (thermohaline fronts due to 
upwelling processes, runoff, poleward 
winter current, eddies shedding, etc.) and 
also algal monitoring. 
 
 
R8 National Centre for Marine Research 
(Greece) 
 
Route:  Athens – Heraklion (Crete)  
Ship:  Minoan Lines  
Scheduled for mid-2003  
Journey time:  9 hours (160 miles)  
Measurements:  Temperature, conductivity, 
turbidity, Chlorophyll-fluorescence  
Measurement rate:  1 Hz logged on board 
down loaded weekly.  Cell-phone data 
telemetry 
Instruments serviced:  1 per week and 
calibration samples collected.  
 
Contact 
Scientists in charge:  Haris Kontoyiannis 
(hk@ncmr.gr) and Kostas Nittis 
(knittis@ncmr.gr)  
http://www.ncmr.gr 
Other associated routes 
 
Route:  Kiel-Oslo by FTZ - Universitaet 
Kiel (Buesum, Germany) 
Using “Blue Box” system developed with 
Go-Systems gmbh 
http://www.go-sys.de/start/start_englisch. 
htm 
Includes development of algal species 
monitor 
Contact:  K. H. Vanselow (E-mail:  
vanselow@ftz-west.uni-kiel.de) 
 
EU Cavasoo project 
Development of CO
2
 monitoring systems on 
4 trans Atlantic routes 
http://envsol.env.uea.ac.uk/temp/tracer/e072
/welcome.htm
 
Appendix 5  
 
List of participants 
 
Canada 
 
Mackas, David L. 
Fisheries & Oceans Canada 
Institute of Ocean Sciences 
P.O. Box 6000, 
Sidney, B.C., V8L 4B2, Canada 
MackasD@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
Welch, David W. 
Fisheries & Oceans Canada 
Pacific Biological Station 
3190 Hammond Bay Road, 
Nanaimo, B.C., V9T 6N7, Canada 
WelchD@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
Japan 
 
Harashima, Akira 
National Institute for Environmental Studies 
Water & Soil Environment Dept. 
16-2 Onogawa, 
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8506, Japan 
harashima@nies.go.jp 
Saitoh, Sei-ichi 
Hokkaido University 
Graduate School of Fisheries Sciences 
3-1-1 Minato-cho 
Hakodate, Hokkaido, 041-8611, Japan 
ssaitoh@salmon.fish.hokudai.ac.jp 
 
 
U.S.A. 
 
Cutchin, David 
7533 Draper Avenue, 
La Jolla, CA  92037, U.S.A. 
dcutchin@ucsd.edu 
 
Decker, Bob 
NOAA 
AOML/OAR/PHOD 
7600 Sand Point Way NE, 
Seattle, WA  98115, U.S.A. 
Bob.Decker@noaa.gov 
 
Letelier, Ricardo 
Oregon State University 
College of Oceanic & Atmospheric Sciences 
104 Ocean Administration Building, 
Corvallis, OR  97331-5503, U.S.A. 
letelier@coas.oregonstate.edu 
 
 
Miller, Charles B. 
Oregon State University 
College of Oceanic & Atmospheric Sciences 
Oceanography Administration Bldg., 
Corvallis, OR  97331-5503, U.S.A. 
cmiller@coas.oregonstate.edu 
 
Mundy, Phillip R. 
Science Coordinator, 
Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Trustee Council 
441 West 5th Avenue, Suite 500, 
Anchorage, AK  99501-2340, U.S.A. 
phil_mundy@oilspill.state.ak.us 
 
Napp, Jeffrey M. 
National Marine Fisheries Service 
Alaska Fisheries Science Center 
7600 Sand Point Way NE, 
Seattle, WA  98115-6349, U.S.A. 
Jeff.Napp@noaa.gov 
Wooster, Warren S. 
School of Marine Affairs 
University of Washington 
3707 Brooklyn Avenue, 
Seattle, WA  98105-6715, U.S.A. 
wooster@u.washington.edu 
 
Zaneveld, Ron 
Oregon State University 
College of Oceanic & Atmospheric 
104 Ocean Administration Building, 
Corvallis, OR  97331-5503, U.S.A. 
zaneveld@coas.oregonstate.edu 
 
 
United Kingdom 
 
Batten, Sonia D. 
Sir Alister Hardy Foundation for Ocean 
Science 
1 Walker Terrace, The Hoe, 
Plymouth, PL1 3BN, United Kingdom 
soba@mail.pml.ac.uk 
 
Hydes, David 
Southampton Oceanography Centre 
Empress Dock, 
Southampton, Hampshire, SO14 3ZH, 
United Kingdom 
djh@soc.sohon.ac.uk 
 
 
 
