 
 
 
 
 
 
PICES Scientific Report No. 3 
1995 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT OF THE PICES-STA WORKSHOP ON MONITORING 
SUBARCTIC NORTH PACIFIC VARIABILITY 
 
Jointly sponsored by PICES and the Science and Technology Agency of Japan 
 
 
Convenor: 
Yukihide Hayashi, Science and Technology Agency, Japan 
 
Co-Chairmen: 
Yasuhiro Sugimori, Tokai University / Chiba University, Japan 
Melbourne G. Briscoe, NOS, NOAA, U.S.A. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December 1995 
Secretariat / Publisher 
North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES) 
c/o Institute of Ocean Sciences, P.O. Box 6000, Sidney, B.C., Canada.  V8L 4B2 
pices@ios.bc.ca 
 iii
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
     Page 
FOREWORD  iv 
 
AGENDA   v 
 
INTRODUCTION:  OCEANIC INTERDECADAL CLIMATE IN THE NORTH 
    PACIFIC OCEAN AND LIVING RESOURCES  
    VARIABILITY 1 
 
PROCEEDINGS  - SUBARCTIC PACIFIC CLIMATE VARIABILITY 
Kimio Hanawa.    Interannual to decadal scale variations in the North Pacific 6 
Lynne D. Talley & Xiaojun Yuan.  Summary of variability of physical conditions  
 in the subarctic North Pacific 16 
Vladimir V. Plotnikov & Gennady I. Yurasov.  Seasonal and interannual variability  
  of ice cover in the North Pacific marginal seas 26 
Stephen C. Riser.  Space and time scales of variability in the subarctic North  
  Pacific:  Implications to monitoring the system 35 
 
  - ECOSYSTEM RESPONSE 
N. Brent Hargreaves. PICES-GLOBEC international program on climate change 
  and carrying capacity 61 
Warren S. Wooster. PICES-GLOBEC International Program on Climate Change 
  and Carrying Capacity - An update on progress 63 
Satoru Taguchi.  Monitoring of lower trophic level variability and response 
  to long-term forcing in the subarctic Pacific Ocean 65 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS 85 
 
 iv
FOREWORD 
 
The PICES Science Board and the Science and 
Technology Agency of Japan held a Workshop on 
Monitoring Subarctic North Pacific Variability, 
October 22-23, 1994, in Nemuro, Hokkaido, 
Japan, in conjunction with the PICES Third 
Annual Meeting.  The Workshop addressed the 
responses of the subarctic Pacific to forcing by 
climate variations and human activities.  The time 
scales considered were seasons to centuries.  The 
first workshop objective was to suggest current 
and future long-term monitoring programs to 
describe significant forcing and responses.  
Second was to suggest scientific, technological 
and other factors that affect the above monitoring 
programs, and third, was to provide a summary 
report that advised on a strategy for developing a 
monitoring program, by 31 January, 1995.  A 
preliminary report and recommendations were to 
be provided to the Science Board at the conclusion 
of the Workshop. 
 
The Workshop was not intended to discuss process 
studies or to review the science of the subarctic 
Pacific, but rather to focus on the long-term 
monitoring programs required for assessment of 
the physical and ecological responses to long-term 
forcing, both natural and man-made.  It was 
expected that much of the monitoring might occur 
under the auspices of the Global Ocean Observing 
System and the Global Climate Observing System. 
 
The Workshop was structured around two themes 
and several sub-themes: 
Subarctic Pacific Climate Variability 
 External forcing; Global Climate Change 
 Subarctic North Pacific 
 Ice-Covered Marginal Sea 
 Space and Time Scales; Sampling Problem 
Ecosystem Response 
 Subarctic Large-Scale Variability 
 Lower Tropic Levels 
 Higher Tropic Levels 
 
Workshop Convenor: 
Y. Hayashi, Science and Technology Agency, 
Japan. 
 
Steering Committee Co-Chairmen: 
Y. Sugimori, Tokai University / Chiba 
University, Japan. 
M.G. Briscoe, NOAA, U.S.A. 
 
Members: 
T.C. Royer, University of Alaska, U.S.A. 
M. Fukasawa, Tokai University, Japan 
J.F. Garrett, IOS, Canada 
G.D. Stauffer, NOAA, U.S.A. 
T. Yamagata, Tokyo University, Japan 
R.C.H. Wilson, MEDS, Canada 
D.Q. Yang, IO, China 
S. Ishii, JAMSTEC, Japan 
W.S. Wooster, PICES 
 
Observers: 
H.D. Ahn, KORDI, Korea 
A. Bychkov, POI, Russia 
V.V. Navrotsky, POI, Russia 
 
 v
AGENDA 
 
October, 22 (Saturday): 
 
1. Introduction 
 
2. Opening remarks by W.S. Wooster 
 
3. Keynote address by Y. Hayashi, Y. Sugimori 
and M.G. Briscoe 
 
4. Subarctic Pacific climate variability 
 i)  K. Hanawa.  Interannual to decadal scale 
variations in the North Pacific 
 ii) L.D. Talley and X.J. Yuan.  Summary of 
variability of physical conditions in the 
subarctic North Pacific 
 iii)  V.V. Plotnikov and G.I. Yurasov.  
Seasonal and interannual variability of ice 
cover in the North Pacific marginal seas 
 iv)  S.C. Riser.  Space and time scales of 
variability in the subarctic North Pacific: 
Implications to monitoring the system 
 
5. Ecosystem Response 
 i)  N.B. Hargreaves.  PICES-GLOBEC 
International Program on Climate Change 
and Carrying Capacity 
 ii)  S. Taguchi.  Monitoring of lower tropic 
level variability and response to long-term 
forcing in the subarctic Pacific Ocean 
 iii)  A.B. Hollowed.  Potential response of 
Northeast Pacific fish stocks to climate 
change 
 
6. Steering Committee Meeting, October 23, 
(Sunday) 
 i)  Working Group for climate variability and 
ecosystem response 
 ii)  Working Group report in Plenary 
 iii)  Steering Committee meeting 
 iv)  Workshop report 
7.Poster Session 
 i)  T. Sugimoto, S. Kimura, and I. Aoki.  
Monitoring of currents and zooplankton 
biomass with ADCP on VOSS 
 ii)  H. Ishii, and T. Takizawa.  Long-term 
variations of atmosphere and ocean in the 
PICES region 
 iii)  S. Saitoh, H. Onishi, and M. Onishi.  An 
applicability of global multichannel sea 
surface temperatures to study on transition 
zone in the central North Pacific Ocean 
 iv)  A. Harashima, R. Tsuda, Y. Tanaka, T. 
Kimoto, H. Tatsuta, and T. Hagiwara.  
Ferry-based biogeochemical monitoring 
from the marginal seas to the subtropical 
gyre 
 v)  Y. Senga, T. Araga and Y. Sugimori.  
Modularized real-time surface-water 
monitoring system 
 vi)  N. Kimura, Y. Okada and H. 
Fukushima.  Estimation of vertical profile 
of chlorophyll concentration around the 
Antarctic Peninsula derived from the 
satellite image (Nimbus-7/CZCS) 
 vii)  M. Ikeda, T. Yao and Q. Yao.  Seasonal 
evolution of sea ice cover and shelf water 
off Labrador simulated in a coupled ice-
ocean model 
 viii)  J. Suwa, M. Kubota and Y. Sugimori.  
Monitoring of the subarctic surface fronts 
in 1988 
 ix)  D. Lee.  Development of ocean 
monitoring system in Korea and its 
connection to North East Asia regional 
GOOS 
 
 
 
 
 1
INTRODUCTION:  OCEANIC INTERDECADAL CLIMATE IN THE 
NORTH PACIFIC OCEAN AND LIVING RESOURCES VARIABILITY 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
 Although there are many important 
examples of climate fluctuations with quasi-
periods of 10-30 years, such interdecadal climate 
variability (ICV) has been given relatively little 
attention by scientists, particularly in comparison 
with the 3-5 year time scale associated with the El 
Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO).  Instances of 
ICV are found in many physical and biological 
systems and can be discerned in high-resolution 
proxy records that are unlikely to have been 
affected by humankind. 
 
 Dynamically, the oceans are likely to play 
a key role in setting the time scale for ICVs.  
Besides having important socio-economic effects, 
an understanding of natural decadal-scale climate 
variations is crucial to differentiating natural 
climate changes from those due to anthropogenic 
forcing, e.g., Greenhouse Warming.  This class of 
interdecadal variations is particularly challenging 
because as well as the oceans, it involves 
interactions between the atmosphere, ocean and 
cryosphere, and is probably also related to 
biogeochemical process. 
 
 Observations of global mean air 
temperature reveal year-to-year variations 
superposed on a long-term trend throughout the 
20th century.  However, there is also important 
decadal-scale variation (Nitta and Yoshinari, 
1992).  The warmest of the past decade is part of a 
long term trend of global warming associated with 
the observed greenhouse gas increases in the 
atmosphere (IPCC 1990). 
 
 A notable climate impact is the influence 
on the change in the pattern of migration of 
salmon to the mouth of Fraser River from the 
south end of Vancouver Island to the north end.  
Other connections range from an increase in the 
chlorophyll concentration of the surface water 
over the North Pacific gyre. 
 
 Another recent example of ICV has come 
from the North Atlantic.  The remarkable 
phenomenon is well known as "Great Salinity 
Anomaly (GSA)".  This event involves a 
freshening of the surface waters of the northern 
North Atlantic during the 1960s and 1970s.  On 
the other hand, deep water masses of the world 
ocean form at both polar extremes of the Atlantic.  
In contrast, the Pacific has a circulation more 
constrained to horizontal layers.  A freshening 
such as the GSA may interrupt the northward 
transport of heat in the Atlantic.  In the North 
Atlantic, deep water formation would reduce 
poleward heat transport by the thermohaline 
circulation.  Aside from redistributing the earth's 
heat and salt, the thermohaline circulation mixes 
water mass properties.  Convective water mass 
formation also plays an important role in 
providing a sink for atmosphere CO
2
 and the 
global CO
2
 budget in the North Atlantic.  
Normally, information on changes below the 
ocean surface are scarce.  In the North Pacific, 
there is evidence that the cooling in SST's over the 
recent decades extends to well below 500m, and 
involves a considerable amount of heat capacity. 
 
 In the remainder of this introduction, we 
focus on examples of interdecadal climate 
variability (the mid-1970s North Pacific climate 
shift) to give a perspective of what is known and 
what is unknown about this class of climate 
variability. 
 
2. MID 1970S NORTH PACIFIC CLIMATE SHIFT 
 
 A reliable analyses of regional patterns of 
sea surface temperature (SST) anomalies for 
decades over the globe can only be carried out for 
the period after 1946.  The most striking and 
largest amplitude anomalies of decade-mean 
temperature in the Northern Hemisphere are found 
for 1977-1986.  In that decade, substantially, 
cooler (>0.5°C) than normal conditions (relative to 
the 1951-80 mean) occurred in central North 
Pacific SST.  There was a large warming (>1.5°C) 
over Alaska and SST increased along the west 
coast of North America, while cooling occurred 
over eastern North America.  This distinctive 
pattern of surface temperature anomalies for 1977-
 2
86 is linked to changes in many other climate 
variables.  At the North Pacific surface, the wind 
stress and wind stress curl changed, and by 
implication the Ekman pump, Sverdrup transport 
and ocean current.  Sea surface temperatures, air 
temperature at the sea interface, sea-ice, and 
stream flow in coastal regions all changed.  Other 
evidence suggests pronounced changes in 
phytoplankton, ocean biology and in fish stocks in 
the North Pacific.  The changes appear to be 
closely linked with low frequency variability in 
the tropical Pacific and Indian Ocean and the El 
Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon.  
At the ocean surface, the wind changes drive 
variation in surface fluxes, ocean mixing and 
ocean current.  In the sea of Okhotsk, sea-ice 
cover often shows a reverse tendency with greater 
than normal values after about 1976 (Sekine 
1989).  Large changes are also found throughout 
the troposphere, that is, the pattern associated with 
strong changes downstream over North America.  
This "Pacific-North American" teleconnection 
pattern is closely linked to the changes in surface 
temperature, moisture and involves changes in 
cloud cover. 
 
 Meanwhile, over the Pacific Northwest, 
the shift to a stronger high pressure ridge over 
western Canada provided changes in both 
temperature and precipitation.  Consequently, air 
temperature and sea-ice cover along the coast of 
Alaska changed (Salmon 1992).  Also stream flow 
in many rivers along coastal Alaska increased 
(Cayan 1991). 
 Changes in the atmospheric circulation 
alter the sensible and latent heat fluxes from the 
ocean surface into the atmosphere.  The flux 
changes observed during the 1970s and 1980s are 
consistent with changes in the observed SST 
pattern (Cayan 1992, a,b,c).  A basin wide change 
in winds is apparent due to the difference between 
wind stress of 1977-1982 and 1971-1976 (Cayan 
et al.) with stronger cyclonic circulation in south 
of the Aleutian Islands after 1976.  In the North 
Pacific, these changes imply changes in the curl of 
wind stress which has implications for the Ekman 
pump and Sverdrup transport (Salmon 1992). 
 
 The decadal changes during the mid 1970s 
also had profound effects on the central and 
eastern Pacific epipelagic ecosystem (Ebbesmeyer 
et al 1991).  Measurements north of Hawaii 
suggest an increase in total chlorophyll in the 
water column and thus, in phytoplankton (Venrick 
et al 1987). The changes in ocean currents and 
temperatures around 1976 have also evidently 
altered the migration pattern of fish, in particular 
tuna and salmon in the North Pacific (Bernet and 
Mysak 1986).  
 
 The space-time scales of the dominant 
ENSO climate signal in the Pacific has been 
associated with a greatly reduced phytoplankton 
biomass in both the western (Dan Donneau 1986) 
and eastern Pacific (Barber et al 1983).   
 
 
 
 3
REFERENCE 
 
Barber, R.T. and F.P. Chavez.  1983.  Biological Consequences of the 1982-93 El Nino.  Science. 
222:1203-1210. 
 
Cayan, D.R.  1992a.  Variability of Latent and Sensible Heat Fluxes Estimated Using Bulk Formulae.  
Atmosphere-Ocean. 30:1-42. 
 
Cayan, D.R.  1992b.  Latent and Sensible Heat Flux Anomalies Over the Northern Oceans:  The 
Connecton to Monthly Atmospheric Circulation. Journal of Climate (in press). 
 
Cayan, D.R.  1992c.  Latent and Sensible Heat Flux Anomalies Over the Northern Oceans:  Driving the 
Sea Surface Temperature.  Journal of Physical Oceanography. 22:859-881. 
 
Cayan, D.R., D.R. Melaio, and W.D. Nichols.  1991.  Monthly Climatic Time Series Data for the Pacific 
Ocean and Western Americas, U.S.Geological Survey.  Open File Report 91-92:380p. 
 
Dandonneau, Y.  1986.  Moniroting the Sea Surface Chlorophyll Concentration in the Tropical Pacific:  
Consequences of the 1982-1983 El Nino.  Fish. Bull. 84(3):687-695. 
 
Ebbesmeyer, D., D. Cayan, D. McClain, W.D. Nicols, D.H. Peterson, and K. Redmond.  1991.  
Sensibility of Marine Biology to Climate Change in a North Pacific Swath.  Proceedings of the 
Seventh Annual Pacific Climate(PACLM) Workshop, Asilmar, California, April 10-13, 1990. 
 
Hanawa, K.  1994.  Interannual to Decadal Scale Variations in the North Pacific.  Proceedings of PICES-
STA Workshop on Monitoring Subarctic Pacific Ocean (PICES & STA):1-5. 
 
Harashima, A., R. Tsuda, Y. Tanaka, T. Kimoto, H. Tatsuta, and T. Hagiwara. 1994.  Ferry-based 
Biogeochemical Monitoring from the Marginal Seas to the subtropical Gyre.  Proceedings of 
PICES-STA Workshop on Monitoring Subarctic Pacific Ocean (PICES & STA):91-96. 
 
Hargreaves, N.B.  1994.  PICES-GLOBEC Int. Program on Climate Change and Carrying Capacity.  
Proceedings of PICES-STA Workshop on Monitoring Subarctic Pacific Ocean (PICES & 
STA):69-70. 
 
Hollowed, A.  1994.  Potential Response of Northeast Pacific Fish Stocks to Climate Change.  
Proceedings of PICES-STA Workshop on Monitoring Subarctic Pacific Ocean (PICES & 
STA):79-82. 
 
Ikeda, M., T. Yao, and Q. Yao.  1994.  Seasonal Evolution of Sea Ice Cover and Shelp Water off 
Labrador Simulated in a Coupled Ice-Ocean Model.  Proceedings of PICES-STA Workshop on 
Monitoring Subarctic Pacific Ocean (PICES & STA):109-113. 
 
Ishii, H., and T. Takizawa.  1994.  Long-term Variations of Atmosphere and Ocean in the PICES.  
Proceedings of PICES-STA Workshop on Monitoring Subarctic Pacific Ocean (PICES & 
STA):84-88. 
 
Kimura, N., Y. Okada, and H. Fukushima.  1994.  Estimation of Vertical Profile of Chlorophyll 
Concentration around the Antarctic Peninsula Derived from the Satellite Image.  Proceedings of 
PICES-STA Workshop on Monitoring Subarctic Pacific Ocean (PICES & STA):102-108. 
 4
Lee, D.  1994.  Development of Ocean Monitoring System in Korea and its Connection to North East 
Asia Regional GOOS.  Proceedings of PICES-STA Workshop on Monitoring Subarctic Pacific 
Ocean (PICES & STA):136-143. 
 
Mysak, L.A.  1986.  El Nino, Interanual Variability and Fisheries in the Northeast Pacific Ocean.  Can. J. 
of Fish. and Aquat. Sci. 43:434-497. 
 
Nitta, T., and J. Yoshimura.  1992.  Interannual and Interdecatal Variations of Global Surface Air 
Temperature, U/M. 
 
Plotnikov, V., and G. Yurasov.  1994.  Seasonal and Interannual Variability of Ice Cover in the North 
Pacific Marginal Sea.  Proceedings of PICES-STA Workshop on Monitoring Subarctic Pacific 
Ocean (PICES & STA):13-24. 
 
Riser, S.  1994.  Space and Time Scales of Variability in the Subarctic North Pacific:  Implications to 
Moniroting the System.  Proceedings of PICES-STA Workshop on Monitoring Subarctic Pacific 
Ocean (PICES & STA):25-67. 
 
Saitoh, S., H. Onishi, and M.Onish.  1994.  An applicability of Global Multichannes Sea Surface 
Temperatures to Study on Transtion Zone in the central North Pacific Ocean.  Proceedings of 
PICES-STA Workshop on Monitoring Subarctic Pacific Ocean (PICES & STA):89-90. 
 
Salmon, D.  1992.  On Interannual Variability and Climate Change in the North Pacific, PhD thesis.  
Univ. of Alaska. 
 
Sekine, Y.  1988.  Anomalous Southward Intrusion of the Oyashio East of Japan 1. Influence of the 
Interannual and Seasonal Variations in the wind Stress Over the North Pacific.  J.Geophys.Res. 
93(C3):2247-2255. 
 
Senga, Y., T. Araga, and Y. Sugimori.  1994.  Modularized Realtime Surface-Water Monitoring System.  
Proceedings of PICES-STA Workshop on Monitoring Subarctic Pacific Ocean (PICES & 
STA):97-101. 
 
Sugimoto, T., S. Kimura, and I. Aoki.  1994.  Monitoring of Currents and Zooplankton Biomass with 
ADCP on VOSs.  Proceedings of PICES-STA Workshop on Monitoring Subarctic Pacific Ocean 
(PICES & STA):83. 
 
Suwa, J., M. Kubota, and Y. Sugimori.  1994.  Monitoring of the Subarctic Surface Fronts in 1988.  
Proceedings of PICES-STA Workshop on Monitoring Subarctic Pacific Ocean (PICES & 
STA):114-135. 
 
Taguchi, S.  1994.  Monitoring of Lower Trophic Level Variability and Response to Long-term Forcing 
in the Subarctic Pacific Ocean.  Proceedings of PICES-STA Workshop on Monitoring Subarctic 
Pacific Ocean (PICES & STA):71-78. 
 
Talley, L., and X. Yuan.  1994.  Summary of Variability of of Physical Condition in the Subarctic North 
Pacific.  Proceedings of PICES-STA Workshop on Monitoring Subarctic Pacific Ocean (PICES 
& STA):6-12. 
 
Vernick, E.L., J.A. McGowan, D.R. Cayan, and T.L. Hayward.  1987.  Climate and Chlorophyll a Long-
term Trends in the Central North Pacific Ocean.  Science. 23B:70-72. 
 5
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proceedings: 
SUBARCTIC PACIFIC CLIMATE VARIABILITY 
 6
Long-term Variations of the North Pacific 
 
 
Kimio HANAWA 
 
 
Department of Geophysics, Graduate School of Science, 
Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.  980-77 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Long-term variations of sea surface temperature (SST), atmospheric forcing of the oceanic circulation and 
the upper thermal condition in the North Pacific are briefly described.  It is insisted that the subsurface 
thermal data taken by TRANSPAC program are very useful to detect the interannual to decadal variations 
of the upper ocean thermal conditions and it is proposed that new monitoring program should be 
established to replace the TRANSPAC program. 
  
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
 It is urgently necessary that we clarify the role of the ocean in global climate change due to the 
increasing greenhouse gasses.  To do this, it goes without saying that a careful search for various kinds of 
archived oceanic data is needed.  Since interannual to decadal scale variations of climate are considered to 
be major manifestations of large-scale air-sea interaction, special attention must be paid to both 
atmospheric and oceanic conditions and their mutual relationship.  El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) 
events are good examples of such phenomena.  Recently, many authors have pointed out significant 
signals with decadal to interdecadal time scales in the North Pacific and in the Northern Hemispheric 
atmospheric circulation.  These phenomena are also considered to be the manifestations of large-scale air-
sea interaction and to be the next investigation target of ENSO events.    
 
 In this paper, recent studies of long-term variations of sea surface temperature (SST) fields, 
atmospheric forcing of the oceanic circulation and the thermal conditions of the upper ocean will briefly 
be reviewed.  In addition, it will be shown that subsurface thermal data taken by the TRANSPAC 
program have been very useful, and indeed critical, in the detection of long-term variations of the upper 
thermal conditions in the northern North Pacific. 
 
 The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:  in Section 2, long-term variations found in 
SST fields of the North Pacific are reviewed and in Section 3, and changes of the atmospheric forcing of 
the oceanic circulation are also described.  In Section 4, preliminary result of change of the upper ocean 
thermal condition is briefly described and in Section 5, the necessity of a new monitoring program is 
stressed. 
  
2. LONG-TERM VARIATIONS OF NORTH PACIFIC SST FIELDS 
 
 Empirical orthogonal function (EOF) analyses for SST fields have been completed by several 
authors since late 1970s.  Recently, Tanimoto et al. (1995a) have shown the existence of two distinctive 
patterns:  one is that with the El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) time scale of 3-4 years (ENSO mode:  
Fig. 1).  The other is that with decadal (DC) time scale (decadal mode:  Fig. 2).  The ENSO and decadal 
 7
mode patterns were extracted by examining the band of periods 24-60 months, and the low frequency 
band, longer than 60 months, all computed from winter SST anomalies. 
 
 The leading mode of the DC time scale is a meridional dipole pattern:  a north-south oscillation of 
low-latitude and mid-latitude oceans.  Time coefficients of this mode (Fig. 2(b)) showed abrupt changes, 
like a step function, around 1976, i.e., mid 1970s, and continued to late 1980s.  This abrupt change may 
be called a "Climatic Jump" or "Regime Shift" and will be discussed in the next section.  In addition to 
this abrupt change, we can observe relatively short time-scale fluctuations in the 1950s. 
 
 This DC mode pattern is also clearly extracted by the composite analysis for the two categorized 
winters (DP and DN winters, see figure caption of Fig. 2 for the definition), as shown in Fig. 3.  This 
means that the pattern extracted by EOF analysis is well organized and is a very robust feature. 
   
 It was also found that wind stress fields over the North Pacific varies coherently with SST fields 
described above, as shown in Fig. 4, in which composite maps of wintertime wind stress vector anomalies 
are shown (Tanimoto et al., 1995b).  In DN (DP) winters, the elongated elliptical cyclonic (anticyclonic) 
pattern centered on 40N and the international date line appeared in the anomaly fields.  These anomaly 
fields of wind stress vectors correspond to the southward (northward) shift of the westerly axis and 
strengthening (weakening) of westerlies in DN (DP) winters. 
 
3. ABRUPT CHANGE OF ATMOSPHERIC FORCING OCCURRED IN MID 1970S 
 
 The abrupt change of atmospheric circulation over the North Pacific occurred around the mid 
1970s and was noticed in late 1980s by meteorologists:  e.g., Kashiwabara (1987), Nitta and Yamada 
(1989) and Trenberth (1990).  Nitta and Yamada (1989) showed that since the mid 1970s, SST anomalies 
in the whole equatorial region of the Pacific Ocean have taken positive values, like a condition during 
ENSO events (see Fig. 3(b)).  These positive SST anomalies in the equatorial region forced excitation of 
standing Rossby wave trains, the so-called Pacific/North American (PNA) teleconnection pattern over the 
North Pacific, which is responsible for the strengthening and eastward shift of the Aleutian Low, as well 
as strengthening of wintertime westerlies over the Pacific sector. 
  
 It is easily imagined that the strengthening of wintertime midlatitude westerlies since the mid 
1970s would change the forcing of oceanic conditions in various aspects.  The lowering of SSTs in the 
central Pacific as extracted by EOF analysis mentioned above. can be interpreted as one of the results.  
The strengthening of wintertime midlatitude westerlies can also cause an increase of Sverdrup transports 
in both the subtropical and subpolar gyres as shown by Hanawa (1995).  Actual evidence of the spin-up 
of the subtropical gyre will be described in the next section.  In addition, it is very interesting to note that 
since the mid 1970s to late 1980s, the Oyashio First Intrusion gradually penetrated southward off the 
Sanriku Coast (Hanawa, 1995) and the large meander of the Kuroshio off Honshu Island occurred since 
1975.    
 
4. CHANGE OF SUBSURFACE THERMAL CONDITION 
 
 Analysis for the upper thermal condition also shows the existence of DC time scale variation 
coherent with SST fields mentioned above.  Watanabe and Mizuno (1994) analyzed the subsurface 
thermal data including XBT (Expendable Bathythermograph) data taken in the North Pacific.  Fig. 5 
shows a time-longitude matrix of 0-400m vertically averaged temperature anomalies along the 35-45 °N 
latitude band (a), and that of SST (b).  It is seen that heat content anomaly changed its sign from positive 
before 1976 to negative after 1976, corresponding to that of SST anomalies. 
 8
 Spin-up/spin-down of the North Pacific subtropical gyre in recent decades could also be detected 
by using the subsurface temperature data (Yasuda and Hanawa, 1995).  Fig. 6 shows the Sverdrup 
transport at 30 °N and 130 °E (a) and the temporal change of heat content difference between the north 
(39 °N) and south (29 °N) regions of the Kuroshio Extension.  Although there is some time lag between 
both time series, they clearly show the increasing trend from 1960s to 1980s.  This means that the North 
Pacific subtropical gyre has gradually been spun-up during the analyzed period.  This change can be 
explained by that of wind stress field over the North Pacific (see Fig. 4).  It was also shown that, 
corresponding to this change, thicknesses of the wintertime mixed layer in the midlatitude ocean and 
those of 15-19 °C layer (Subtropical Mode Water) in the northwestern subtropical gyre vary coherently. 
 
 Analysis for the long-term variations of the upper ocean thermal conditions has just begun.  
Careful inspection of those data will give us much interesting and useful information on the oceanic role 
in climate change. 
 
5. CONCLUDING REMARKS - ESTABLISHMENT OF NEW MONITORING PROGRAMS IN THE PICES 
AREA 
 
 As mentioned in the previous section, the subsurface thermal data are essential for clarification of 
the change of oceanic conditions, such as, circulation fields, propagation of Rossby waves, water masses, 
front movement and the depth and temperature of mixed layer, and so on.  At the present time, the most 
suitable and practical way to monitor the subsurface thermal conditions is through XBT measurements 
using the Voluntary Observing Ships (VOS).  Actually, under this understanding, TOGA/WOCE 
XBT/XCTD Program Planning Committee (TWXXPPC) has negotiated arrangements to monitor the 
world oceans by VOS.  Fig. 7 shows present TOGA/WOCE XBT monitoring network (WOCE IPO, 
1992). 
 
 The northern North Pacific, that is, the PICES area has been monitored relatively very well since 
early 1970s.  This monitoring (PX-26 in Fig. 7) has been done under the so-called "TRANSPAC" 
program operated by NOAA with the financial support of the US Navy from early 1970s. 
 
 By using the XBT data accumulated in this program, clarification of structure and its changes of 
the upper ocean has been made from various viewpoints.  Among them, for example, Rossby wave 
propagation was observed in the North Pacific Current (White, 1982), the behaviour of the paths of the 
Kuroshio and the Kuroshio Extension were analyzed (Mizuno and White, 1983) and interannual 
variability in the heat content of the Kuroshio Extension associated with 1982 ENSO event was found 
(White and He, 1986). 
 
 However, since 1993 when the US Navy stopped funding to the TRANSPAC program, the 
number of XBT measurements is now decreasing: before 1992, approximately 3500 XBT profiles were 
available, while they were reduced to about 2000 in 1993 (see Fig. 8:  NOAA NOS, 1994) and to about 
1500 in 1994. 
 
 Therefore, as international or multinational program, the establishment of a new XBT monitoring 
program like as TRANSPAC is urgently required.  TWXXPPC already recommended the establishment 
of TRANSPAC XBT pool like TOGA XBT pool (WOCE IPO, 1994). 
 
 The author believes that PICES can play an important role in the establishment of a new 
functional monitoring program in succession to TRANSPAC XBT program. 
 
REFERENCES 
 9
 
Hanawa, K.  1995.  Southward penetration of the Oyashio water system and the wintertime condition of 
midlatitude westerlies over the North Pacific.  Bull. Hokkaido Natl. Fish. Res. Inst. 59:103-120. 
 
Kashiwabara, T.  1987.  On the recent winter cooling in the North Pacific.  Tenki. 34:777-781 (in 
Japanese). 
 
Mizuno, K., and W.B. White.  1983.  Annual and interannual variability in the Kuroshio Current System.  
J. Phys. Oceanogr. 13:1847-1867. 
 
Nitta, T., and S. Yamada.  1989.  Recent warming of tropical sea surface temperature and its relationship 
with Northern Hemisphere circulation.  J. Meteor. Soc. Japan. 67:375-383. 
 
NOAA NOS.  1994.  1993 Global summary real-time XBT data. 167 p. 
 
Tanimoto, Y., N. Iwasaka and K. Hanawa.  1995a.  Seasonal dependence of sea surface  temperature 
anomalies with multiple time scales in the North Pacific.  Submitted to J.Climate. 
 
Tanimoto, Y., N. Iwasaka and K. Hanawa.  1995b.  Relationship between the sea surface thermal 
condition, the atmospheric general circulation and the air-sea transfers on multiple time scales.  
Submitted to J.Climate. 
 
Trenberth, K.E.  1990.  Recent observed interdecadal climate change in the Northern Hemisphere.  Bull. 
Amer. Meteor. Soc. 71:988-993. 
 
Watanabe, T., and K. Mizuno.  1994.  Decadal changes of the thermal structure in the North Pacific.  Int. 
WOCE Newsletter. 15:10-13. 
 
White, W.B.  1982.  Traveling wave-like mesoscale perturbations in the North Pacific Current.  J. Phys. 
Oceanogr. 12:232-233. 
 
White, W.B., and Y. He.  1986.  Interannual variability in the heat content of the Kuroshio Extension 
associated with the 1982 ENSO event.  J. Phys. Oceanogr. 16:309-321. 
 
WOCE IPO.  1992.  TOGA/WOCE XBT/XCTD Programme Planning Committee Rep. 1st Meeting 
(TWXXPPC-1). 25 p. 
 
WOCE IPO.  1994.  TOGA/WOCE XBT/XCTD Programme Planning Committee Rep.  3rd Meeting 
(TWXXPPC-3) and WOCE Upper Ocean Data Assembly Centers.  Coordination Group Rep. 5th 
Meeting (WOCE UOT/DAC-5). 36 p. 
 
Yasuda, T., and K. Hanawa.  1995.  Temporal variability of the thermal structure in the North Pacific.  
Part 1: Decadal change.  Submitted to J. Phys. Oceanogr. 
 10
 
 11
 
 12
 
 13
 
 14
 
 15
 
 16
Summary of Variability of Physical Conditions  
in the Subarctic North Pacific 
 
 
Lynne D. TALLEY and Xiaojun YUAN 
 
 
Scripps Institution of Oceanography 
La Jolla, CA 92093-0230, U.S.A. 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
 A brief summary of studies of variability in SST, sea surface height, atmospheric forcing, 
circulation, and water properties for the subarctic Pacific is given, with emphasis on the central and 
eastern regions.  Most studies have been for the first few variables, with much less attention paid to 
salinity distributions and circulation including the barotropic component.  The importance of salinity for 
near-surface stratification is quantified. 
 
 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
 
 Variability in the subarctic North Pacific has been reviewed recently for PICES (Denman et al., 
1991;  Okuda et al., 1991;  PICES WG1, 1994), as a basis for discussions of climate change.  The IOC 
has also recently reviewed decadal variations in Pacific subarctic SST and relations with the atmosphere 
(UNESCO, 1992);  their report should be an important input to the monitoring discussion.  This workshop 
continues the general discussion, with more emphasis on what is most likely to be unknown and what 
should be monitored in the subarctic region.  It is presumed that the principal goal of this knowledge and 
monitoring is improvement in understanding, and perhaps even predictions, of interannual change in 
weather and fishery conditions in the subarctic region and surrounding land masses. 
 
 Much of the analysis of interannual and decadal variability in the North Pacific has been in terms 
of winds, sea surface temperature (SST), and major current transports.  Although it is clearly recognized 
and stated that salinity is the dominant factor in the upper ocean stratification of the subarctic gyre, little 
emphasis has been given to its temporal variability.  This is probably due to the meteorological and 
fishery bias of many of the analyses of the upper ocean, since SST is the principal item of oceanographic 
interest for atmospheric modeling and fishery predictions.  A much smaller data base might also be a 
culprit, but there are data enough to at least begin such an analysis, and on which to base 
recommendations for future sampling. 
 
 The following paragraphs are intended to provide background for discussion of uncertainties and 
future monitoring, and are not intended to be an inclusive review of subarctic variability. 
 
2.  SURFACE VARIABILITY AND ATMOSPHERIC FORCING 
 
 The dominant mode of variability for the atmosphere and the ocean surface temperature in the 
subarctic North Pacific has been shown to be associated with the Pacific-North American (PNA) mode, 
which consists in the atmosphere of a strengthening of the Aleutian Low, centered near the dateline and 
40 °N (Davis, 1976; Horel and Wallace, 1981;  Namias et al., 1988;  Hanawa et al. 1989a,b; Hanawa, 
 17
1991;  Trenberth, 1990).  When the Aleutian Low is enhanced, the sea surface temperature is low in the 
western and central subarctic gyre, and high in the eastern Gulf of Alaska, presumably due to the 
enhanced cyclonic ocean circulation.  More of the North Pacific Current flows northward into the Gulf of 
Alaska when the Aleutian Low is strong (Chelton and Davis, 1982).  Hanawa (1991) has also shown that 
there is warming in the Kuroshio region as part of this dominant mode.  SST in the subarctic gyre lags 
atmospheric pressure, unlike in the tropics where the ocean leads the atmosphere. 
 
 Despite the simplicity of the atmospheric PNA teleconnection pattern showing the downstream 
relation of the Aleutian Low to El Nino (Horel and Wallace, 1981), the strength of the Aleutian Low has 
been shown in recent years to be somewhat independent of El Nino.  In particular there was a protracted 
period, from 1976 until 1988, in which the low was especially strong (Trenberth, 1990; Hanawa, 1991;  
Ebbesmeyer et al., 1991);  this period included three El Nino's.  Initiation of the shift in 1976 appears to 
have been due mainly to anomalous surface heat flux (Miller et al., 1994). 
 
 The southern limit of the subarctic circulation depends on the definition.  Near the sea surface, the 
subarctic halocline, which provides the stratification between the mixed layer and the underlying ocean, 
outcrops within the subarctic frontal zone (Roden, 1991), which is 4 ° latitude wide on average (Yuan, 
1994).  The associated temperature front is an important salmon boundary.  The subarctic frontal zone 
location has a several degree latitude range, but appears to have little systematic seasonal or interannual 
variation (Yoshida, 1993;  Kazmin, 1994;  Yuan, 1994).  The salinity and salinity gradient associated with 
it also have little seasonal dependence (Yuan, 1994).  The temperature gradient is stronger in summer 
(Kazmin, 1994).  In all seasons the temperature and salinity gradients are nearly density-compensating 
across the front. 
 
 The subarctic front arises near the western boundary when the Oyashio separates from the coast.  
Even there it is a relatively density-compensated feature.  The frontal zone is advected eastward across 
the Pacific, and slightly southward relative to the general circulation, probably due to Ekman advection to 
the right of the prevailing westerlies.  In the eastern Pacific, the frontal zone lies several degrees south of 
the maximum average Ekman transport. It is generally characterized by two strong fronts, although in the 
western Pacific it sometimes appears as one, and in the eastern Pacific sometimes as three or more fronts.  
The fronts within the subarctic frontal zone may be maintained in their abruptness by the local Ekman 
transport, which is convergent through most of the year except the winter (and hence not in the annual 
average) (Yuan, 1994).  The principal unknowns with respect to the subarctic front are what its true scale 
is (due to the lack of very high resolution measurements), whether it has a significant seasonal cycle (due 
to lack of winter and spring measurements), what maintains the abruptness of individual fronts within it if 
anything, why it is nearly density-compensating, and how the shallow salinity minima which extend to 
the southeast from the subarctic frontal zone are formed locally. 
 
 Below the surface layer, the southern limit of the subarctic region can be identified with the 
northern limit of the main subtropical salinity minimum, North Pacific Intermediate Water (NPIW). The 
boundary is coincident with the subarctic front in the western Pacific, but is several degrees north of it in 
the eastern Pacific (Talley et al., 1991;  Zhang and Hanawa, 1993;  Yuan, 1994), probably due to 
southward Ekman advection of the surface waters as stated before.  Part of the NPIW may advect 
northward into the Gulf of Alaska (Musgrave et al., 1992; Talley et al., 1991; Zhang and Hanawa, 1991). 
Zhang and Hanawa (1991) looked at interannual variation of the boundary between the subarctic and 
subtropical water masses for 1978-1990, and found that the front was clear and identifiable from 170 °E to 
the dateline, with variation of no more than 2 °. There has been no systematic study of the temporal 
variability of this boundary in the eastern Pacific, and there has been no study of its seasonal variability 
anywhere.  
 
 18
 The importance of salinity in the vertical and lateral property structure of the subarctic Pacific can 
be illustrated using the Turner angle (Ruddick, 1983) and an adaptation of it to lateral gradients of 
temperature and salinity.  The Turner angle is Tu=arctan[(N
T
-N
S
)/(N
T
+N
S
)] 
 
where N
T
= α
∂
∂
Τ
n
 and N
S
= β
∂
∂
S
n
 where n is either the vertical or lateral coordinate. 
  
Fig. 1 shows the distribution of Turner angles for the surface layer, based on both the vertical 
stratification and the meridional gradients.  It is clear that north of the subarctic front (about 40 °N), both 
the vertical and meridional density structures are dominated by salinity.  It appears essential then that any 
monitoring program must include salinity.  It also would seem essential that any study of the seasonal, 
interannual, and decadal time scales in the subarctic region should include study of the salinity structure. 
 
3.  GULF OF ALASKA AND NORTHERN CALIFORNIA CURRENT 
 
 A short recent review of variability in the northeastern Pacific can be found in Kelly et al. (1993).  
In the eastern North Pacific the North Pacific Current bifurcates into northward flow around the cyclonic 
Alaskan Gyre, and southward flow into the California Current.  The bifurcation point and strength of flow 
in the two directions is time dependent (Chelton and Davis, 1982).  Interannual variation appears to be 
linked mainly to the strengthening of the Aleutian Low discussed above.  The time scales are 
interdecadal, as indicated above, and there also appears to be a shorter period El Nino time scale, as 
documented by Van Scoy and Druffel (1993).  They present evidence for flow of subpolar water into the 
California Current (to 30 °N) during non-El Nino years (weak Aleutian Low), and no subpolar water at 
that location during El Nino years.  They also indicate that vertical mixing in the Alaska gyre is more 
vigorous during El Nino years (strong Aleutian Low). 
 
 Royer (1993) suggests that about 30% of the interannual oceanic signal in the northeast Pacific is 
associated with the 18.6-year nodal tide.  Substantiation is through comparison of recent ocean time series 
with air temperature, and then demonstration of the tidal signal in a 150-year record of air temperature.  
Because explanations for the non-El Nino interdecadal signal in the northern North Pacific (e.g. the 1976-
1988 "regime") are so complex (Miller et al., 1994), it seems that the tidal ideas should receive 
consideration. 
 
 The winds and wind stress curl in the Gulf of Alaska have a strong seasonal cycle. However, the 
baroclinic transport of the Alaska Stream does not respond strongly to this seasonal cycle (Royer, 1981;  
Musgrave et al., 1992);  instead it has a much stronger interannual variation (Royer, 1981).  This is likely 
related to the turning latitude for the annual baroclinic Rossby wave, which lies south of the subarctic 
gyre.  The fresh water runoff into the Gulf of Alaska, which contributes about 40% of the fresh water for 
the northeast Pacific, also has a strong seasonal cycle which is correlated with a seasonal cycle in 
baroclinic transport very close to the Alaska coast (Royer, 1982). 
 
 Barotropic response of the currents in the Gulf of Alaska to the winds, on the other hand, is well 
established for short time scales (e.g., Niiler and Koblinsky, 1985;  Chave et al., 1992);  no long time 
series of barotropic motion exist.  Chave et al. show that the ocean's barotropic mode near 40 °N in the 
central Pacific is coherent with several atmospheric variables;  the response is non-local suggesting 
propagation of Rossby waves over the rough topography. Kelly et al. (1993) used the short existing 
Geosat altimetry record to show the two modes of the eastern Pacific:  strong and weak California Current 
(Chelton and Davis, 1982), and that the variations in surface height are related to local Ekman pumping, 
rather than to Rossby wave propagation. 
 
 19
 The only long time series which exists for the interior Gulf of Alaska is that at Ocean Weather 
Station Papa (50 °N, 145 °W) and the section east of it into the Canadian coast.  Tabata et al., (1986) and 
White and Tabata (1987) describe the variability in steric height and deeper anomalies over the years, 
showing that heating controls the steric height offshore of Canada while the freshwater sources control it 
along the coast, and that there is westward propagation of anomalies with a period of 2-5 years, 
respectively. 
 
 Large eddies along the eastern boundary of the Gulf of Alaska have not received much attention.  
Tabata (1982) describes the eddy often found off Sitka. Another eddy is often found off Queen Charlotte.  
The NOARL model suggests a progression of semi-permanent large eddies along the eastern boundary.  
Their dynamical forcing and effect on the gyre circulation, if any, has yet to be considered. 
 
4.  WESTERN SUBARCTIC GYRE 
 
 Variability in the western subarctic gyre was reviewed by Okuda et al. (1992), and in the PICES 
Working Group 1 report (1994).  The western subarctic gyre is fed from the east by the Alaska Stream, 
and may also contain an enclosed strong cyclonic circulation elongated along the Kuril Islands.  The 
extent and time dependence of the connection with the eastern subarctic is not quantified, due to a lack of 
time series observations. 
 
 Until recently there appeared to be relatively few estimates of boundary current transports in this 
region other than around Japan.  The WG1 report lists a set of recent baroclinic transport estimates for the 
East Kamchatka Current; the largest variations seem to be associated with the presence or absence of the 
large Kuril eddies.  The East Kamchatka Current and Oyashio appear to have significant barotropic 
components, which have not been well measured at all.  The Oyashio transport variations relative to 
standard depths are regularly documented, but do not include the barotropic component.  Sekine (1988) 
shows that the strength of the southward intrusion of the Oyashio water into the Mixed Water Region has 
some relation to the variation in Sverdrup forcing over the subarctic Pacific, but variations in the 
baroclinic transport of the Oyashio are not easily related to Sverdrup forcing changes. 
 
 A series of large eddies (200 km diameter) along the Kuril Islands has been observed in various 
ways over the past decade (e.g., Bulatov and Lobanov, 1984; see PICES WG1 report). These eddies may 
propagate slowly northward, entraining subarctic waters. Their relation to the Oyashio and East 
Kamchatka Current has not been clarified, nor are their dynamics understood. 
 
 Variability in the circulation of the Okhotsk and Bering Seas has not been quantified, other than 
to indicate that there are changes.  The sea ice cover in both marginal seas has been better described and 
related to interannual changes in atmospheric conditions. Overland et al. (1994) and Stabeno and Reed 
(1994) review and present what is currently known about the circulation of the Bering Sea, pointing out 
the considerable eddy activity within most of the region except along the boundaries.  No time scales for 
variability are indicated.  Likewise, it is apparent that the Okhotsk Sea has a great deal of eddy activity, 
which is likely to be responsible for mixing the various inputs such as the saline Soya Current water, 
inflowing North Pacific water, and ventilated shelf water. 
 20
5.  SUMMARY 
 
 Large uncertainties regarding variability in the subarctic Pacific exist in a number of areas. A 
major one is the variability of salinity and the freshwater sources: the surface stratification is determined 
by salinity, with densest ventilation occurring where the waters are most saline (brine rejection due to sea 
ice in the Bering and Okhotsk Seas, and where saline subtropical waters are injected into the subarctic in 
the Okhotsk Sea and through Tsugaru Strait into the region adjacent to the Oyashio).  Salinity probably 
plays a role in vertical mixing of surface properties downwards as well.  It appears though that no 
systematic studies have been made, or might be possible with the available data set, of the correspondence 
of the circulation and SST with surface salinity. A second major area of uncertainty is the nature of the 
changes in the circulation, and the effect of the circulation on SST.  The dominant atmospheric and SST 
modes have been established.  There has been significant progress in looking at sea surface height.  
However, changes in the circulation, water properties including salinity, and barotropicity of subarctic 
currents (which appears to be large), as well as the role of the large eddies in the western and eastern 
boundary regions are much less well studied.  Basic phenomena of the subarctic circulation and water 
properties are not understood: the formation and maintenance of the Kuril and eastern boundary eddies, 
the processes which create the subarctic front and maintain it across the Pacific, the maintenance of the 
nearly isothermal layer which extends through the halocline, quantification of the changes in circulation 
and ventilation due to sea ice formation and melt, and so on. 
 
 Future monitoring efforts must concentrate on the interannual changes of the subarctic ocean as 
they relate to atmospheric variables.  The barotropic response must be included, which thus involves 
much shorter time scales as well.  The principal processes controlling the strength of the Aleutian Low 
should be elucidated, including the complicated relationship with El Nino, which has a much shorter time 
scale.  Salinity cannot be ignored in any such studies.  Modeling efforts, including sufficiently realistic 
topography because of the importance of the barotropic ocean response and a realistic inclusion of salinity 
as an independent variable must continue to be encouraged.  Mixing of temperature and salinity must be 
properly parameterized and modeled. Models synthesizing altimetry and in situ measurements should be 
developed as the model physics become better honed.  Observations must be continued, both for 
providing basic information for understanding processes which are not now understood, as well as for 
providing the basic long time series needed for monitoring and improving models. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Bulatov, N.V. and V. Lobanov.  1984.  Investigation of mesoscale eddies east of Kuril Islands on the 
basis of meteorological satellite data.  Issledovanie Zemli iz Kosmosa (Soviet J. Rem. Sensing) 3-
1983:40-47 (in Russian). 
Davis, R.E.  1976.  Predictability of sea surface temperature and sea level pressure anomalies over the 
North Pacific Ocean.  J. Phys. Oceanogr. 6:249-266. 
 
Denman, K.L., H.J. Freeland and J.F. Garrett.  1991.  Climate change in the subarctic Pacific Ocean. Part 
I.  Atmospheric and oceanographic evidence.  PICES Scientific Workshop, Seattle, 10-13 
December 1991, Part A, Summ. Rep. and Rev. Pap. 
 
Ebbesmeyer, C., D. Cayan, D. McClain, W.D. Nichols, D.H. Peterson and K. Redmond, 1991: Sensitivity 
of marine biology to climate change in a North Pacific swath. Proc. 7th Ann. Pacific Climate 
(PACLIM) Workshop, Asilomar, CA, April 10-13, 1990. 
 
 21
Favorite, F., A.J. Dodimead and K. Nasu.  1976  Oceanography of the Subarctic Pacific region, 1960-71. 
Bull. Int. North Pacific Comm. 33:1-187. 
 
Hanawa, K., Y. Yoshikawa, and T. Watanabe.  1989.  Composite analyses of wintertime wind stress 
vector fields with respect to SST anomalies in the western North Pacific and the ENSO events: 
Part I. SST composite. J. Met. Soc. Japan.  67:385-400. 
 
Hanawa, K., Y. Yoshikawa, and T. Watanabe.  1989.  Composite analyses of wintertime wind stress 
vector fields with respect to SST anomalies in the western North Pacific and the ENSO events: 
Part II. ENSO composite, J. Met. Soc. Japan.  67:833-844. 
 
Hanawa, K.  1991.  Long-term variations in physical environments in the Pacific Ocean, p. 19-28.  In T. 
Kawasaki, S. Tanaka, Y. Toba, and A. Taniguchi [ed.] Long-term variability of pelagic fish 
populations and their environment. Pergamon, Oxford. 
 
Horel, J.D. and J.M. Wallace.  1981.  Planetary scale atmospheric phenomena associated with the 
Southern Oscillation.  Monthly Weath. Rev., 109:813-829. 
 
Kazmin, A.  1994.  Estimates of frontogenesis in the North Pacific.  Abstract, The Oceanography Society 
Pacific basin meeting, July 19-22, 1994, Honolulu. 
 
Kelly, K.A., M.J. Caruso and J.A. Austin.  1993.  Wind-forced variations in sea surface height in the 
northeast Pacific Ocean.  J. Phys. Oceanogr. 23:2392-2411. 
 
Miller, A.J., D.R. Cayan, T.P. Barnett, N.E. Graham, and J.M. Oberhuber.  1992.  Interdecadal variability 
of the Pacific Ocean: model response to  observed heat flux and wind stress anomalies.  Clim. 
Dyn. 4:287-302. 
 
Musgrave, D.L., T.J. Weingartner and T.C. Royer.  1992.  Circulation and hydrography in the 
northwestern Gulf of Alaska.  Deep-Sea Res. 39:1499-1519.   
 
Nagata, Y. and K. Ohtani.  1989.  Subarctic North Pacific.  Japan-U.S. WOCE workshop 3, Kyoto, Japan. 
 
Namias, J., X. Yuan and D.R. Cayan.  1988.  Persistence of North Pacific sea surface temperature an 
atmospheric flow patterns.  J. Climate. 1:682-703. 
 
Niiler, P.P. and C.J. Koblinsky.  1985.  A local time-dependent Sverdrup balance in the eastern North 
Pacific Ocean. Science. 229:754-756. 
 
Okuda, K., K. Mizuno and K. Kitani.  1991.  Some important features in the oceanographic environment 
of the PICES area and their relationship to the fisheries problems.  PICES Scientific Workshop, 
Seattle, 10-13 December 1991, Part A, Summ.  Rep. and Rev. Pap. 
 
Overland, J.E., M.C. Spillane, H.E. Hurlburt and A.J. Wallcraft.  1994.  A numerical study of the 
circulation of the Bering Sea basin and exchange with the North  Pacific Ocean.  J. Phys. 
Oceanogr. 24:736-758. 
 
PICES Working Group I.  1995.  The Okhotsk Sea and Oyashio Region. North Pacific Marine Science 
Organization (PICES) Report 2: 227 p. 
 22
Roden, G.  1991.  Subarctic-subtropical transition zone of the North Pacific:  Large-scale aspects and 
mesoscale structure. In J.A. Wetherall [ed.] Biology Oceanography and Fisheries of the North 
Pacific Transition Zone and the Subarctic Frontal Zone. NOAA Technical Report. 105:1-38. 
 
Royer, T.C.  1982.  Coastal fresh water discharge in the northeast Pacific.  J. Geophys. Res. 87:2017-
2021. 
 
Royer, T.C.  1993.  High-latitude oceanic variability associated with the 18.6-year nodal tide.  J. 
Geophys. Res. 98:4639-4644. 
 
Ruddick, B.  1983.  A practical indicator of the stability of the water column to double-diffusive activity. 
Deep-Sea Res. 30:1105-1107. 
 
Sekine, Y.  1988.  Anomalous southward intrusion of the Oyashio east of Japan.  1. Influence of the 
seasonal and interannual variations in the wind stress over the North Pacific.  J. Geophys. Res. 
93:2247-2255. 
 
Tabata, S.  1982.  The anticyclonic, baroclinic eddy off Sitka, Alaska, in the northeast Pacific Ocean.  J. 
Phys. Oceanogr. 12:1260-1282. 
 
Tabata, S., B. Thomas and D. Ramsden.  1986.  Annual and interannual variability of steric sea level 
along Line P in the northeast Pacific Ocean.  J. Phys. Oceanogr. 16:1378-1398. 
 
Talley, L.D.  1993.  Distribution and formation of North Pacific Intermediate Water. J. Phys. Oceanogr. 
23:517-537. 
 
Talley, L.D., Y. Nagata, M. Fujimura, T. Kono, D. Inagake, M. Hirai, and K. Okuda.  1994.  North 
Pacific Intermediate Water in the Kuroshio/ Oyashio mixed water region.  J. Phys. Oceanogr. 
25:475-501. 
 
Talley, L.D.  1995.  Salinity extrema from thermohaline tilting. Submitted to J. Phys. Oceanogr. 
 
Trenberth, K.E.  1990.  Recent observed interdecadal climate changes  in the northern hemisphere. Bull. 
Amer. Meteorol. Soc. 71:988-993.   
 
UNESCO, 1992:  Oceanic interdecadal variability.  Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission 
technical series. 40: 37p. 
 
Van Scoy, K.A. and E.R.M. Druffel.  1993.  Ventilation and transport of thermocline and intermediate 
waters in the northeast Pacific during recent El Ninos. J.  Geophys. Res. 98:18083-18088. 
 
Warren, B.A. and W.B. Owens.  1985.  Some preliminary results concerning deep northern boundary 
currents in the North Pacific.  Progr. in Oceanogr. 14:537-551. 
 
White, W.B. and S. Tabata.  1987.  Interannual westward- propagating baroclinic long-wave activity on 
Line P in the eastern midlatitude North Pacific.  J. Phys. Oceanogr. 17:385-396. 
 
Yoshida, T.  1993.  Sea surface temperature fronts around the south boundary of the western North 
Pacific Subarctic gyre. PICES Nemuro Workshop on western subarctic circulation '93, Sept 19-
23, 1993. 
 23
Yuan, X.  1994.  Characteristics and frontogenesis of the subarctic front in the North Pacific. Ph.D. thesis, 
Scripps Institution of Oceanography, U. Calif. San Diego. 
 
Zhang, R.C. and K. Hanawa.  1993.  Features of the water-mass front in the northwestern North Pacific.  
J. Geophys.Res. 98:967-975. 
 
 
 24
 
 
 
 
 25
 
 26
Seasonal and Interannual Variability of Ice Cover 
in the North Pacific Marginal Seas 
 
 
Vladimir V. PLOTNIKOV & Gennady I. YURASOV 
 
 
Pacific Oceanological Institute 
43 Baltiyskaya Street, Vladivostok, Russia.  690041 
 
 
 Due to thermal inertia, ice conditions of the Okhotsk, Bering and Japan Seas are one of the most 
expressive indicators for variability of the climatic system in the whole North Pacific.  One of the main 
generalized characteristics of ice conditions is ice cover (Maksimov, 1977;  Plotnikov, 1987;  L. 
Gidrometeoizkdat, 1977). 
 
 Most essential input to the evolution of ice processes in these frozen seas is made by seasonal and 
interannual fluctuations (Plotnikov, 1987;  Zubakin, 1987).  Still, for these seas, the quantitative analyses 
of similar variability needs further study. 
 
 As the initial data, mean 10-day values of the ice cover in the Pacific marginal seas were used 
starting from 1960.  These values were obtained by averaging maps of ice surveys from aircraft 
performed in the region, and then they were corrected with the help of all data available (vessel 
observations, satellite data, etc.)  The time interval of studies included the period from December to May 
for the Okhotsk and Bering Seas, and from December to April  for the Japan Sea.  The choice of such 
periods is determined by climatic peculiarities of the considered water areas (L. Gidrometeoizdat, 1977). 
 
1. SEASONAL VARIABILITY 
 
 Seasonal fluctuations of the ice cover conditions in the Pacific marginal seas are mainly 
conditioned by astronomical forcing and possess a vividly expressed annual period.  These oscillations 
are superimposed by fluctuations conditioned by of regional hydrometeorological factors. 
 
 To analyze the processes of the seasonal evolution for the ice cover, a theory of periodically 
correlated random processes was used (Zakharov, 1981).  To represent the seasonal character of ice 
processes the typical curves were computed of seasonal motion of ice cover for mild, normal and severe 
winters were drawn (Fig. 1), with an estimation of the standard deviations (Fig. 2) that characterize their 
variability. 
 
 Distribution of estimates shows a vividly expressed annual motion of the ice cover and a local 
minimum of variability during the periods of maximal development of ice conditions.  Variability 
maxima are generally related to the periods of development and destruction of the ice cover except the 
Bering Sea, where variability maximum appears to be connected with the start of the period of the ice 
destruction.  Differences in the analyzed characteristics are expressed first in absolute values and in terms 
when different phases start to take place. 
 
 27
 Thus, the ice cover maximum in the Okhotsk Sea takes place in March, that of the Japan Sea  in 
February;  and for the Bering Sea, there are, two periods of possible maxima of the ice cover:  at the end 
of February and early of April. 
 
 Some similarity of the ice processes in the Okhotsk Sea and the Japan Sea, as well as distinct 
differences in the Bering Sea (in statistical sense) are probably related to the nature of the evolution of the 
large-scale system of hydrometeorological parameters of the North Pacific (L. Gidrometeoizdat, 1977). 
 
 To estimate seasonal variability, the correlation matrices of the ice cover distribution interrelation 
were constructed (Table 1-3).  These matrices show that the correlations during the ice season generally 
preserve their sign.  This fact reflects the stability (in a statistical sense) of tendencies arising in the ice 
processes.  The maximal sluggishness of the processes (the largest duration of significant relations 
satisfying 95% level of significance) is related to the periods when ice cover is a maximum.  For the 
Okhotsk Sea this period lasts from February to March;  and for the Bering Sea, from the end of January to 
April;  and for the Sea of Japan, from January to April.  The duration of significant correlations during 
these periods reaches 3-4 months (i.e. state of ice conditions just during these periods influences further 
evolution of ice processes).  The least sluggishness of the processes occurs at the beginning of the ice 
period.  This can be easily explained by the initial nonstability of the ice processes at the beginning of ice 
formation, when even small disturbances of the external factors can lead to radical redistribution of the 
new formed ice cover.  To a lesser extent, such a fact is also a characteristic for the end of the ice period . 
 
2. INTERANNUAL VARIABILITY 
 
 To estimate long-term variability, the many years ice cover series for the same 10-day periods 
were prepared.  They were used to calculate statistical estimates of the correlation functions and 
frequency spectra.  They permit us to determine to a first approximation some peculiarities of the long-
term variability, as well as to repeat the main energy-carrying frequencies and their amplitudes. 
 
 The schemes show (Fig. 3) that the time of relaxation of the autocorrelation functions generally 
exceeds the data time spacings (one year).  Along with this, the autocorrelation functions show the 
presence of the quasiperiodic components (Fig. 4).  The periods of 2-3 years, 7-8 years, 11 years and 22 
years are distinguished.  With some confidence it is possible to distinguish the 2-3 year variability, 
considering the data available (33 years). 
 
 Investigations performed recently (the INPOC Programme, etc.) permit us to suggest that such 
periodicity is possibly typical of the whole climatic system in the Pacific Ocean Subarctic Zone.  A 
possible interpretation of the mechanism for formation of such variability, at least as a first 
approximation, can be presented as a chain of cause and effect relationships. 
 
 The disturbance of the thermodynamic equilibrium in the Subarctic Front zone in September of 
1991 lead to the increase of the interlatitudinal heat- and mass-exchange, which in turn increased the level 
of inhomogeneity of the typical subarctic water and lead to sharp contrasts of temperature between the 
ocean-atmosphere and the continents in winter of 1991 - 1992.  (This conclusion is made on the basis of 
analyzing the cruise data obtained in the bounds of the INPOC Programme and it is presented in the 
Report on 60 Cruise of RV "PRILIV", 1993).  
 
 Along with the noted characteristics, the whole complex of the hydrometeorological parameters, 
including heat storage of the upper 1,000 m layer of the ocean, was changed.  The next fact is 
intensification of circulation activity and enforcing of heat-exchange processes between the atmosphere 
and the ocean, which lead to the extreme cooling of the active layer in the North Pacific in winter of 
 28
1991-1992.  Secondary effect of the stated processes was expansion of the area of the western subarctic 
subtype of waters in spring of 1992 (Fig. 5).  (Many researchers distinguish the western and the eastern 
subtypes of the subarctic waters.  The main difference between these subtypes consists of the fact that the 
western subtype possess a distinct subsurface cold layer, and the eastern one does not possess it, or it is 
very weak.  Corresponding to these subtypes, the subarctic zone of the Pacific Ocean can be divided into 
two areas - western and eastern.  Here the location of the division can be considered as some indicator of 
the hydrological processes in the Subarctic zone of the Northern Pacific).  Until the fall of 1992 the cold 
intermediate layer formed as a result of winter convection, was preserved, and the area of its distribution 
even increased to some extent due to advection and mixing processes.  Thus, for the winter of 1992-1993 
the western area had lower heat storage of waters and the active circulation in the system of the western 
marginal currents transporting the cold water.  This lead to decreasing of temperature contrasts between 
the ocean, atmosphere, and the continents.  The given changes caused a decrease of heat exchange at the 
sea surface and a decrease of dynamic activity, which lead to relatively mild winter conditions.  
Correspondingly, the margin of the western subtype of waters in winter of 1993 shifted to the west as 
compared to that a year before. 
 
 In the eastern sector, according to the proposed suggestions, the processes were more diverse. 
This is indirectly show by the results of the successive comparison of smoothed temperature values on the 
isopicnic surfaces along 50° N, as well as values of their difference from one survey to another. This 
gives the opportunity to suggest the presence of some balance mechanism between the thermohaline 
characteristics of the western and eastern zones, separating the subarctic zone of the North Pacific into 
two parts. 
 
 In view of such notions it is possible to explain the phase opposition of the ice processes in the 
Japan and Okhotsk Seas compared to the Bering Sea, as well as its exceptions.  This is related to the 
position of the boundary between the western and the eastern subtypes of waters of the subarctic zone.  
The phase opposition is explained by the location of the mentioned seas in the zones of predominance of 
different subtypes of the subarctic structure of waters.  A possible shift of the boundary between the 
waters subtypes far to the east, when the predominant part of the Bering Sea would be located in the area 
of the western subtype of waters, would result in a shift in ice processes in all North Pacific marginal 
Seas. 
 
 The peaks of spectral density occurring at the periods of 11 years and 22 years, probably are 
related to the heliophysical factors.  This periodicity is marked in many climatic systems also. 
 
 Considering the problem of classification by the variability character, we can distinguish as a 
separate group the initial period of ice formation including December, where the correlation and 
especially spectral functions differ considerably from the same functions during the other periods.  This is 
also the reflection of the non-stability of ice processes during the initial period of ice formation. 
Consequently, the ice cover during the period of its primary formation cannot be considered as indicator 
of the climatic processes.  In space and time, a distinct non-regularity of the weight distribution of some 
cyclic components of variability is observed.  While during the periods of the ice growth the process of 7-
8 year periodicity prevail, during the ice destruction periods it is observed the shift of energy-carrying 
characteristics to the area of lower frequencies and the fluctuations of 11 years and 22 years periods start 
to predominate.  It is noted the more expressed predominance of 7-8 years variability in the Okhotsk and 
Japan Seas and 11 and 22 years variability in the Bering Sea. 
 
 Besides the noted periodicities there is a series of secondary cycles, which probably are overtones 
of main oscillations, and their relative input to their total variability is considerably lower. The large-scale 
variability of ice cover in the Pacific marginal seas is a useful guide, to possible changes in climatic 
 29
conditions, and similar variations are observed by researchers for the other hydrometeorological 
characteristics as well. 
 
 Taken together it is hoped that such studies can make useful additions to our understanding and 
of the  functioning of a complicated climatic system as the North Pacific. 
 
 
REFERENCES  
 
Maksimov, I.V., E.I. Sarukhanyan and N.P. Smirnov.  1977.  Cosmogeophysical background of 
macroprocesses in the ocean and atmosphere and super long-ranged forecast. L. Gidrometeoizdat. 
1977:18-25. 
 
Plotnikov, V.V. 1987.  Estimation of the space - time conjugation of ice conditions in the Far Eastern 
seas. FERNI. 36:79-88. 
 
Rozhkov, V.A.  1979.  Methods of the probability analysis of oceanic processes. L. Gidrometeoizdat. 
1979: 230 p.      
 
Physical fundamentals of the theory of climate and its modelling. - L. Gidrometeoizdat. 1977: 127 p. 
 
Zakharov, V.F.  1981.  Ice of Arctical and the present - day natural processes. L. Gidrometeoizdat. 1981: 
136 p. 
 
Zubakin, G.K.  1987.  Large-scale variability of the state of the Nort-European basin sea ice cover. L. 
Gidrometeoizdat. 1987: 160 p. 
 
 
 30
 
 
 
Table 1. Correlation matrix of seasonal ice interconnections ( Okhotsk Sea ) 
 
   10 December  January February March April May 
  Month   day    I   II   III    I   II   III   I   II   III   I   II   III   I   II   III    I   II   III
    I 1 . 0 0                  
December   II  0.70 1.00                 
  III   0.38 0.67 1.00                
    I 0.24 0.48 0.79 1.00               
 January   II 0.21 0.32 0.65 0.79 1.00              
  III 0.11 0.38 0.49 0.67 0.73 1.00            
    I  0.31 0.41 0.41 0.59 0.56 0.881.00           
 February   II  0.40 0.44 0.43 0.56 0.65 0.890.951.00          
  III 0.41 0.43 0.48 0.50 0.64 0.840.870.941.00         
    I 0.32 0.29 0.31 0.38 0.38 0.670.790.790.881.00        
 March      II 0.29 0.33 0.29 0.33 0.31 0.650.750.700.820.911.00       
  III 0.20 0.25 0.26 0.37 0.46 0.80 0.78 0.81 0.90 0.88 0.88 1.00      
    I 0.23 0.31 0.34 0.34 0.54 0.79 0.750.810.870.800.770.911.00     
 April   II 0.16 0.26 0.42 0.37 0.52 0.78 0.760.790.830.720.690.800.851.00     
  III 0.09 0.10 0.27 0.24 0.44 0.68 0.64 0.66 0.72 0.66 0.61 0.70 0.74 0.91 1.00    
    I 0.04 0.04 0.27 0.29 0.40 0.56 0.48 0.47 0.58 0.58 0.60 0.61 0.61 0.72 0.85 1.00   
 May   II 0.18 0.25 0.37 0.44 0.40 0.61 0.50 0.49 0.60 0.50 0.62 0.60 0.61 0.65 0.70 0.87 1.00 
  III 0.51 0.33 0.23 0.37 0.43 0.30 0.33 0.39 0.46 0.34 0.42 0.34 0.32 0.20 0.21 0.38 0.61 1.00
 
 
 
 
Table 2. Correlation matrix of seasonal ice interconnections ( Bering Sea ) 
 
   10 December January February March April May 
  Month  day    I   II   III    I   II   III   I   II   III   I   II   III   I   II   III    I   II   III
    I 1 . 0 0                  
December   II  0.83 1.00                 
  III   0.49 0.65 1.00                
    I 0.16 0.40 0.75 1.00               
 January   II 0.25 0.55 0.68 0.83 1.00              
  III 0.25 0.43 0.59 0.54 0.78 1.00            
    I  0.06 0.27 0.53 0.49 0.61 0.791.00           
 February   II  0.29 0.36 0.39 0.27 0.40 0.520.711.00          
  III 0.26 0.39 0.40 0.84 0.45 0.550.590.791.00         
    I 0.07 0.20 0.19 0.19 0.36 0.390.320.650.731.00        
 March      II 0.01 0.14 0.20 0.28 0.42 0.420.410.710.660.851.00       
  III 0.21 0.40 0.50 0.37 0.56 0.65 0.61 0.75 0.60 0.71 0.84 1.00      
    I 0.22 0.39 0.57 0.44 0.51 0.61 0.660.780.600.650.730.901.00     
 April   II 0.26 0.43 0.57 0.35 0.46 0.57 0.590.760.680.700.700.880.911.00     
  III 0.21 0.37 0.54 0.31 0.43 0.51 0.63 0.75 0.67 0.68 0.67 0.83 0.84 0.90 1.00    
    I 0.20 0.39 0.40 0.40 0.58 0.63 0.60 0.70 0.69 0.73 0.72 0.85 0.80 0.88 0.86 1.00   
 May   II 0.12 0.32 0.34 0.39 0.51 0.55 0.51 0.70 0.65 0.77 0.73 0.79 0.83 0.84 0.77 0.92 1.00 
  III 0.00 0.19 0.16 0.22 0.26 0.34 052 0.67 0.51 0.52 0.56 0.56 0.69 0.71 0.62 0.71 0.77 1.00
 
 
 31
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3. Correlation matrix of seasonal ice interconnections ( Japan Sea ) 
 
    10 December January February March April 
Month   day    I   II   III    I   II   III    I   II   III    I   II   III     I   II   III 
    I 1.00               
December   II 0.59 1.00              
  III 0.22 0.49 1.00             
    I 0.03 0.29 0.59 1.00            
January   II 0.16 0.42 0.30 0.64 1.00           
  III 0.02 0.39 0.56 0.57 0.76 1.00          
    I 0.64 0.21 0.31 0.57 0.62 0.73 1.00         
February   II 0.23 0.35 0.28 0.46 0.71 0.71 0.73 1.00        
  III 0.12 0.08 0.01 0.26 0.69 0.50 0.38 0.66 1.00       
    I 0.07 0.00 0.13 0.09 0.51 0.51 0.47 0.53 0.75 1.00      
March   II 0.12 0.04 0.11 0.12 0.52 0.42 0.38 0.56 0.81 0.77 1.00     
  III 0.37 0.30 0.27 0.18 0.57 0.59 0.38 0.64 0.74 0.72 0.66 1.00    
    I 0.41 0.18 0.12 0.06 0.49 0.46 0.41 0.36 0.46 0.57 0.37 0.61 1.00   
April   II 0.40 0.32 0.31 0.09 0.44 0.56 0.33 0.61 0.47 0.33 0.40 0.67 0.47 1.00  
  III 0.66 0.36 0.34 0.15 0.22 0.19 0.25 0.38 0.12 0.02 0.17 0.43 0.44 0.53 1.00
 
 
 
 
 32
 
 33
 
 34
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 35
 
 36
 
 37
 
 38
 
 39
 
 40
 
 41
 
 42
 
 43
 
 44
 
 45
 
 46
 
 47
 
 48
 
 49
 
 50
 
 51
REFERENCES 
 
Bendat, J.S., and A.G. Piersol.  1971.  Random Data:  Analysis and Measurement Procedures. Wiley-
Interscience, New York. 407 p. 
 
Bretherton, F.P., R.E. Davis, and C.B. Fandry.  1976.  A technique for objective analysis and design of 
oceanographic experiments applied to MODE-73. Deep-Sea Research. 23:559-581. 
 
Chelton, D.B., and R.E. Davis.  1982.  Monthly mean sea-level variability along the west coast of North 
America.  Journal of Physical Oceanography. 12:757-784. 
 
Davis, R.E., D.C. Webb, L.A. Regier, and J. Dufour.  1992.  The autonomous Lagrangian circulation 
explorer (ALACE). Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology. 9:264-285. 
 
Halpern, D., W. Knauss, O. Brown, M. Freilich, and C. Wentz.  1994.  An atlas of monthly mean 
distributions of SSMI surface wind speed, ARGOS buoy drift, AVHRR/2 sea surface 
temperature, AMI surface wind components, and ECMWF surface wind components during 
1992. Jet Propulsion Laboratory Publication 94-4. Unpublished report. 
 
Hare, S.  1995.  PhD Dissertation, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, U.S.A. 
 
Hu, J.H., and P.P. Niiler.  1987.  NEPAC current meter and XBT data for the circulation in the northeast 
Pacific thermocline:  42N and 28N, 152W;  July 1982-October 1985. SIO Ref. 87-4.  
Unpublished report. 
 
Jacobs, G.A., H.E. Hurlburt, J.C. Kindle, E.J. Metzger, J.L. Mitchell, W.J. Teague, and A.J. Wallcraft.  
1994.  Decade-scale trans-Pacific propagation and warming effects of an El Nino anomaly. 
Nature. 370:360-363. 
 
Miller, S., and C. Wunsch.  1973.  The pole tide. Nature. 246:98-102. 
 
Niiler, P.P.  1994.  Surface currents of the Pacific Ocean as measured by Lagrangian drifters (abstract). 
Proceedings of the Oceanography Society Pacific Basin Meeting, Honolulu, July 1994. 
 
Reed, R.K.  1990.  A year-long observation of water exchange between the North Pacific and the Bering 
Sea. Limnology and Oceanography. 35:1604-1609. 
 
Reynolds, R.  1994.  Surface velocity. In US WOCE Report 1994. US WOCE Implementation Report 
Number 6, US WOCE Office, College Station Texas. Unpublished report. 
 
Rhines, P.B.  1976.  The dynamics of unsteady currents. In E.D. Goldberg [ed.] The Sea, 6. John Wiley, 
New York. 
 
Roden, G.I.  1989.  Analysis and interpretation of long-term climatic variability along the west coast of 
North America. In D.H. Peters [ed.] On Aspects of Climate Variability in the Pacific and Western 
Americas. Geophysical Monograph 55, American Geophysical Union. 
 
Royer, T.C.  1989.  Upper ocean temperature variability in the northeast Pacific:  is it an indicator of 
global warming? Journal of Geophysical Research. 94:18,175-18,183. 
 
 52
Royer, T.C.  1993.  High-latitude oceanic variability associated with the 18.6 year nodal tide. Journal of 
Geophysical Research. 98:4,639-4,644. 
 
Schmitz, W.J., P.P. Niiler, and C.J. Koblinsky.  1987.  Two-year moored instrument result results along 
152E. Journal of Geophysical Research. 92:10,826-10,834. 
 
Stabeno, P.J., and R.K. Reed.  1991.  Recent Lagrangian measurements along the Alaskan Stream.  Deep-
Sea Research. 38:289-296. 
 
Stewart, R., L.L. Fu, and M. Lefebvre.  1986.  Science opportunities from the Topex/Poseidon mission. 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory Publication 86-18. Unpublished report. 
 
Stommel, H.M.  1989.  The Slocum mission. Oceanography, April 1989 issue. 
 
Tabata, S.  1989.  Trends and long-term variability of ocean properties at Ocean Station P in the northeast 
Pacific Ocean. In D.H. Peterson [ed.] Aspects of Climate Variability in the Pacific and Western 
Americas. Geophysical Monograph 55, American Geophysical Union. 
 
Trenberth, K.E., and J.W. Hurrell.  1994.  Decadal atmosphere-ocean variations in the Pacific.  Climate 
Dynamics. 9:303-319. 
 
White, W.B., and R.L. Bernstein.  1979.  Design of an oceanographic network in the midlatitude North 
Pacific. Journal of Physical Oceanography. 9:592-606. 
 
Wunsch, C.  1967.  The long-period tides. Reviews of Geophysics. 5:447-476. 
 
Wunsch, C.  1981.  Low-frequency variability of the sea. In Evolution of Physical Oceanography:  
Scientific Surveys in Honor of Henry Stommel. MIT Press, Cambridge, U.S.A. 623 p. 
 
Wunsch, C., and D. Stammer.  1994.  The TOPEX/POSEIDON data. In US WOCE Report 1994.  US 
WOCE Implementation Report Number 6, US WOCE Office, College Station Texas.  
Unpublished report. 
 
 
 53
 
 54
 
 55
 
 56
 
 57
 
 58
 
 59
 
 60
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proceedings: 
ECOSYSTEM RESPONSE 
 61
PICES-GLOBEC International Program on  
Climate Change and Carrying Capacity 
 
 
Brent HARGREAVES 
 
 
Chairman, Steering Committee 
Pacific Biological Station, Nanaimo, Canada 
 
 
 The North Pacific Marine Sciences Organization (PICES) and the Global Ocean Ecosystem 
Dynamics Program (GLOBEC) agreed in 1993 to jointly organize an international science program on 
“Climate Change and Carrying Capacity” (CCCC) in the temperate and subarctic regions of the North 
Pacific Ocean. 
 
 PICES is interested in studying Climate Change and Carrying Capacity due to the remarkable 
changes that have occurred in the North Pacific in recent decades, in both the open ocean and marginal 
seas.  Concurrent changes in atmospheric pressure and ocean temperatures indicate that in 1976 and 1977 
the North Pacific shifted from one climate state, or regime, to another that has persisted through the 
1980s.  Analyses of the North Pacific sea surface temperatures (SST) and atmospheric flow have 
identified a pattern of regime shifts in SST, the atmospheric Pacific/North American index, and the 
southern oscillation index, lasting several years to decades.  Specifically, since 1976 there has been an 
intensification of the Aleutian low during the winter (November through March).  The centre of the low 
has shifted further east and is now about 4 mb deeper, on average.  There have also been associated 
changes in wind stress curl, the corresponding Sverdrup transport, a warming over Alaska, and a cooling 
in the central and western North Pacific.  The strength of flows in the Alaska and California Currents also 
appear to fluctuate out-of-phase.  Global modelling studies further suggest that if global warming occurs, 
its effects will be most strongly developed in high latitudes. 
 
 Although the important linkages are currently poorly understood, there is growing evidence that 
biological productivity in the North Pacific responds to these decadal-scale shifts in atmospheric and 
oceanic conditions, by flipping between periods of high and low productivity.  In coastal areas, both the 
far eastern and California stocks of Pacific sardine peaked in abundance in the 1920s and 30s, declined 
significantly in the 1950s and 1960s, then began to increase synchronously in the mid-1970s.  Large scale 
changes in pelagic fish production in the western Pacific, and in year class synchrony in recruitment of 
numerous important fish stocks in the eastern North Pacific, suggests coastal production is linked to 
variations in ocean climate.  In the central North Pacific Ocean, there was a 50% increase in the average 
summer primary production, a two-fold increase in the summer biomass of zooplankton during the same 
period.  The combined, national catches of salmon in the North Pacific also apparently declined steadily 
from historic highs in the late 1930s to a low in the mid-1970s.  However, by the late 1970s there was a 
striking increase and the combined salmon catches subsequently had risen two- to three-fold, to nearly the 
historic high levels for this century.  During any particular ocean climate regime the productivity of some 
species may be high, while the productivity of other species may be low.  For example, major shifts in the 
dominant fish species has occurred among sardine, anchovy and mackerel in the Kuroshio-Oyashio 
Current region from the 1970s to 1980s.  In addition to the decadal-scale regime shifts, longer-term global 
climate change may result in substantial changes in the biological carrying capacity of the North Pacific. 
 The CCCC Program will address how climate change affects ecosystem structure, and the 
productivity of key biological species at all trophic levels in the open ocean and coastal North Pacific 
 62
ecosystems.  The physical environmental changes that have occurred in this century, particularly during 
the late 1970s, may provide a natural experiment for studying such questions. 
 
PICES-GLOBEC SCIENCE PLAN 
 
 The CCCC Program will take a broad ecosystem approach, with a strong emphasis on the 
coupling between atmospheric and oceanographic processes, and their impact on the production of the 
major living marine resources.  Activities in the CCCC Program are anticipated on two spatial scales: 
 
 A. basin-scale studies to determine how plankton productivity and the carrying capacity for high 
trophic level, pelagic carnivores in the North Pacific changes in response to climate variations. 
 
 B. regional-scale, ecosystem studies comparing how variations in ocean climate change species 
dominance and productivity of key plankton and fish populations in the coastal margins of the 
Pacific Rim, from China to California. 
 
 The Science Strategy for the Program will include five main elements:  (1) focus primarily on 
determining how the dynamics of the open subarctic and coastal margin ecosystems around the Pacific 
Rim respond to climate change, (2) employ mechanistic process studies to improve understanding and 
develop early recognition and prediction capabilities for regime changes, (3) develop and employ models 
to guide research activities, integrate results, and improve capabilities for forecasting ecosystem responses 
to climate change, (4) develop broader insights and understanding through regional scale comparative 
studies, and (5) support and coordinate CCCC Program activities with GLOBEC.INTernational and other 
existing and planned international (e.g. NPAFC, WOCE, JGOFS, GOOS, NOPACCS) and national (e.g. 
CalCOFI, BIOCOSMOS, GLOBEC-SPACC, HUBEC, FOCI, LaPerouse) organizations and research 
programs in the PICES region. 
 
The Key Research Activities proposed include: 
 
1. Retrospective analyses of existing atmospheric, physical, plankton, and fisheries data, to identify 
recent (and historical) changes in the subarctic Pacific. 
 
2. Develop numerical modelling system for ecosystem dynamics research and monitoring. 
 
3. Develop observation and monitoring systems to collect new observational data on surface winds, 
upper ocean temperature and circulation, nutrient flux, phytoplankton productivity (from ocean 
colour sensors and in situ studies), zooplankton, mesopelagic micronektonic animals and higher 
trophic level carnivores. 
 
4. Biological Process Studies will be conducted in the open subarctic, and in the selected suite of 
regional, coastal ecosystems around the Pacific Rim.  Key process studies will focus on primary 
production, zooplankton production, distribution and life history, food web trophodynamics and 
modelling (feeding, growth, reproduction and mortality rates), life history models, and the migratory 
behaviour of key zooplankton, fish, marine mammals, and sea birds. 
 63
PICES-GLOBEC International Program on  
Climate Change and Carrying Capacity - 
An update on progress 
 
 
Warren S. WOOSTER 
 
 
Co-Chairman, Implementation Group 
School of Marine Affairs, University of Washington 
Seattle, WA  98195-6000, U.S.A. 
 
 
 The PICES-GLOBEC Workshop held in Nemuro on 15-17 October 1994 led to agreement on a 
Science Plan which was subsequently approved by the Governing Council of PICES and published in the 
report of the PICES Third Annual Meeting.  A Scientific Steering Committee for the CCCC Program was 
established and charged with development of an implementation plan.  Membership of that Committee 
was established and its Executive Committee met in Honolulu on 24-26 May 1995. 
 
 The Draft Implementation Plan that emerged identified several Central Scientific Issues: 
 
Physical Forcing: What are the characteristics of climate variability, can interdecadal patterns be 
identified, how and when do they arise? 
Lower trophic level response: How do primary and secondary producers respond in productivity, and 
in species and size composition, to climate variability in different ecosystems of the 
subarctic Pacific. 
Higher trophic level response: How do life history patterns, distributions, vital rates, and population 
dynamics of higher trophic level species respond directly and indirectly to climate 
variability? 
Ecosystem interactions: How are subarctic Pacific ecosystems structured?  Do higher trophic levels 
respond to climate variability solely as a consequences of bottom up forcing?  Are 
there significant inter-trophic level and top-down effects on lower trophic level 
production and on energy transfer efficiencies? 
  
 Research activities applied to these issues at both basin and regional scales would include (1) 
retrospective analyses, (2) development of models, (3) process studies, (4) development of observation 
systems, and (5) data management. 
 
 The following regional (1-10) and basin scale (11-12) components of the CCCC Program were 
identified;  a tentative list of national and interna-tional programs, present or planned, in each component 
was prepared. 
 
1.  California Current System, south 
2.  California Current System, Oregon to Vancouver Island 
3.  Southeast and Central Alaska 
4.  Eastern Bering Sea 
5.  Western Bering Sea/Kamchatka 
6.  Okhotsk Sea 
7.  Oyashio/Kuroshio 
 64
8.  Japan Sea/East Sea 
9.  Bohai and Yellow Sea 
10.  East China Sea 
11.  Western subarctic gyre 
12.  Eastern subarctic gyre 
 
 Of particular importance for the regional scale studies is a comparison of ecosystem properties 
and responses to climate variability.  For such comparisons, a common set of program outputs is required;  
the following items were proposed:  
 
Physical forcing: location of major fronts and current boundaries;  atmospheric pressure gradients;  air-
sea heat exchange;  major physical features;  mixed layer temperature and depth;  
velocity of major currents;  eddies, vertical and horizontal mixing and fine structure. 
Lower trophic levels: annual and seasonal productivity;  temporal and spatial patterns of plankton 
dynamics and nutrient fields;  identifica-tion of major taxonomic groups;  population 
parameters for key species or taxonomic groups. 
Higher trophic levels and ecosystem interactions: abundance trends and distributions of life stages of 
key species and their predators and prey;  population parameters (growth, mortality, 
reproduction);  food web structure (including diets and trophodynamic linkages of 
key species);  pro-duction and productivity structure. 
 
 It is proposed that the Scientific Steering Committee now be called the Implementation Group.  
Because of the importance of the regional scale studies, representatives of National GLOBEC Programs 
constitute the majority of the Group's Executive Committee which also includes a representative of the 
North Pacific Anadromous Fish Commission, with which PICES is co-operating in this program.  Liaison 
has been established with SCOR and IOC, sponsors of GLOBEC International, and with the International 
Council for the Exploration of the Sea which is sponsoring a related program, on Cod and Climate 
Change.  Cooperation with other relevant international programs and organizations is also contemplated. 
 
 The importance of monitoring to the CCCC Program is clear.  The goal of the program is to 
understand, and eventually to predict, the effects of climate variation on ecosystems of the subarctic 
Pacific.  This requires that changes in climate and in ecosystem response be measured systematically in an 
appropriate monitoring system, the design of which draws on the findings of retrospective, process, and 
model studies.  Thus the PICES Working Group on Monitoring (WG 9) will have a key role in reviewing 
existing and planned monitoring systems and in taking the requirements of the CCCC Program into 
account as they develop plans for  
enhancement of monitoring in the region. 
 
 65
Monitoring of Low Trophic Level Variability and Response to 
Long-Term Forcing in the Subarctic Pacific Ocean  
 
 
Satoru TAGUCHI 
 
 
Hokkaido National Fisheries Research Institute  
116 Katsura-koi, Kushiro, Japan.  085 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
 The subarctic Pacific Ocean consists of the Alaskan gyre and the western Subarctic gyre with a 
couple of seasonally ice-covered marginal seas such as the Bering Sea and the Sea of Okhotsk.  The 
western Subarctic Gyre is the unique water mass, which can be modified by trapping of a warm core ring, 
in the subarctic Pacific Ocean.  The Alaskan Gyre and the western Subarctic Gyre show a strong seasonal 
thermocline.  Winter mixing does not occur below 100 m in the former gyre while it occurs deeper than 
200 m in the latter gyre.  This difference in the physical structure of water mass in winter may cause a 
different low trophic level variability at the near surface ecosystem between two water masses, and the 
low trophic level may respond differently to long-term forcing.  To monitor those variabilities and 
responses, ship observation has been the main effort based on either continuous or discrete 
determinations.  Some determinations, for examples, microzooplankton are still dependent mostly on the 
discrete sampling.  Technological developments with acoustics, optics, and satellite should be achieved to 
overcome the present difficulties encountered in the subarctic Pacific Ocean.  
 
 
1. SUBARCTIC PACIFIC OCEAN 
 
 The subarctic Pacific Ocean is isolated by the subarctic front from the other parts of Pacific 
Ocean (Roden 1972) and has a variety of water masses (Favorite et al. 1976).  The Bering Sea and the Sea 
of Okhotsk are isolated from the subarctic Pacific Ocean by the Aleutian Islands and the Kurile Islands, 
respectively.  They in part are seasonally ice-covered and will be discussed by somewhere else. The entire 
subarctic gyre has a positive Ekman vertical velocity (Gargett 1991).  This indicates that a wind-forced 
upwelling replenishes nutrients in the euphotic zone.  The eastern and the western parts of the subarctic 
Pacific Ocean are consist of the Alaskan Gyre, which encircles the Gulf of Alaska (Musgrave 1992), and 
the western Subarctic Gyre, which encircles the western subarctic Pacific Ocean (Kawai 1972), 
respectively.  In the present study the term of the western Subarctic Gyre is applied to a broad area 
including the western subarctic domain defined by Dodimead et al. (1963).  The western Subarctic Gyre 
often traps a warm core ring, which modifies the regional water structure (Kawasaki 1992).  The physical 
structure of the Alaskan Gyre is characterized by a permanent halocline at 80-120 m (Tabata 1975).  The 
annual exchange through the halocline is limited (Acara 1964, Tabata 1965) and relatively insignificant 
(Denman and Gargett 1988).  On the other hand, a permanent halocline similar to the one in Alaskan Gyre 
dose not exist at a shallow upper layer in the western Subarctic Gyre (Favorite et al. 1976).  Nutrients are 
abruptly transported to the upper layer in winter.        
 
 Even though the subarctic Pacific Ocean concerns this study, the difference in water structures 
between two gyres, which are outside the effects of any land mass or continental shelf, within the ocean, 
requires a specific monitoring system for each gyre to evaluate the response to the long-term forcing in 
 66
this region.  Most data to present the Alaskan Gyre in the present study are obtained at the oceanic station 
P (50
°
N, 145
°
W) and its vicinity.  However, data to present the western Subarctic Gyre are obtained from 
station A11 (40
°
30'N, 146
°
00'E), which located the western edge of the western subarctic domain, but still 
at the north of the subarctic boundary (Kawasaki 1992).  
 
2. LOW TROPHIC LEVEL VARIABILITY  
 
 The driving force for the surface water currents in the Alaskan Gyre and the western Subarctic 
Gyre is the drag of the wind on the surface of the water (Fig. 1) although there is the argument on the drag 
of the wind (Amorocho and DeVries 1980).  Wind directions are opposite between winter and summer in 
the region of the subarctic Pacific.  This variable force may affect the current speeds in the gyres since the 
geostrophic circulation is weak in the subarctic gyre.  However the general current system remains the 
same regardless of wind directions.  A strong seasonal thermocline is developed during the heating period 
in both gyres.  It occurs in May in the Alaskan Gyre (Tabata 1975) and in April in the western Subarctic 
Gyre (Kasai et al. 1994).  Surface winter minimum temperature was higher than 5.5
°
C in the former gyre 
(Fig. 2) and higher than 3
°
C in the latter gyre (Fig. 3).  Vertical mixing occurs in winter in both gyres.  
However, vertical mixing dose not occur below 100 m in the former gyre (Tabata 1975) while it goes 
deeper than 200 m in the latter gyre (Kasai et al. 1994). Winter nitrate concentrations in the surface mixed 
layer are 13 uM in the Alaskan Gyre (Anderson et al. 1969) and 20 uM in the western Subarctic Gyre 
(Kasai et al. 1994), respectively.  These values are reduced to a minimum of 6 uM in late summer in the 
former gyre.  However they are reduced to less than 0.5 uM in the latter gyre (Fig. 4).  Winter chlorophyll 
a concentrations are 0.2 mg m
-3
 in the Alaskan Gyre (Parsons and Anderson 1970) and 0.05 mg m
-3
 in the 
western Subarctic Gyre (Kasai et al. 1994), respectively.  The former value increases to only 0.73 mg m
-3
 
in summer (Welschmeyer et al. 1993) while the latter value increases to higher than 5 mg m
-3
 in the 
spring bloom (Fig. 5).  The seasonal change of chlorophyll a concentration shows a single peak in 
summer in the Alaskan Gyre and one large in spring and one small peak in fall in the western Subarctic 
Gyre.  According to the seasonal studies by Parsons and LeBrasseur (1968), Anderson et al. (1969), and 
Parsons and Anderson (1970), the timing of the spring bloom is earliest along coast and latest in a central 
area associated with the center of Alaskan Gyre.  The similar trend is also observed in the western 
Subarctic Gyre (Taguchi et al. 1994, Kasai et al. 1994, Yoshimori et al. 1995).  In the Alaskan Gyre, 
picoplankton (<2 um) is usually dominant beneath the seasonal thermocline in August (Miller et al. 
1988).  These small cells prefer the regenerated ammonium to nitrate (Harrison and Wood 1988).  During 
the spring bloom, larger cells than 10 um become the most abundant; more than 90% of total chlorophyll 
a in the western Subarctic Gyre (Fig. 6).  These large cells assimilate nitrate effectively (Taguchi et al. 
1992).       
 
 Based on the ecosystem model, Frost (1993) described little seasonal change of phytoplankton 
standing stock in the Alaskan Gyre with a much large short-term variability.  However, a study on 
numerical model of spring bloom reveals a great seasonality in the western Subarctic Gyre (Yoshimori et 
al. 1995).  Seasonal change in phytoplankton production rate is substantial in the Alaskan Gyre (Frost 
1993).  Maximum daily primary production can exceed 1 gC m
-2
 and minimum values are below 0.2 gC 
m
-2
 with a modelled annual production of 162 gC m
-2
.  Although no seasonal data for primary production 
are completed at the present time, the similar substantial seasonal change in phytoplankton production is 
expected in the western Subarctic Gyre.  
      
 Zooplankton was collected with a vertical tow of 350 um mesh net from 150 m to the surface in 
the Alaskan Gyre (Parsons and Lalli 1988, Brodeur and Ware 1992).  Macro- and microzooplankton were 
collected with a vertical tow of 333 um mesh net and 183-35 um mesh net from the bottom of surface 
mixed layer in the western Subarctic Gyre (Saito et al. 1994a).  In the Alaskan Gyre there is a marked 
increase in the biomass of macrozooplankton as measured by wet weight (converted to dry weight by 
 67
using a factor of 0.1) from winter values of about 1 mg m
-3
 to spring maximum of about 8 mg m
-3
.  On 
the other hand, average dry weights of macrozooplankton vary a range from about 5 to 400 mg m
-3
 in the 
western Subarctic Gyre.  A ratio of the maximum to the minimum is 80, which is ten times higher than 
one in the Alaskan Gyre.  Although seasonal change of microzooplankton biomass is not available in the 
Alaskan Gyre, LeBrasseur and Kennedy (1972) provide the seasonal change of microzooplankton 
community in numbers as an index of microzooplankton abundance.  They show that maximum number 
of 30,000 individuals m
-3
 in winter and minimum number of 100 individuals m
-3
 in summer.  However, 
these values seems low compared to <10 x 10
6
 ciliates m
-3
 (Landry et al. 1993).  Strom et al. (1993) 
estimated ciliate carbon biomass using a conversion factor of 0.19 pgC um
-3
 (Putt and Stoecker 1989).  
The ciliate biomass ranged from 1 to 7 mgC m 
-3
 during summer.  Simulated annual cycle of herbivorous 
carbon biomass ranged from <10 to 40 gC m
-3
 (Frost 1993).  While herbivores is not the major consumers 
of phytoplankton (Dagg 1993), the specific mortality rate caused by microzooplankton is balanced by the 
specific growth rate of phytoplankton during spring and early summer (Landry et al. 1993).  In the 
western Subarctic Gyre, microzooplankton carbon biomass changes from maximum of 100 mg m
-3
 in 
spring to minimum of 1 mg m
-3
 in winter (Saito et al. 1994b).  Similar to the Alaskan Gyre, the ecological 
importance of microzooplankton compared to macrozooplankton is significant in summer in the western 
Subarctic gyre (Fig. 7).  However, maximum zooplankton biomass, which occurred at or immediately 
after the spring bloom of phytoplankton, mostly consisted of macrozooplankton in the western Subarctic 
Gyre.  
      
 Neocalanus plumchrus, N. cristatus, and Eucalanus bungii may comprise 80 to 95% of the 
plankton biomass collected by 0.33 mm net in the Alaskan Gyre (Miller et al. 1984).  They are 
particularly abundant in the spring and early summer at Station P. N. plumchrus, N. flemingeri, N. 
cristatus, and E. bungii may comprise more than 95% immediately after the spring bloom in the western 
Subarctic Gyre (Saito et al. 1994b).  
 
 Chaetognaths are important among invertebrate carnivores in the Alaskan Gyre (Terazaki and 
Miller 1986) and the western Subarctic Gyre (Terazaki et al. 1995).  Eukronia hamata, which inhabits the 
epipelagic (0-200 m) and upper mesopelagic layer (200-500 m) is the most abundant species in the 
Alaskan Gyre.  Seasonal maximum and minimum abundances are about 1.5 and 0.5 individuals per m
3
, 
respectively.  Sagitta elegans, which inhabits the epipelagic layer, is the most abundant species in the 
western Subarctic Gyre.  
 
 Carbon flux determined by sediment trap experiments (Takahashi 1986) is estimated at 200 m by 
fitting an exponential decay curve to data at great depths as studied by Pace et al. (1987).  The maximum 
flux occurs in July and the annual carbon flux is estimated as 86 gC m
-2
 year
-1
 in the Alaskan Gyre 
(Taguchi 1992).  Carbon flux determined by sediment trap experiments at 500 m (Hanaoka, unpublished 
data) shows one small peak (30 mgC m
-2
 d
-1
) in spring and one large peak (100 mgC m
-2
 d
-1
) in fall in the 
western Subarctic Gyre (Fig. 8).  Annual carbon flux at 1,145 m is estimated to be 12 gC m
-2
 year
-1
 in the 
western Subarctic Gyre if 40 mgC m
-2
 day
-1
 was assumed for the period from May 12 to July 10 in which 
data was lacking.  Annual carbon flux at 50 m estimated by the method of Pace et al. (1987) is 120 gC m
-2
 
year
-1
.  When the concept developed by Eppley and Peterson (1979) is adopted to both gyres, the annual 
carbon flux can be converted to the annual primary production.  The f-ratio is defined as a ratio of new 
production to new plus regenerated production. Annual new production estimated by Wheeler (1993) 
based on 180 day sufficient light for primary production is 49 gC m
-2
, which corresponds to 30 % of 
modelled annual primary production (Frost 1993).  This estimate is similar to the annual minimum 
estimated by Frost (1993). In this study 40%, as suggested by Frost (1993) is adopted to the Alaskan Gyre 
while 50% is applied to the western Subarctic Gyre since their primary production is more likely 
controlled by nitrate than ammonium (Kasai et al. 1994).  When those values are applied to both gyres, 
the annual primary production is estimated to be 215 gC m
-2
 year
-1
 in the Alaskan Gyre and 240 gC m
-2
 
 68
year
-1
 in the western Subarctic Gyre, respectively.  The former estimate is 1.3 times higher than the 
estimate from 
14
C experiments (170 gC m
-2
 y
-1
) (Welschmeyer et al. 1993).  The independent estimate of 
annual primary production at Station P by Wong (cited in Welchmeyer et al. 1993) is similar (140 gC m
-2
 
y
-1
).  When we consider error involved in those calculation, the difference between those two estimates 
can be insignificant but needs to be studied.  
 
3. RESPONSES OF LOW TROPHIC LEVEL TO LONG-TERM FORCING       
 
 The western Subarctic Gyre locates between 40 and 55
°
N while the Alaskan Gyre locates 
between 50 and 60
°
N.  Photosynthetically Available Radiation (PAR) should be similar between both 
areas (Sverdrup et al. 1965).  However, more than 60% cloud coverage occurs with 60% of chance in the 
western Subarctic Gyre and higher than 70% of chance in the Alaskan Gyre in July (Fig. 9).  This 
difference may result in different level of PAR on the ocean surface.  Photosynthesis of phytoplankton 
may respond to the different level of PAR, which is governed by a long-term climate change, to achieve 
higher primary production in the western Subarctic Gyre.  
 
 Occurrence of low pressure system is limited to the western Subarctic Gyre in summer (Fig. 10).  
This may disturb temporarily a seasonal thermocline.  However, the low pressure occurs often over the 
two areas in winter.  Vertical mixing of surface water would be strongly induced by wind in winter.  It is 
very critical for the supply of nutrients from the deep water in the western Subarctic Gyre.  However the 
amount of nutrient supply is dependent on the different water structures between two gyres.  The 
permanent halocline in the Alaskan Gyre could reduce the amount of nutrient supply from deep water.  
The upper ocean stratification above the permanent halocline may be related to a relatively higher 
precipitation in the Alaskan Gyre than that in the western Subarctic Gyre (Terada and Hanzawa 1984) and 
freshwater input as summer runoff from coastal areas along the eastern and northern boundaries of the 
Alaskan Gyre (Royer 1982).  
 
 Phytoplankton would respond to assimilate nutrients when a favorite condition comes in spring 
(Sverdrup 1953).  The response of phytoplankton is different between two gyres.  Large diatoms respond 
immediately to high nitrate concentrations in the western Subarctic Gyre while picoplankton assimilate 
nutrients in the Alaskan Gyre.  Picoplankton may assimilate favorably ammonium regenerated by 
microzooplankton in the Alaskan Gyre as shown in the oceanic surface water by Harrison and Wood 
(1988).  Large diatoms may not be efficiently grazed by macrozooplankton but they sink to deep water 
(Riebesell 1991).  However, in the western Subarctic Gyre, macrozooplankton increase immediately after 
the increase of large diatoms (Fig. 11).  
 
 Bakun (1973) indicates that the strong interannual variation in the intensity of the winter winds is 
positively correlated with the average summer zooplankton biomass during 1956-1962 and 1980-1989 
(Brodeur and Ware 1992).  An increase in the intensity of the zonal winds associated with the North 
Pacific High could speed up the subarctic current and advect zooplankton into the southern Gulf of 
Alaska (Brodeur and Ware 1992).  In the western Subarctic Gyre, the zonal index indicates a different 
trend in the spring of 1991 (Fig. 12) when the spatial distribution of abundant zooplankton biomass 
(>1.25 mgC m
-3
) is limited to the coastal water and sporadic locations (Fig. 11).  The high anomaly 
observed in March 1991 may be related to the reduced growth of young copepodites in spring.  
 69
4. RECOMMENDATION FOR LONG-TERM MONITORING  
 
 Effective methods are partially listed for the long-term monitoring in the subarctic Pacific Ocean 
(Table 1).  Technology for most measurements is available at the present time.  However, some 
application should be considered to monitor the long-term variability of lower trophic levels in the 
subarctic Pacific Ocean.  Such application should be made (1) to determine the biological processes in the 
regenerated nutrient predominant ecosystem in the Alaskan Gyre, since preferential utilization of 
ammonium by phytoplankton can account for the low standing stock of phytoplankton and the 
underutilization of nitrate in the surface layer in summer, and (2) to determine the biological processes in 
the large particle predominant ecosystem in the western Subarctic gyre.  
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
 
Discussion with K. Ohtani, Hokkaido University;  H. Saito and T. Kono, Hokkaido National Fisheries 
Research Institute improved the earlier versions of this manuscript.  Critical reading by K. Banse is 
greatly appreciated.  
 
 
REFERENCES  
 
Acara, A.  1964.  On the vertical transport velocity on Line P in the eastern subarctic Pacific Ocean. J. 
Fish. Res. Bd. Canada.  21:397-407.  
 
Amorocho, J. and J.J. DeVries.  1980.  A new evaluation of the wind stress coefficient over water 
surfaces. J. Geophys. Res.  85:433-442.  
 
Anderson, G.C., T.R. Parsons and K. Stephens.  1969.  Nitrate distribution in the subarctic Northeast 
Pacific Ocean. Deep-Sea Res.  16:329-334.  
 
Anderson, G.C., R.K. Lam, B.C. Booth, and J.M. Glass.  1977.  A description and numerical analysis of 
the factors affecting the processes of production in the Gulf of Alaska. Univ. Washington, Dept. 
Oceanogr. Spec. Rept. 76 (Ref.M-77-40): 231p.  
 
Arhcer, D., S. Emerson, T. Powell and C.S. Wong.  1993.  Numerical bindcasting of sea surface pCO
2
 at 
weathership station Papa. Progr. Oceanog. 32:319-351.  
 
Bakun, A.  1973.  Coastal upwelling indices, west coast of North America, 1946-1971.  NOAA Tech. 
Rept. NMFS SSRF-671:103.  
 
Bakun, A.  1990.  Global climate change and intensification of coastal ocean upwelling. Science. 
247:198-201.  
Bricaud, A., A.L. Bedhomme and A. Morel.  1988.  Optical properties of diverse phytoplanktonic species:  
experimental results and theoretical interpretation. J. Plankt. Res. 10:851-873.  
 
Brodeur, R.D. and D.M. Ware.  1992.  Long-term variability in zooplankton biomass in the subarctic 
Pacific Ocean. Fish. Oceanogr. 1:32-38.  
 
Caldwell, D.R., T.M. Dillon, and J.N. Moum.  1985.  The rapid-sampling vertical profiler:  an evaluation. 
J. Atmos. Ocean. Tech. 2:615-625.  
 70
 
Dagg, M.  1993.  Grazing by the copepod community dose not control phytoplankton production in the 
subarctic Pacific Ocean. Prog. Oceanog. 32:163-183.  
 
Denman, K.L. and A.E. Gargett.  1988.  Multiple thermoclines are barriers to vertical exchange in the 
subarctic Pacific during SUPER, May 1984. J. Mar. Res. 46:77-103.  
 
Dodimead, A.J., F. Favorite and T. Hirano.  1963.  Review of the oceanography of the subarctic Pacific 
region. Bull. Inter. North Pac. Fish. Comm. 13:1-195.  
 
Eppley, R.W. and B.J. Peterson.  1979.  Particulate organic matter flux and planktonic new production in 
the deep ocean.  Nature. 282:677-680.  
 
Favorite, F., A.J. Dodimead and K. Nasu.  1976.  Oceanography of the Subarctic Pacific region, 1960-
1971. Bull. Inst. North Pacific Comm. 33:1-187.  
 
Fiedler, P.C.  1984.  Satellite observations of the 1982-1983 El Nino along the U.S. Pacific Coast. 
Science 224:1251-1254.  
 
Frost, B.W.  1993.  A modelling study of processes regulating plankton standing stock and production in 
the open subsurface Pacific Ocean. Prog. Oceanog. 32:17-56.  
 
Gargett, A.E.  1991.  Physical processes and the maintenance of nutrient-rich euphotic zones. Limnol. 
Oceanogr. 36:1527-1545.  
 
Gargett, A.E. and T.R. Osborn.  1981.  Small-scale shear measurements during the Fine and 
Microstructure Experiment (FAME). J. geophys. Res. 86:1929-1944.  
 
Gordon, H.R., D.K. Clark, J.W. Brown, O.B. Brown, R.H. Evans and W.W. Broenkon.  1983. 
Phytoplankton pigment concentrations in the Middle Atlantic Bight:  Comparison of ship 
determinations and CZCS estimates. Appl. Optics 22:20-36.  
 
Harrison, W.G. and L.J.E. Wood.  1988.  Inorganic nitrogen uptake by marine picoplankton: Evidence for 
size partitioning. Limnol. Oceanogr. 33:468-475.  
 
Herman, A.W.  1992.  Design and calibration of a new optical plankton counter capable of sizing small 
zooplankton. Deep-Sea Res. 39:395-415.  
 
Kasai, H., H. Saito and S. Taguchi.  1994.  Variability in timing and magnitude of spring bloom in the 
western subarctic Pacific off Hokkaido, Japan. PICES Third Annual Meeting Abstracts 
Collection:20. 
Kawai, H.  1972.  Hydrography of the Kuroshio extension, p.235-352. In H. Stommel and K. Yoshida 
[ed.] Kuroshio - Its physical aspects. Univ. Tokyo Press.  
 
Kawasaki, Y.  1992.  Process of modification and decay of the Kuroshio warm-core ring 86B in the North 
Pacific western subarctic region. Bull. Hokkaido Natl. Fish. Res. Inst. 56:43-53. (in Japanese with 
English abstract).  
 
 71
Kiefer, D.A., W.S. Chamberlin and C.R. Booth.  1989.  Natural fluorescence of chlorophyll a: 
Relationship to photosynthesis and chlorophyll concentration in the western Pacific gyre. Limnol. 
Oceanogr. 34:868-881.  
 
Landry, M.R., B.C. Monger, and K.E. Selph.  1993.  Time-dependency of microzooplankton grazing and 
phytoplankton growth in the subarctic Pacific. Prog. Oceanog. 32:205-222.  
 
LeBrasseur, R.J. and O.D. Kennedy.  1972.  Microzooplankton in coastal and oceanic areas of the Pacific 
Subarctic water mass: a preliminary report, p.355-365. In A.Y. Tekenouti et al. [ed.] Biological 
Oceanography of the Northern North Pacific Ocean. Idemitsu Shoten, Tokyo.  
 
McAllister, C.D.  1969.  Aspects of estimating zooplankton production from phytoplankton production. J. 
Fish. Res. Bd. Canada. 26:199-220.  
 
Miller, C.B., B.W. Frost, H.P. Batchelder, M.J. Clemons and R.E. Conway.  1984.  Life histories of large, 
grazing copepods in a subarctic ocean gyre: Neocalanus plumchrus, Neocalanus cristatus, and 
Eucalanus bungii in the Northeast Pacific. Prog. Oceanogr. 13:201-243.  
 
Miller, C.B., K.L. Denman, A.E. Gargett, D.L. Mackas, P.C. Booth, B.W. Frost, M.R. Landry, J.Lewin, 
C.J. Lorenzen, M.J. Perry, M. Dagg and N. Welschmeyer.  1988.  Lower trophic level production 
dynamics in the oceanic Subarctic Pacific Ocean, p. 1-26. In T. Nemoto and W. G. Pearcy [ed.] 
Proceedings of the Japan-United States of America Seminor on the Biology of Micronekton of 
the Subarctic Pacific. Bull. Ocean Res. Inst., Univ. Tokyo, No. 26, Part I. 
 
Moor, C., J.R.V. Zaneveld and J.C. Kitchen.  1992.  Preliminary results from in situ spectral absorption 
meter data. Ocean Optics 11, Proc. SPIE Int. Soc. Opt. Eng. 1750:330-337.  
 
Musgrave, D.L., T.J. Weingartner, and T.C. Royer.  1992.  Circulation and hydrography in the 
northwestern Gulf of Alaska. Deep-Sea Res. 39:1499-1512.  
 
Napp, J.M., P.B. Oriner, R.E. Pieper, and D.V. Holliday.  1991.  Biovolume-size spectra of epipelagic 
zooplankton using a Multi-frequency Acoustic Profiling System (MAPS). Deep-Sea Res. 40:445-
459.  
 
Pace, M.L., G.A. Knauer, D.M. Karl, and J.H. Martin.  1987.  Primary production, new production and 
vertical flux in the eastern Pacific Ocean. Nature. 325:803-804.  
 
Parslow, J.S.  1981.  Phytoplankton-zooplankton interactions:  data analysis and modelling (with 
particular reference to Ocean Station P [50
°
N, 145
°
W] and controlled ecosystem experiments). 
Ph.D. thesis, Univ. British Columbia.  
 
Parsons, T.R. and G.C. Anderson.  1970. Large scale studies of primary production in the North Pacific 
Ocean. Deep-Sea Res. 17:765-776.  
 
Parsosns, T.R. and C.M. Lalli.  1988. Comparative oceanic ecology of the plankton communities of the 
subarctic Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. Oceanogr. Mar. Biol. Annu. Rer. 26:317-359.  
 
Putt, M. and D.K. Stoecker.  1989.  An experimentally determined carbon:volume ratio for marine 
"oligotrichous" ciliates from estuarine and coastal waters. Limnol. Oceanogr. 34:1097-1103.  
 72
Riebesell, U.  1991.  Particle aggregation during a diatom bloom. II. Biological aspects. Mar. Ecol. Prog. 
Ser. 69:281-291.  
 
Roden, G.I.  1972.  Temperature and salinity fronts at the boundaries of the subarctic-subtropical 
transition zone in the western Pacific. J. geophys. Res. 77:7175-7187.  
 
Royer, T.C.  1982.  Coastal fresh water discharge in the Northeast Pacific. J. geophys. Res. 87:2017-
2021.  
 
Saito, H., H. Kasai, and S. Taguchi.  1994a.  The effects of physical structure on plankton biomass in the 
subarctic Pacific in summer. Bull. Japanese Soc. Fish. Oceanogr. 58:116-119. (in Japanese).  
 
Saito, H., H. Kasai and S. Taguchi.  1994b.  Seasonal change in zooplankton biomass in the western 
subarctic Pacific off Hokkaido, Japan. PICES symposium, October 21, 1994, Nemuro. 
 
Sathyendranathe, S., T. Platt, E.P.W. Horne, W.G. Harrison, O. Ulloa, R. Outerbridge and N. Hoepffner.  
1991.  Estimation of new production in the ocean by compound remote sensing. Nature. 353:129-
133.  
 
Strom, S.L., J.R. Postel and B.C. Booth.  1993.  Abundance, variability, and potential grazing impact of 
planktonic ciliates in the open subarctic Pacific Ocea. Prog. Oceanog. 32: 185-203.  
 
Sverdrup, H.U.  1953.  On conditions for the vernal blooming of phytoplankton. J. Cons. perm. int. 
Explor. Mer. 18:287-295.  
 
Sverdrup, H.U., M.W. Johnson and R.H. Fleming.  1965.  The ocean, Prentice-Hall, 1087p.  
 
Tabata, S.  1965.  Variability of oceanographic conditions at Station P in the subarctic Pacific Ocean. 
Trans. Royal Soc. Canada, Ser. 4, 3:367-418.  
 
Tabata, S.  1975.  The general circulation of the Pacific Ocean and a brief account of the oceanographic 
structure of the North Pacific Ocean. Part 1.  Circulation and volume transports. Atmosphere 
13:134-168.  
 
Taguchi, S.  1992.  Comparison of biological oceanographic processes between the Alaskan gyre and the 
central gyre in the east North Pacific. Bull Japanese Soc. Fish. Oceanogr. 56:25-28.  
 
Taguchi, S., H. Kasai, and H. Saito.  1994.  Estimation of vertical distribution of chlorophyll a off east 
Hokkaido by Gaussian curve fitting. Proc. NIPR Symp. Polar Biol. 7:17-31.  
Taguchi, S., H. Saito, H. Kasai, T. Kono and Y. Kawasaki.  1992.  Hydrography and spatial variability in 
the size distribution of phytoplankton along the Kurile Islnads in the western subarctic Pacific 
Ocean. Fish. Oceanogr. 1:227-237.  
 
Takahashi, K.  1986.  Seasonal fluxes of pelagic diatoms in the subarctic Pacific, 1982-1983. Deep-Sea 
Res. 33:1225-1251.  
 
Terada, K. and M. Hanzawa.  1984.  Climate of the North Pacific Ocean, p. 431-503. In H. Van Loon 
[ed.] Climates of the Oceans, Elsevier, Amsterdam.  
 
 73
Terazaki, M. and C.B. Miller.  1986.  Life history and vertical distribution of pelagic chaetognaths at 
Ocean Station P in the subarctic Pacific. Deep-Sea. Res. 33:323-337.  
 
Terazaki, M., H. Saito, H. Kasai, T. Kono, Y. Kawasaki, and S. Taguchi.  1995.  Horizontal distribution 
and seasonal change of epipelagic Chaetognatha Sagitta elegans in relation to hydrography 
around the Kurile and Hokkaido Islands in the western subarctic Pacific Ocean. Fish. Oceanogr. 
(in press).  
 
Tsuda, R., Y. Kakui and T. Saito.  1989.  Observations of marine phytoplankton size using optical fiber 
cables with the laser technique. Proc. Adv. Mar. Tech. Conf. 1:59-63.  
 
Welschmeyer, N.A., S. Strom, R. Goericke, G. DiTullio, M. Belvin, and W. Petersen.  1993.  Primary 
production in the subarctic Pacific Ocean: Project SUPER. Prog. Oceanog. 32:101-135.  
 
Wheeler, P.A.  1993.  New production in the subarctic Pacific Ocean: Net changes in nitrate 
concentrations, rates of nitrate assimilation and accumulation of particulate nitrogen. Prog. 
Oceanog. 32:137-161.  
 
Yan, X.H., P.P. Niler and R.H. Stewart.  1991.  Construction and baccuracy analysis of images of the 
daily-mean mixed-layer depth. Int. J. Remote Sens. 12:2573-2584.  
 
Yoshimori, A., J. Ishizaka, T. Kono, H. Kasai, H. Saito, M.J. Kishi and S. Taguchi.  1995.  Modeling of 
spring bloom in the western Subarctic Pacific (off Japan) with observed vertical density structure. 
J. Oceanogr. 51:471-488.       
 74
Table 1. Effective methods for the long-term monitoring in the subarctic Pacific Ocean. ST and SP 
indicate the satellite and ship observation including buoy system, respectively.  
 
Measurements Information Obtained Method References   
 
Wind vertical mixing ST, SP Yan et al. (1991) 
PAR primary production ST, SP Kiefer et al. (1989) 
PAR heating ST, SP Archer et al. (1993) 
Temperature mixed layer depth ST, SP Yan et al. (1991)  
Salinity vertical mixing ST, SP   
Nutrient new production ST, SP Sathyendranath et al. 
     
 (1991) 
Current   spatial distribution ST, SP Fiedler (1984)  
Shear vertical distribution SP Gargett & Osborn  
     (1981);   
   Caldwell et al.  
     (1985) 
Natural fluorescence chlorophyll a primary production ST, SP Kiefer et al. (1989) 
Absorption chlorophyll a ST, SP Moore et al. (1992) 
Upwelling irradiance primary production ST Gordon et al. (1983) 
Upwelling irradiance taxonomic group ST Bricaud et al. (1988) 
Laser size distribution ST, SP Tsuda et al. (1989) 
Acoustics biomass size distribution SP Napp et al. (1991) 
Optics biomass SP Herman (1992) 
Sediment Trap vertical flux SP Eppley & Peterson 
     (1979) 
 
 
 75
 
 76
 
 77
 
 78
 
 79
 
 80
 
 81
 
 82
 
 83
 
 84
 
 85
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
1. GENERAL FINDINGS 
 
i) Some aspects of the climate-scale physics and 
biology of the subarctic North Pacific are 
understood, and long-term monitoring 
programs can be scientifically designed based 
on this knowledge and on existing technology.  
The climate module of the Global Ocean 
Observing System (GOOS) is a target for any 
recommendations concerning monitoring for 
the purposes of describing and understanding 
climate.  GOOS, in addition to providing the 
ocean component of the Global Climate 
Observing System (GCOS), is a target for any 
recommendations concerning monitoring for 
the purposes of understanding climatic effects 
(namely, variability and change) on the living 
marine resources in the ocean, especially at the 
lower trophic levels. 
 
ii) Other aspects of the subarctic North Pacific 
require more research, or new technology, 
before monitoring programs can be 
undertaken.  GCOS and GOOS are not targets 
for these recommendations, because GCOS 
and GOOS are not research programs or 
funding agencies, however it would be useful 
to keep GCOS and GOOS informed as to 
research and technology needs and programs, 
so that close contact can be initiated and 
maintained to facilitate a future transition to 
monitoring programs. 
 
2. SPECIFIC FINDINGS AND RECOMMEN-
DATIONS 
 
I) The working papers prepared for this 
Workshop are, in general, review papers of 
high quality and broad interest.  They should 
be published so as to provide the material in 
archive and accessible form. 
 
It is recommended that PICES publish the 
review papers as a PICES Scientific Report, 
after the authors have had an opportunity (two 
months) to revise their papers based on the 
discussions at the Workshop.  The report will 
be restricted to the seven invited authors, plus 
a summary statement at the beginning by the 
co-editors, Prof. Sugimori and Dr. Briscoe.  
Specific information on formats and text 
requirements will be provided to the authors 
by the co-editors. 
 
PICES should treat the recommendations and 
discussions of this Workshop as only the first 
step regarding monitoring that is possible now 
and the needs for new science studies and 
technology development.  Therefore, it is 
recommended that PICES form an 
interdisciplinary, Monitoring Working Group 
with the following terms of reference: 
 
- The WG will be responsible for planning 
the monitoring activities in the PICES 
area, including proposing scientific and 
technical priorities and schedules, and 
including physical, biological, and 
chemical measurements. 
 
- The WG should cooperate with the GCOS 
Ocean Observing Panel for Climate, the 
GCOS Living Marine Resources science 
planning group, the Scientific Steering 
Committee of the PICES-GLOBEC 
Climate Change and Carrying Capacity 
Program, and other such bodies as may be 
needed. 
 
- The WG will work with the PICES 
Technical Committee on Data Exchange 
to ensure timely and open exchange of 
monitoring data between participants and 
to external data users, as a mechanism to 
control the quality and relevance of the 
data. 
 
- The WG will report regularly as requested 
by the PICES Science Board. 
 
The WG will have a lifetime of two years, 
which may be extended by the Science 
Board if needed.  Its membership will be 
two people from each member country, 
 86
with credentials in the scientific and 
technical areas concerned with the 
monitoring activities.  The Chairman will 
be named by the PICES Science Board. 
 
ii) New technology is essential to effective 
monitoring of the PICES area, but its 
development requires attention for a long 
period, often with not visible results, and at 
great cost.  Nevertheless, it is essential. 
It is recommended that PICES encourage its 
member states to support the development of 
the new technology required for monitoring 
and identified in the report of this Workshop.  
Particular attention should be paid to the 
development of autonomous biological 
instrumentation, without which monitoring of 
ecosystem response to climate forcing will be 
particularly difficult. 
 
 
 
 
