 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PICES Scientific Report No. 33 
2006 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the PICES/NPRB Workshop on 
Integration of Ecological Indicators of the North Pacific  
with Emphasis on the Bering Sea 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Edited by 
Gordon H. Kruse, Patricia Livingston, James E. Overland, 
Glen S. Jamieson, Skip McKinnell and R. Ian Perry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December 2006 
Secretariat / Publisher 
North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES) 
P.O. Box 6000, Sidney, B.C., Canada. V8L 4B2 
E-mail: secretariat@pices.int  Home Page: http://www.pices.int
 
 
 
iii
List of Participants 
 
  
AUSTRALIA 
 
Elizabeth Fulton 
CSIRO 
GPO Box 1538 
Hobart, TAS 7001 
beth.fulton@csiro.au 
 
CANADA 
 
Villy Christensen 
Fisheries Centre 
University of British Columbia 
2204 Main Mall 
Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z4 
v.christensen@fisheries.ubc.ca 
 
Glen S. Jamieson (Convenor) 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada 
Pacific Biological Station  
3190 Hammond Bay Road 
Nanaimo, BC, V9T 6N7 
jamiesong@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
Robert O’Boyle 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada 
Bedford Institute of Oceanography 
Dartmouth, NS, B2Y 4A2 
oboyler@mar.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
R. Ian Perry (Convenor) 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada 
Pacific Biological Station  
3190 Hammond Bay Road 
Nanaimo, BC, V9T 6N7 
perryi@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
Jake Rice 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada 
200 Kent Street, Stn. 12S015  
Ottawa, ON, K1A 0E6 
ricej@dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
JAPAN 
 
Akihiko Yatsu 
Hokkaido National Fisheries Research Institute 
116 Katsurakoi 
Kushiro, Hokkaido 085-0802 
yatsua@fra.affrc.go.jp 
REPUBLIC OF KOREA 
 
Suam Kim 
Department of Marine Biology 
Pukyong National University,  
599-1 Daeyeon 3-dong, Nam-gu  
Busan 608-737 
suamkim@pknu.ac.kr 
 
RUSSIA 
 
Vladimir I. Radchenko 
Sakhalin Research Institute of Fisheries and 
 Oceanography  
196 Komsomolskaya Street 
Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk, 693023 
vlrad@sakhniro.ru 
 
U.S.A. 
 
Rebecca Asch 
NOAA/Climate Program Office 
1100 Wayne Avenue, Suite 1200 
Silver Spring, MD 20874  
rebecca.asch@noaa.gov 
 
Kerim Y. Aydin 
NOAA/Alaska Fisheries Science Center 
7600 Sand Point Way NE 
Seattle, WA 98115-0070 
kerim.aydin@noaa.gov 
 
Timothy Barnett 
Scripps Institution of Oceanography 
9500 Gilman Drive 
La Jolla, CA 92093-0224 
tbarnett@ucsd.edu 
 
Andrea Belgrano 
JISAO 
University of Washington 
Box 354235 
Seattle, WA 98195-4235 
belgrano@u.washington.edu 
 
Jennifer L. Boldt 
School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195 
and NOAA/Alaska Fisheries Science Center 
7600 Sand Point Way NE, Bldg. 4 
Seattle, WA 98115-6349 
jennifer.boldt@noaa.gov 
iv 
Nicholas A. Bond 
JISAO 
University of Washington 
7600 Sand Point Way NE 
Seattle, WA 98115 
bond@pmel.noaa.gov 
 
Lisa B. Eisner 
NOAA/Alaska Fisheries Science Center 
Auke Bay Laboratory  
Juneau, AK 99801 
lisa.eisner@noaa.gov 
 
Diana Evans 
North Pacific Fisheries Management Council 
605 W 4th Avenue, Suite 306 
Anchorage, AK 99501 
diana.evans@noaa.gov 
 
David L. Fluharty 
School of Marine Affairs 
University of Washington 
3707 Brooklyn Avenue NE 
Seattle, WA 98105 
fluharty@u.washington.edu 
 
Daniel Goodman 
Department of Ecology 
Montana State University  
Bozeman, MT 59717-0346 
goodman@rapid.msu.montana.edu 
 
Anne B. Hollowed 
NOAA/Alaska Fisheries Science Center 
7600 Sand Point Way NE 
Seattle, WA 98115-6349 
anne.hollowed@noaa.gov  
 
George L. Hunt, Jr. 
School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences 
University of Washington 
Box 355020 
Seattle, WA 98195 
geohunt2@u.washington.edu 
 
James N. Ianelli 
NOAA/Alaska Fisheries Science Center 
7600 Sand Point Way NE 
Seattle, WA 98115 
jim.ianelli@noaa.gov 
 
Gordon H. Kruse (Convenor) 
University of Alaska Fairbanks 
Juneau Center 
11120 Glacier Highway 
Juneau, AK 99801 
gordon.kruse@uaf.edu 
Sarah Kruse 
Ecotrust 
Jean Vollum Natural Capital Center, Suite 200 
721 NW Ninth Avenue 
Portland, OR 97209 
skruse@ecotrust.org 
 
Jason S. Link 
NOAA/Northeast Fisheries Science Center  
Woods Hole, MA 02543 
jason.link@noaa.gov 
 
Patricia Livingston (Convenor) 
NOAA/Alaska Fisheries Science Center  
7600 Sand Point Way NE 
Seattle, WA 98115-6349 
pat.livingston@noaa.gov 
 
Nathan J. Mantua 
JISAO 
University of Washington 
Box 354235 
Seattle, WA 98195-4235 
mantua@atmos.washington.edu 
 
Bernard A. Megrey 
NOAA/Alaska Fisheries Science Center 
7600 Sand Point Way NE 
Seattle, WA 98115-6349 
bern.megrey@noaa.gov 
 
Franz Mueter  
Sigma Plus Statistical Consulting  
697 Fordham Drive 
Fairbanks, AK 99709 
fmueter@alaska.net 
 
Jeffrey M. Napp 
NOAA/Alaska Fisheries Science Center 
7600 Sand Point Way NE, Bldg. 4 
Seattle, WA 98115-6349 
jeff.napp@noaa.gov 
 
James E. Overland (Convenor) 
NOAA/Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory 
7600 Sand Point Way NE 
Seattle, WA 98115-6349 
james.e.overland@noaa.gov 
 
William T. Peterson 
NOAA/Hatfield Marine Science Center 
2030 S Marine Science Drive 
Newport, OR 97365 
bill.peterson@noaa.gov 
 
 
v
John F. Piatt 
USGS/Alaska Science Center 
1011 East Tudor Road 
Anchorage, AK 99503 
john-piatt@usgs.gov 
 
Sergei N. Rodionov 
JISAO  
University of Washington  
Box 354235 
Seattle, WA 98195-4235 
sergei.rodionov@noaa.gov 
 
Phyllis J. Stabeno 
NOAA/Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory 
7600 Sand Point Way NE 
Seattle, WA 98115-0070 
phyllis.stabeno@noaa.gov 
 
Warren S. Wooster 
School of Marine Affairs 
University of Washington 
3707 Brooklyn Avenue 
Seattle, WA 98105-6715 
wooster@u.washington.edu 
CO-SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
 
Stewart (Skip) McKinnell 
PICES Secretariat 
P.O. Box 6000 
Sidney, BC, V8L 4B2, Canada 
mckinnell@pices.int 
 
Clarence Pautzke 
North Pacific Research Board 
1107 W 3rd Avenue, Suite 100 
Anchorage, AK 99501, U.S.A. 
cpautzke@nprb.org 
 
Carl Schoch 
North Pacific Research Board 
1107 W 3rd Avenue, Suite 100 
Anchorage, AK 99501, U.S.A. 
cschoch@nprb.org 
 
Francis K. Wiese 
North Pacific Research Board  
1007 W 3rd Avenue 
Anchorage, AK 99501, U.S.A. 
francis.wiese@nprb.org 
 
 
vii 
Table of Contents 
 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY...............................................................................................................................ix 
FOREWORD .................................................................................................................................................xi 
WHITE PAPERS PREPARED FOR THE WORKSHOP.....................................................................................1 
Development of operational objectives for the southeastern Bering Sea ecosystem by Gordon H. 
 Kruse and Diana Evans ...................................................................................................................3 
Toward ecosystem-based management for the oceans:  A perspective for fisheries in the  
 Bering Sea by Andrea Belgrano, Jennifer L. Boldt, Patricia Livingston, and Jeffrey M. Napp....17 
Ecological indicators:  Software development by Sergei N. Rodionov ................................................39 
ECOSYSTEM REPORTS...............................................................................................................................49 
Structure and purpose of the Alaskan Ecosystem Considerations appendix by Patricia Livingston ...51 
PICES report on Marine Ecosystems of the North Pacific:  Towards ecosystem reporting for  
 the North Pacific basin by R. Ian Perry and Jeffrey M. Napp .......................................................53 
INDICATOR USAGE IN OTHER REGIONS AND SUGGESTIONS FOR THE  
NORTH PACIFIC/BERING SEA ...................................................................................................................57 
SCOR/IOC Working Group 119 on Quantitative ecosystem indicators for fisheries management 
 by Villy Christensen .......................................................................................................................59 
Eastern Canada – Ecosystem approach to fisheries in DFO Maritimes Region by Robert O’Boyle  
 and Tana Worcester.......................................................................................................................63 
Northeastern United States by Jason S. Link........................................................................................65 
STATUS OF THE BERING SEA.....................................................................................................................67 
Ecosystem Considerations for 2006 in fishery management – Upper trophic level and aggregate 
 indicators for the status of the southeastern Bering Sea by Jennifer L. Boldt, Kerim Y. Aydin,  
 Patricia Livingston, and Anne B. Hollowed ..................................................................................69 
PERSPECTIVES ON INDICATORS................................................................................................................73 
Perspective on ecological indicators by Daniel Goodman ...................................................................75 
Comments on the SAFE Ecosystem Considerations appendix and the PICES North Pacific  
 Ecosystem Status report, and review of Day 1 by Jake Rice .........................................................79 
DISCUSSION GROUP RESULTS...................................................................................................................83 
Objectives and use of indicators in the Bering Sea/North Pacific........................................................87 
Matching objectives with indicators.....................................................................................................95 
Methodologies to monitor ecosystem-wide structural change .............................................................99 
Communicating results.......................................................................................................................101 
WORKSHOP OBJECTIVES AND OUTCOMES............................................................................................101  
Develop a set of operational objectives for the southeastern Bering Sea ecosystem .........................105 
Evaluate the two ecosystem status reports .........................................................................................106 
Identify steps to validate indicator performance, improve the monitoring network, and integrate  
 into predictive models..................................................................................................................107 
Investigate methodologies that monitor system-wide structural changes within the marine  
 ecosystem.....................................................................................................................................107 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS...............................................................................................................................109 
 
ix 
Executive Summary 
 
Ecosystem indicators are part of a larger process that considers policy-level goals for an ecosystem.  
Other elements include operational objectives and performance criteria.  The eastern Bering Sea is 
advanced in application of ecosystem-based considerations to the management of marine resources.  For 
instance, an Ecosystem Considerations appendix is prepared by the Alaska Fisheries Science Center 
(AFSC) each year for the annual Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation (SAFE) reports published by 
the North Pacific Fishery Management Council (NPFMC).  This report is reviewed annually by 
NPFMC’s plan teams and Scientific and Statistical Committee, and scientific advice is provided annually 
to managers based on ecosystem trends relative to managed fish species.  Similarly, the North Pacific 
Marine Science Organization (PICES) prepared a North Pacific Ecosystem Status report in 2004 and is 
beginning to plan for an updated version of this report.  Both reports can be improved by developing 
consensus on operational objectives and appropriate indicators.  
 
Progress toward operational objectives and development of appropriate indicators was made by 
conducting the following four activities during an international workshop held on June 1–3, 2006, in 
Seattle (Washington, U.S.A.):  
 
1. Involve the Bering Sea and international communities in developing of a set of operational objectives 
for the southeastern Bering Sea ecosystem; 
2. Evaluate two status reports with the goal of integrating results and streamlining the presentation.  The 
two reports are: 
a. NPFMC. 2005. Appendix C:  Ecosystem Considerations for 2006. North Pacific Fishery 
Management Council, Anchorage, Alaska (http://access.afsc.noaa.gov/reem/EcoWeb /index.cfm);  
b. PICES. 2004. Marine Ecosystems of the North Pacific, PICES Special Publication 1, 280 p. 
(http://www.pices.int/publications/special_publications/NPESR/2005/npesr_2005.aspx); 
3. Investigate methodologies that monitor system-wide structural changes within the marine ecosystem; 
4. Identify steps to validate indicator performance, improve the monitoring network, and integrate into 
predictive models. 
 
In preparing the workshop a focus was on the southeastern Bering Sea because it represents the center of 
the Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands large marine ecosystem (LME), one of three LMEs (the other two are the 
Gulf of Alaska and Arctic Ocean) defining the North Pacific Research Board’s (NPRB) research region.  
This endeavour was funded by NPRB.  Although the project focused on the southeastern Bering Sea, the 
intent of this exercise was to provide insights, findings, and recommendations more broadly applicable to 
the North Pacific and its adjacent seas, a larger area representing the PICES region, including waters 
bordering China, Japan, South Korea, Russia, Canada, and the United States.  
 
Workshop presentations included three white papers on (1) development of operational objectives for the 
southeastern Bering Sea ecosystem;  (2) ecosystem-based management for the oceans:  a perspective for 
fisheries in the Bering Sea; and (3) ecological indicators:  software development.  These papers were 
followed by presentations on indicator use in other regions with advice for the North Pacific and reports 
on the status of the southeastern Bering Sea.  A series of break-out groups was then convened to discuss 
the Ecosystem Considerations appendix of the SAFE report and PICES North Pacific Ecosystem Status 
report, objectives and use of indicators, matching indicators to objectives, methods to monitor ecosystem-
wide structural changes, and means toward communicating results.  Although this project was ambitious, 
substantial progress was made, and the following recommendations resulted from the workshop: 
 
 
 
x 
Ecosystem Objectives and Indicators 
1. Ecosystem-level and community-level conservation thresholds are relatively new ideas in marine 
conservation.  Since they will require new kinds of indicators, research is needed for their 
development and application to the Bering Sea. 
2. New research is needed to understand how to synthesize the large set of Bering Sea data records into 
a reasonable number of ecosystem status indicators. 
3. A formal process of evaluating and selecting ecosystem indicators is a general requirement.  The 
Alaska Fisheries Science Center should consider developing and applying such a process to the 
indicators in its Ecosystem Considerations appendix. 
4. Enhancements to the ocean/ecosystem monitoring network are needed to fill data gaps at ecological 
pulse points (plankton, benthic infauna and epifauna, seasonal species interactions and movements, 
small pelagics, and cephalopods) to improve predictive models and the development of ecosystem 
indicators. 
5. More collaboration between modelers at the Alaska Fisheries Science Center and the Pacific Marine 
Environmental Laboratory, and elsewhere is encouraged to link various climate/ecosystem and 
conservation/assessment models, and to use these models to evaluate management strategies. 
 
Socio-economics 
While the workshop did not address socio-economic operational objectives for the Bering Sea and North 
Pacific, linkages between the well-being of people and healthy marine ecosystems require a level of 
attention comparable to those for ecosystem conservation objectives: 
6. Socio-economic objectives related with the marine environment should be developed for the region, 
along with their indicators and reference points.  
7. The North Pacific Fishery Management Council should play a central role in shepherding the 
development of these socio-economic objectives and indicators for the southeastern Bering Sea and 
Gulf of Alaska ecosystems; 
8. There is a need to conduct scientific and policy analyses of pathways to achieve socio-economic 
objectives while remaining within ecosystem-level conservation limits. 
 
Communication 
9. Plans should be developed at an early stage on how the information from indicators can best be 
communicated to scientists, policy and decision makers, and the general public.  The plans should 
include publishing concise, attractive executive summaries of major ecosystem status reports that will 
describe important trends and patterns in marine ecosystems for non-scientists.   
10. To reach policy makers and the public in Asian countries, future iterations of the Synthesis chapter in 
the PICES North Pacific Ecosystem Status report should be published in multiple languages. 
11. The development by the National Marine Fisheries Service of an Ecosystem Considerations website 
greatly increased access to time series of ecosystem indicators for the Alaska region, and should be 
maintained and enhanced.  
12. An overview of the status of the Bering Sea ecosystem(s) should be presented at the annual Marine 
Science in Alaska Symposium to foster broader communication among the diversity of regional 
scientists, managers and the public. 
 
Specific recommendations from individuals/groups can be found under Discussion Group Results in this 
report. 
xi 
Foreword 
 
This project entitled “Integration of ecological indicators for the North Pacific with emphasis on the 
Bering Sea:  A workshop approach” was developed from a proposal submitted in response to the North 
Pacific Research Board’s (NPRB’s) request for proposals for 2005, specifically Project Need 1, Item 2, as 
stated below:  
 
Evaluate the Utility of Ecosystem Indicators in Explaining Processes underlying 
Marine Production.  Processes related to physical (e.g., atmospheric forcing, ocean 
temperature, salinity, sea level, freshwater discharges, transport of planktonic life history 
stages, sea ice extent and duration, turbulence and cold pool extent), chemical (e.g., 
nutrient/micronutrient availability to phytoplankton), and biological (e.g., predation, 
timing of plankton/zooplankton production, commercial catch composition, 
biomass/abundance trends) phenomena provide indicators of ecosystem status. The 
project would report on the current understanding of ecosystem indicators in the Bering 
Sea and Aleutian Islands, evaluate pros and cons of existing indicators, and identify next 
steps toward developing and/or validating indicators and evaluating their performance 
(e.g., using hind-casts of indicators and various marine populations).  In addition, the 
report will describe how indicators can best be used as a tool for resource managers.  
The approach would include a workshop of regional experts to address the challenge of 
developing indicators and interpreting their utility. 
 
The North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES) appreciates NPRB funding for this work, which 
attempts to further the development of integrated ecosystem indicators for the Bering Sea. 
 
The following four objectives/activities were central for the PICES/NPRB Indicators Workshop held on 
June 1–3, 2006, in Seattle (Washington, U.S.A.): 
1. Involve the Bering Sea and international communities in developing a set of operational objectives 
for the southeastern Bering Sea ecosystem; 
2. Evaluate two status reports with a goal of integrating results and streamlining the presentation: 
a. NPFMC. 2005. Appendix C: Ecosystem Considerations for 2006. North Pacific Fishery 
Management Council, Anchorage, Alaska (http://access.afsc.noaa.gov/reem/EcoWeb /index.cfm);  
b. PICES. 2004. Marine Ecosystems of the North Pacific, PICES Special Publication 1, 280 p. 
(http://www.pices.int/publications/special_publications/NPESR/2005/npesr_2005.aspx) 
3. Investigate methodologies to monitor system-wide structural changes within the marine ecosystem; 
4. Identify steps to validate indicator performance, improve the monitoring network, and integrate into 
predictive models. 
 
In conducting these activities there was a focus on the southeastern Bering Sea because it represents the 
center of the Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands large marine ecosystem (LME), one of three LMEs (the other 
two are the Gulf of Alaska and Arctic Ocean) defining the NPRB research region (NPRB, 2005).  
Although the project focused on the southeastern Bering Sea, the intent was to provide insights, findings, 
and recommendations more broadly applicable to the North Pacific and adjacent seas, a larger area 
representing the PICES region, including waters bordering China, Japan, South Korea, Russia, Canada, 
and the United States.  
 
The primary product of the project is this PICES Scientific Report, which includes three white papers 
developed for the Indicators workshop, and a summary of workshop discussions, outcomes, and 
recommendations.  Outcomes of the workshop has also been used by NPRB to prepare an integrated 
ecosystem research plan for the Bering Sea. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WHITE PAPERS PREPARED FOR THE WORKSHOP 
 
3 
Development of operational objectives for the southeastern Bering Sea 
ecosystem 
 
Gordon H. Kruse
1
 and Diana Evans
2 
 
1 
School of Fisheries and Ocean Sciences, Juneau Center, University of Alaska Fairbanks, 11120 Glacier 
Highway, Juneau, AK 99801, U.S.A.  E-mail:  gordon.kruse@uaf.edu 
2 
North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 West 4th Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501, 
 U.S.A. 
  
 
Introduction 
 
According to the United Nations Convention on 
Biological Diversity, an ecosystem approach [to 
management, EAM] is a strategy for the 
integrated management of land, water and living 
resources that promotes conservation and 
sustainable use in an equitable way 
(http://www.biodiv.org/default.shtml).  I n t h e 
northeastern Pacific Ocean, contemporary 
conservation and management issues include 
fisheries, mariculture and ocean ranching, invasive 
species (including rats and foxes on the Aleutian 
Islands), preservation of heritage sites, coastal 
development, coastal erosion from rising sea level, 
oil and gas exploration and development, oil spill 
prevention and response, and risks associated with 
toxic waste sites from defunct military facilities.  
Among these concerns, management plans have 
been most fully developed for commercial 
fisheries.  Therefore, while we maintain the 
broader view of EAM, we focus on fisheries 
management for the purposes of this workshop. 
 
Traditional fisheries management compares the 
status of an exploited fish stock to the well-being 
of users of that resource.  Since the 1990s, 
fisheries managers have been advised to broaden 
their scope of awareness beyond single-species 
considerations owing to a greater appreciation of 
the following (FAO, 2003):  
 
• General poor performance of single-species 
fishery management worldwide; 
• Heightened awareness of interactions among 
fisheries and ecosystems; 
• Better understanding of the functional value of 
ecosystems to humans; 
• Recognition of the wide range of societal 
objectives associated with marine fishery 
resources and ecosystems. 
 
As a result, fisheries management has been 
moving slowly toward multispecies and ecosystem 
approaches.  That is, within the broader context of 
EAM, fisheries have been shifting toward an 
ecosystem-based fisheries management (EBFM), 
also called an ecosystem approach to fisheries 
(EAF).  An EAF strives to balance diverse 
societal objectives by taking into account the 
knowledge and uncertainties of biotic, abiotic, and 
human components of ecosystems and their 
interactions and applying an integrated approach 
to fisheries within ecologically meaningful 
boundaries (Garcia et al., 2003).  
 
An appreciation of diverse societal objectives 
recognizes that benefits arising from fish harvests 
form just one of the “services” that humans derive 
from marine ecosystems.  Instead, an EAM 
approach strives to balance the suite of ecosystem 
services according to objectives and priorities set 
by society.  Ecosystem services may be 
categorized into the following types (MEA, 2005):   
 
• Provisioning:  food, water, fuel, fiber, 
biochemicals, and genetic resources; 
• Regulating:  climate, disease, water 
purification, and floods; 
• Cultural:  spiritual, recreational, ecotourism, 
aesthetic, and educational; 
• Supporting:  necessary for production of all 
other ecosystem services, e.g., primary 
production, nutrient cycling, and ecological 
value. 
 
4 
Making EAF operational 
 
To make EAF operational, there is a need to 
establish a policy, management, monitoring and 
assessment framework for a system with 
measurable operational objectives.  An operational 
objective might consist of a verb (e.g., reduce), a 
specific measurable indicator (e.g., bycatch 
mortality), and a reference point (e.g., 1% of 
standing biomass) (Jamieson et al., 2001).  
Indicators are used to quantify the performance of 
management with respect to these objectives 
(Fig. 1). 
 
High-level Policy Goals
(economic, social, environmental)
Broad Objective for Fishery
Priority Issues
(level at which management can address)
Operational Objectives
Indicators and Performance Measures
Monitoring Review
and Performance Evaluation
 
Fig. 1  Relationship between policy goals, broad 
fishery objectives, operational objectives, and indicators 
and performance measures for an ecosystem approach 
to fisheries (EAF). Adapted from FAO (2003). 
 
The following is a simple example of how such a 
framework might be developed for a groundfish 
fishery.  A high-level policy goal is to maintain 
ecosystem structure and function.  While noble 
and perhaps somewhat naive, this goal is too 
vague to allow if unequivocal determination has 
been attained.  So a broad objective for a 
groundfish fishery, that is consistent with the 
policy goal, may be to maintain the community of 
predators within ecologically viable levels.  Some 
might consider that this objective is still too broad 
to allow definitive measurement of management 
success.  So operational objectives with increasing 
levels of specificity can be developed, such as 
maintaining the spawning biomass of the predators 
(e.g., sharks, cod and halibut) at 35% or more of 
their unfished levels while banning the harvest of 
forage species (e.g., capelin, eulachon, and sand 
lance) to maintain natural fluctuations in prey 
abundance.  An objective becomes operational 
only if there are agreed-upon target and limit 
reference points associated with the objective, as 
well as a routinely monitored indicator that, when 
compared to the limit and target reference points, 
provides a performance measure showing how 
well management is achieving the objective 
(Fig. 2). 
 
Tim e
Indicator
Indicator
Performance
measures
Reference point (limit)
Reference point (target)
 
Fig. 2  Illustration of an indicator, reference points, 
and performance measures relative to an ecosystem 
operational objective. Modified after FAO (2003). 
 
 
Ecosystem considerations in fisheries 
management in the eastern Bering Sea 
 
The U.S. North Pacific Fishery Management 
Council (NPFMC) recommends regulations for 
federally managed fisheries in the U.S. Exclusive 
Economic Zone (EEZ, 3–200 nautical miles, nm) 
in the Gulf of Alaska, Aleutian Islands, and 
eastern Bering Sea; federal regulations are 
implemented and enforced by NOAA/Fisheries.  
For state-managed fisheries, regulations are set 
and fisheries are managed by the Alaska Board of 
Fisheries and Alaska Department of Fish and 
Game, respectively.  The State of Alaska manages 
fisheries within state waters (0–3 nm), and 
management authority for some fisheries in the 
EEZ is delegated to the State of Alaska (e.g., 
crabs, lingcod, and some rockfishes in the Gulf of 
Alaska), whereas still others (e.g., crabs in the 
Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands, and scallops and 
salmon throughout Alaska) are managed under 
cooperative state–federal management plans. 
5 
Fisheries off the coast of Alaska tend to be 
conservatively managed, and exploited fish stocks 
have fared much better in this region than many 
other areas of the world (POC, 2003).  NPFMC 
has a long track record of setting precautionary 
catch limits (Witherell et al., 2000; Witherell, 
2004).  Conservative estimates of overfishing 
limits (OFLs) and acceptable biological catches 
(ABCs; where ABC < OFL) are recommended to 
NPFMC by their Scientific and Statistical 
Committee (Fig. 3).  Moreover, total allowable 
catches (TACs) are always set at or below ABC 
levels and fishery removals are managed in-season 
so as not to exceed the TACs (Fig. 3).  In addition, 
total catch for the Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands 
groundfish complex is constrained to 2 million mt, 
so that the sum of TACs for individual groundfish 
species is considerably less than the sum of ABCs.  
This limit provides a buffer against the 
uncertainties of single species harvest targets.  
 
 
Fig. 3   Estimates of biomass, overfishing level (OFL), acceptable biological catch (ABC), and total allowable 
catch (TAC), and actual catch in millions of tons for groundfish in the Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands (BSAI) region 
from 1992–2005 (source: NPFMC).  
 
Other conservative single-species aspects of 
federal fishery management in Alaska include 
capacity reduction programs for most fisheries, 
individual transferable quotas for crab, sablefish 
and halibut, and excellent data-collection 
programs, including fishery-independent surveys 
and an at-sea observer program.  Likewise, the 
State of Alaska constrains groundfish and 
invertebrate catches by guideline harvest levels 
(similar to TACs) and does not allow commercial 
fisheries to be prosecuted if stocks fall below a 
precautionary threshold level of abundance.  
 
NPFMC incorporates many ecosystem 
considerations into fishery management (Witherell 
et al., 2000; Witherell, 2004).  Examples include 
limits on bycatch and discards in the Bering Sea 
groundfish fisheries.  Prohibited species catch 
(PSC) limits are established as a small fraction of 
crab and herring biomass and chinook and chum 
salmon abundance; when PSC limits are attained, 
specific areas close to fishing (Witherell and 
Pautzke, 1997).  Other ecosystem approaches 
include large area closures to bottom trawling and 
dredging to protect corals and sponges, crabs, and 
other bottom habitats.  Ninety-five percent of the 
Aleutian Islands management area (~277,100 nm
2
) 
has been closed to bottom trawling since 2005 
(Witherell, 2005).  Some state waters have been 
closed to trawling by the State of Alaska since the 
late 1960s in efforts to protect crab habitats.  
Presently, nearly all state waters in the Gulf of 
Alaska and southeastern Bering Sea are closed to 
trawling, where only fixed gears (e.g., pots, 
longlines, and jigs) are allowed for groundfish 
(Kruse et al., 2000).  Other ecosystem approaches 
6 
include numerous measures to protect Steller sea 
lions and reduce seabird bycatch, full retention 
standards for pollock and cod fisheries to reduce 
discards, and a prohibition on forage fish fisheries 
throughout the Gulf of Alaska, Aleutian Islands, 
and Bering Sea, with the exception of ongoing 
commercial fisheries for Pacific herring.  
 
Need for further development of EAF for the 
Bering Sea 
 
Despite the healthy status of many fished stocks, 
some fish and wildlife populations have undergone 
significant declines in recent decades.  In 2004, no 
overfishing occurred in any of the 58 assessed 
marine fish and invertebrate stocks, but four of 32 
assessed stocks were determined to be overfished 
(NMFS, 2005).  The four stocks listed as 
overfished in 2004 were snow crabs (Bering Sea), 
blue king crabs (Pribilof Islands), blue king crabs 
(St. Matthew Island), and Tanner crabs (eastern 
Bering Sea).  As many scientists attribute the 
cause of these low crab abundances to climate 
change, the term “depleted” may be more 
appropriate than “overfished.”  In the Gulf of 
Alaska, where the State of Alaska manages 
invertebrate stocks without a federal fishery 
management plan, most crab and shrimp stocks 
collapsed in the 1980s, and abundance continues at 
low levels despite fishery closures for more than 
20 years (Kruse et al., 2000).  Significant declines 
in great whales, the western stock of Steller sea 
lions, fur seals, sea otters, and some seabirds, such 
as spectacled eider and Steller’s eider, are of much 
concern.  Whereas the role of humans is clear in 
some declines (e.g., historical whaling, predation 
of seabird eggs by human-introduced rats and 
foxes on Aleutian Islands), others are less clear, 
but may involve a stronger role of climate (e.g., 
recent decline of fur seals, lack of recovery of 
crabs and shrimps).  A better understanding of the 
roles of humans and climate on these changes is 
necessary to strengthen EAF, refine management 
objectives, and to develop useful indicators, 
reference points, and performance measures.   
 
Goals and objectives for the Bering Sea 
 
In 2004, the National Marine Fisheries Service 
(NMFS) completed an Alaska Groundfish 
Fisheries Programmatic Supplemental 
Environmental Impact Statement (PSEIS), a 
comprehensive assessment of the overarching 
conservation and management policies and 
objectives of the Alaska groundfish fishery 
management plans (NMFS, 2004).  This PSEIS 
assessment was conducted through the 
environmental review process established by the 
National Environmental Policy Act.  Original, 
revised, and final versions of PSEIS were 
developed and reviewed during a series of public 
hearings, as well as during meetings of NPFMC 
from 2001 to 2004.  As a consequence, NPFMC 
recommended amendments to the fishery 
management plans for the Bering Sea/Aleutian 
Islands and Gulf of Alaska groundfish fisheries.  
The revised plans include a high-level policy 
statement, a broad goal and objectives for the 
fishery, a set of priority issues, and a more specific 
set of objectives within each priority issue 
(NPFMC, 2005; see Appendix 1 excerpted from 
the revised fishery management plan for the 
Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands).   
 
NPFMC’s high-level policy statement for both the 
Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands groundfish fishery 
management plan and Gulf of Alaska fishery 
management plan is:  
 
…to apply judicious and responsible fisheries 
management practices, based on sound scientific 
research and analysis, proactively rather than 
reactively, to ensure the sustainability of fishery 
resources and associated ecosystems for the 
benefit of future, as well as current generations. 
 
NPFMC developed a set of broad objectives for 
the fishery, which are to:  
1. provide sound conservation of the living marine 
resources;  
2. provide socially and economically viable 
fisheries for the well-being of fishing 
communities;  
3. minimize human-caused threats to protected 
species;  
4. maintain a healthy marine resource habitat; and  
5. incorporate ecosystem-based considerations 
into management decisions. 
 
The Council identified nine priority issues: 
1. prevent overfishing; 
2. promote sustainable fisheries and communities; 
7 
3. preserve the food web; 
4. manage incidental catch and reduce bycatch 
and waste; 
5. avoid impacts to seabirds and marine 
mammals; 
6. reduce and avoid impacts to habitat; 
7. promote equitable and efficient use of fishery 
resources; 
8. increase Alaska Native consultation; 
9. improve data quality, monitoring and 
enforcement. 
 
Within these nine issues, 45 specific objectives 
(i.e., “tasks”) were adopted and grouped into those 
already included in the groundfish management 
program, those related to actions currently under 
Council consideration, those related to actions 
currently on hold or not initiated, and those that 
apply to all management actions (see Appendix 2 
for details).  NPFMC has developed a work plan to 
address these priority issues and objectives 
(Appendix 3).  Progress on the work plan is 
reviewed during each Council meeting.   
 
Following the approach recommended during a 
workshop on objectives and indicators in Canada 
(Jamieson et al., 2001), for purposes of our 
workshop, we will not consider issues that 
primarily concern economic and social dimensions 
of human use (i.e., issues 2, 7, 8, and 9).  Instead, 
we focus on the remaining five issues that address 
conservation of species and habitats (i.e., issues 1, 
3, 4, 5, and 6).  
 
 
Priority conservation issues with examples of 
operational objectives and indicators 
 
The following are the five broad priority 
conservation issues identified by NPFMC.  For 
each conservation issue, an example of an 
hypothetical operational objective and an 
associated indicator is provided. 
 
Prevent overfishing 
 
• Operational objective:  maintain harvest rates 
below those defined to be overfishing, F
OFL
, for 
each exploited fish and invertebrate stock. 
Whereas the exact definition and value of F
OFL
 
varies by stock based on the level of available 
data and stock-specific life history parameters, 
for most groundfish stocks managed by 
NPFMC, F
OFL
 is based on F
35%
, a rate that will, 
on average, reduce spawning stock biomass to 
35% of the unfished level.   
• Indicator:  estimated annual fishing mortality 
based on the sum of landings, discards, and 
bycatch mortality divided by fishery-
independent estimates of stock biomass.  
 
Preserve the food web 
 
• Operational objective:  do not “fish down the 
food web” by maintaining trophic-level balance 
in the eastern Bering Sea relative to the mean 
trophic-level range (3.32 to 3.77, mean 3.61) 
observed during the base period, 1954–1984.  
• Indicator:  estimated annual mean trophic level 
of the catch of all groundfish and crabs from 
the eastern Bering Sea.  
 
Manage incidental catch and reduce bycatch and 
waste 
 
• Operational objective:  reduce discarded 
bycatch by 40% from levels estimated from 
1994–1997. 
• Indicator:  estimated discards as a percentage 
of total groundfish catch.  
 
 
Avoid impacts to seabirds and marine mammals 
 
• Operational objective:  reduce total seabird 
bycatch on longline vessels by 30% from levels 
from 1994–1997. 
• Indicator:  Estimated seabird bycatch based on 
counts on vessels with observers extrapolated 
to the total longline fleet based on the 
proportion of observed to estimated total 
fishing effort.  
 
8 
Reduce and avoid impacts to habitat 
 
• Operational objective:  Reduce bottom habitat 
disturbance by 25% from the base period 1990–
1999. 
• Indicator:  annual bottom trawl effort (days 
fished). 
 
Food for thought: Input from two pre-
workshops on objectives for Alaska 
 
In preparing for the Indicators workshop in 
Seattle, two preliminary events were held, one on 
January 25, 2006, in Anchorage and the other on 
February 8, 2006, in Seattle.  The former was held 
as an afternoon session at the conclusion of the 
annual Marine Science in Alaska Symposium and 
the latter was held as an evening session during 
the meeting of NPFMC.  The first workshop was 
attended by approximately 75 participants, 
whereas the latter was attended by 20 participants.   
 
A report on these two workshops was prepared by 
Gordon Kruse and has been posted on the PICES 
website at http://www.pices.int/projects/Bering_ 
Indicators/project_documents.aspx for this 
workshop.  However, a few of the more intriguing 
comments and questions are: 
• We know the Bering Sea is a dynamic system 
and we also know that some reference points 
(e.g., crab biological reference points) are not 
always robust, so how do we manage for 
performance measures in a dynamic system? 
The idea to “maintain” might not be the 
appropriate term. 
• Objectives that include the phrase “to maintain” 
and those dealing with “ecosystem structure” 
are vague.  There is a need to consider 
ecosystem states that may change over time 
(multiple states of the system) and there is a 
need to allow ecosystem indicators to fluctuate 
over time.  There has been considerable work 
on the benthic intertidal zone that indicates the 
existence of multiple steady states. 
• Consider species that are indicators of various 
kinds of ecosystem change: secular, cyclical, 
and decadal. 
• Consider the possibility that indicators 
themselves may change.  For instance, if sea ice 
ultimately disappears from the Bering Sea, it 
would no longer be a useful indicator for the 
Bering Sea, but could remain useful for the 
Arctic Ocean. 
• Often we can only see ecosystem shifts in 
hindsight (i.e., note that we are still arguing 
over the last El Niño), so it may be naive to say 
when we see an ecosystem change we will 
respond accordingly. 
• There is a focus on the use of single, sentinel 
species as indicators of ecosystem-level 
changes.  It may be useful to broaden our 
consideration by looking at aggregate 
indicators, such as the biomass of a class of 
consumers.  
• We are entrenched in methods that try to 
maintain the mean but eliminate the variance.  
What if the most important feature for 
sustaining variability is maintaining the 
variance and not the mean? 
• It is important to consider the need to examine 
aspects of variability over time.  Consider 
focusing on things for which we understand the 
variance structure well. 
• Consider diversity versus richness as an 
indicator. Also, consider the spatial distribution 
of biodiversity. 
• Are there desirable upper limits on species, 
such as particular marine mammal abundances? 
For example, how high does arrowtooth 
flounder need to reach to trigger a halt to the 
pollock fishery or to hold the fishery harmless 
for their crab and halibut bycatch to foster 
removal of arrowtooth flounder from the 
system? 
• Consider statistical versus functional methods 
to render indicators.  For the latter, consider 
exploring groupings of species in the system by 
functional groups, such as winter spawners 
versus summer spawners, or predators of 
copepods versus predators of other plankton, 
etc. 
• Consider using species with which we do not 
interact directly – e.g., walrus in the Bering Sea 
that feed on clams – as indicators.  Then, use 
these species to compare to those species that 
are affected by fisheries to try to sort out our 
effects. 
• There are other views regarding the role of the 
human population in the system, such as Chuck 
Fowler’s (NMFS/National Marine Mammal 
9 
Laboratory) approach that argues that harvests 
are an order of magnitude too high relative to 
other similar trophic-level consumers. 
• Some indicators are common across systems. 
Consider looking at degraded systems to see 
what indicators may have shown a change in 
those systems and adopt those. 
• Consider focusing on indicators that motivate 
management decisions.  Sea ice indicators are 
nice, but what management decision hinges on 
this indicator? 
 
Opportunity: Development of a Fishery 
Ecosystem Plan for the Aleutian Islands 
 
Since 2005, NPFMC has been considering a 
Fishery Ecosystem Plan (FEP) for the Aleutian 
Islands management area as a more explicit EAF.  
NPFMC has committed to developing FEP, and 
has created a scientific Ecosystem Team to assist 
with its formulation. 
 
Interest in establishing the first North Pacific FEP 
in the Aleutian Islands stems from several 
considerations.  The area has attracted more 
interest in recent years concerning fisheries for 
walleye pollock, Pacific cod and Atka mackerel.  
To date, the Aleutian Islands has been lumped 
together with the Bering Sea under one fishery 
management plan for groundfish, however, some 
evidence suggests that stock structure for some 
commercial species may require separate 
management units.   
 
Also, in recent years, NPFMC has recognized the 
Aleutian Islands as a region containing unique 
ecological values that the Council wishes to 
preserve.  The Aleutian Islands have been a focus 
for Steller sea lion protection measures and 
conservation of benthic habitats to protect 
coldwater corals and sponges.   
 
The Aleutian Islands ecosystem was the focus of a 
special issue of the journal Fisheries 
Oceanography (Schumacher et al., 2005).  Many 
papers in this issue indicated that the Aleutian 
Islands themselves may involve more than one 
region.  For example, the Aleutian passes east of 
Samalga Pass are more shelf-like in nature, 
whereas those to the west are more oceanic.  
Significant differences in ecology are associated 
with these features.   
 
The Aleutian Islands marine ecosystem remains an 
area of severely limited knowledge due, in part, to 
its remoteness.  Schumacher and Kruse (2005) 
identified the need for increased funding for 
ecosystem research as well as the need to broaden 
management objectives to encompass a wider set 
of ecosystem services in an integrated ecosystem 
management plan.  Quite possibly, timing may 
now be ripe for such progress. 
 
References 
 
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2003. 
Fisheries management: 2. The ecosystem approach 
to fisheries. Food and Agriculture Organization, 
FAO Fisheries Technical Guidelines for 
Responsible Fisheries 4 (Suppl. 2), Rome. 112 p. 
Garcia, S.M., Zerbi, A., Aliaume, C., Chi, T. Do and 
Lasserre, G. 2003. The ecosystem approach to 
fisheries: Issues, terminology, principles, 
institutional foundations, implementation and 
outlook.  Food and Agriculture Organization, FAO 
Fisheries Technical Paper 443, Rome. 71 p.  
Jamieson, G., O’Boyle, R., Arbour, J., Cobb, D., 
Courtenay, S., Gregory, R., Levings, C., Munro, J., 
Perry, I. and Vandermeulen, H.  2001.  Proceedings of 
the national workshop on objectives and indicators for 
ecosystem-based management. Can. Sci. Advis. Sec. 
Proceed. Ser. 2001/09. 140 p. 
Kruse, G.H., Funk, F.C., Geiger, H.J., Mabry, K.R., 
Savikko, H.M. and Siddeek, S.M. 2000. Overview of 
state-managed marine fisheries in the central and 
western Gulf of Alaska, Aleutian Islands, and 
southeastern Bering Sea, with reference to Steller sea 
lions. Alaska Department of Fish and Game, Division 
of Commercial Fisheries, Regional Information 
Report 5J00-10, Juneau. 
MEA (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment). 2005. 
Ecosystems and human well-being: synthesis. Island 
Press, Washington, DC. 137 p. 
NMFS (National Marine Fisheries Service). 2004. 
Programmatic supplemental environmental impact 
statement for the Alaska groundfish fisheries 
implemented under the authority of the fishery 
management plans for the groundfish fishery of the 
Gulf of Alaska and the groundfish fishery of the 
Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands area. U.S. 
Department of Commerce, NOAA, National Marine 
Fisheries Service, Juneau, AK, and Seattle, WA.  
NMFS (National Marine Fisheries Service). 2005. 
Annual report to Congress on the status of U.S. 
10 
fisheries – 2004. U.S. Department of Commerce, 
NOAA, National Marine Fisheries Service, Silver 
Spring, MD. 20 p. 
NPFMC (North Pacific Fishery Management Council). 
2005. Fishery management plan for groundfish of 
the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands management 
area. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 
Anchorage, AK. 
NPRB (North Pacific Research Board). 2005. North 
Pacific Research Board Science Plan. North Pacific 
Research Board. Anchorage, AK. 198 p. 
POC (Pew Oceans Commission). 2003. America’s 
living oceans: charting a course for sea change. A 
report to the Nation: recommendations for a new 
oceans policy. Pew Oceans Commission, Arlington, 
VA. 166 p.   
Schumacher, J.D., Kruse, G.H. and Macklin, S.A. 
(Editors). 2005. The Aleutian ecosystem: processes 
controlling variability in productivity and ecosystem 
structure.  Fish. Oceanogr. 14 (Suppl. 1): 306 p. 
Schumacher, J.D. and Kruse, G.H. 2005. Toward 
sustainable ecosystem services from the Aleutian 
Archipelago. Fish. Oceanogr. 14 (Suppl. 1): 227–
291. 
Witherell, D. (Editor). 2004. Managing our nation’s 
fisheries: past, present and future. U.S. Department 
of Commerce, NOAA Fisheries, Silver Spring, MD. 
254 p. 
Witherell, D. (Editor). 2005. Managing our nation’s 
fisheries II: focus on the future. U.S. Department of 
Commerce, NOAA Fisheries, Silver Spring, MD. 
283 p. 
Witherell, D. and Pautzke, C. 1997. A brief history of 
bycatch management measures for eastern Bering 
Sea groundfish fisheries. Mar. Fish. Rev. 59: 15–22. 
Witherell, D., Pautzke, C. and Fluharty, D.  2000. An 
ecosystem-based approach for Alaska groundfish 
fisheries. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 57: 771–777. 
  11 
Appendix 1 Excerpt from Chapter 2 of the BSAI [GOA] Groundfish FMPs, “Management Approach 
for the BSAI [GOA] Groundfish Fisheries” 
 
The Council’s policy is to apply judicious and 
responsible fisheries management practices, based 
on sound scientific research and analysis, 
proactively rather than reactively, to ensure the 
sustainability of fishery resources and associated 
ecosystems for the benefit of future, as well as 
current generations.  The productivity of the North 
Pacific ecosystem is acknowledged to be among 
the highest in the world.  For the past 25 years, the 
Council management approach has incorporated 
forward looking conservation measures that 
address differing levels of uncertainty.  This 
management approach has in recent years been 
labelled the precautionary approach.  Recognizing 
that potential changes in productivity may be 
caused by fluctuations in natural oceanographic 
conditions, fisheries, and other, non-fishing 
activities, the Council intends to continue to take 
appropriate measures to insure the continued 
sustainability of the managed species.  It will carry 
out this objective by considering reasonable, 
adaptive management measures, as described in 
the Magnuson-Stevens Act and in conformance 
with the National Standards, the Endangered 
Species Act (ESA), the National Environmental 
Policy Act, and other applicable law.  This 
management approach takes into account the 
National Academy of Science’s recommendations 
on Sustainable Fisheries Policy.  
 
As part of its policy, the Council intends to 
consider and adopt, as appropriate, measures that 
accelerate the Council’s precautionary, adaptive 
management approach through community-based 
or rights-based management, ecosystem-based 
management principles that protect managed 
species from overfishing, and where appropriate 
and practicable, increase habitat protection and 
bycatch constraints.  All management measures 
will be based on the best scientific information 
available. Given this intent, the fishery 
management goal is to provide sound conservation 
of the living marine resources; provide socially 
and economically viable fisheries for the well-
being of fishing communities; minimize human-
caused threats to protected species; maintain a 
healthy marine resource habitat; and incorporate 
ecosystem-based considerations into management 
decisions. 
 
This management approach recognizes the need to 
balance many competing uses of marine resources 
and different social and economic goals for 
sustainable fishery management, including 
protection of the long-term health of the resource 
and the optimization of yield.  This policy will use 
and improve upon the Council’s existing open and 
transparent process of public involvement in 
decision-making.  
 
Appendix 2  Management objectives from the groundfish FMPs. 
 
Goal 
Objectives relating to actions 
already established as part of 
groundfish management 
program (does not preclude 
further actions under these 
objectives) 
Objectives relating to actions 
currently under Council 
consideration 
Objectives relating to actions 
that are on hold from Council 
consideration, or have not yet 
been initiated 
Objectives relating to 
considerations that are 
applied to all management 
actions 
Prevent Overfishing 2. Use existing OY caps. 
3. Specify OY as a range. 
*4. Periodic reviews of F
40
 and 
adopt improvements. 
*5. Improve management 
through species categories. 
 1. Adopt conservative harvest 
levels 
Promote Sustainable 
Fisheries and 
Communities 
   6. Promote conservation while 
providing for OY 
7. Promote management 
measures that avoid social 
and economic disruption 
8. Promote fair and equitable 
allocation 
9. Promote safety 
Preserve Food Web 12. Limit harvest on forage 
species. 
*10. Develop indices of 
ecosystem health. 
*11. Improve ABC calculations 
to account for uncertainty 
and ecosystem. 
 13. Incorporate ecosystem 
considerations in fishery 
management 
Manage Incidental 
Catch and Reduce 
Bycatch and Waste 
14. Continue and improve 
current incidental catch and 
bycatch program. 
18. Continue to manage 
incidental catch and bycatch 
through seasons and areas. 
19. Account for bycatch 
mortality in TAC 
accounting. 
*20. Control prohibited species 
bycatch through PSC limits. 
*15. Develop incentive programs 
for bycatch reduction. 
*17. Develop management 
measures that encourage 
techniques to reduce 
bycatch. 
16. Encourage research for non-
target species population 
estimates. 
21. Reduce waste to biologically 
and socially acceptable 
levels 
Avoid Impacts to 
Seabirds and 
Marine Mammals 
 
22. Continue to protect ESA-
listed and other seabirds. 
*23. Maintain or adjust SSL 
protection measures.  
24. Encourage review of marine 
mammal and fishery 
interactions. 
  
 
   
Appendix 2 Continued 
 
Goal 
Objectives relating to 
actions already established 
as part of groundfish 
management program (does 
not preclude further actions 
under these objectives) 
Objectives relating to 
actions currently under 
Council consideration 
Objectives relating to actions that 
are on hold from Council 
consideration, or have not yet been 
initiated 
Objectives relating to 
considerations that are applied to 
all management actions 
Avoid Impacts to 
Seabirds and 
Marine Mammals 
25. Continue to protect ESA-
listed and other marine 
mammals. 
   
Reduce and Avoid 
Impacts to Habitat 
27. Identify EFH and HAPC, 
and mitigate fishery 
impacts as necessary. 
*29. Encourage research on 
baseline habitat mapping. 
 
 *26. Review and evaluate efficacy of 
habitat protection measures for 
managed species. 
28. Develop MPA policy. 
*30. Develop goals and criteria for 
MPAs;  implement as appropriate. 
 
Promote Equitable 
and Efficient Use of 
Fishery Resources 
 *32. Maintain LLP and 
initiate rights-based 
management programs. 
33. Periodically evaluate effectiveness 
of rights-based management 
programs. 
31. Provide economic and 
community stability through fair 
allocation 
34. Consider efficiency when 
adopting management measures 
Increase Alaska 
Native Consultation 
  36. Consider ways to enhance local 
and traditional knowledge 
collection. 
37. Increase Alaska Native 
participation in fishery 
management. 
35. Incorporate local and traditional 
knowledge into fishery 
management 
Improve Data 
Quality, Monitoring, 
and Enforcement 
 *38. Increase utility of 
observer data. 
*39. Develop equitable 
funding mechanisms for 
the NPGOP. 
*40. Increase economic data reporting 
requirements. 
*41. Improve technology for 
monitoring and enforcement. 
42. Encourage development of an 
ecosystem monitoring program. 
43. Cooperate with NPRB to 
identify needed research 
44. Promote enforceability 
45. Coordinate management and 
enforcement programs with 
Federal, State, international, and 
local partners 
* indicates that objective is reflected on Council’s work plan. 
Legend: 
ABC acceptable biological catches LLP license limitation program OY optimal yield 
EFH essential fish habitat MPA marine protected area PSC prohibited species catch 
ESA Endangered Species Act NPGOP North Pacific Groundfish Observer Program SSL Steller sea lion 
HAPC habitat of particular concern NPRB North Pacific Research Board TAC total allowable catch 
 
Appendix 3  NPFMC work plan (May 2006) for implementing groundfish management policy. 
 
Jun Oct Dec Feb Apr Jun Oct Dec
a. complete EFH action as scheduled
27 Amendment approved by Council
b. recommend to NOAA Fisheries increased mapping of 
benthic environment
29
part of Council's research priorities, approved in 
April 06
c. develop and adopt definitions of MPAs, marine reserves, 
etc.
30 discussion paper presented in Feb 05
d. review all existing closures to see if these areas qualify for 
MPAs under established criteria
30 discussion paper presented in Feb 05
e. evaluate effectiveness of existing closures
26 discussion paper presented in Feb 05
a. complete rationalization of GOA fisheries
17 (32)
rockfish demonstration program approved; 
analysis ongoing for broader rationalization
b. complete rationalization of BSAI non-pollock fisheries
17 (32)
partially addressed through IRIU Amd 80 (final 
action Jun 06); also Pacific cod sector 
allocations (approved)
c. explore incentive-based bycatch reduction programs
15
partially to be addressed through GOA 
rationalization and BSAI salmon vessel bycatch 
accountability analyses
d. explore mortality rate-based approach to setting PSC 
limits
20
e. consider new management strategies to reduce incidental 
rockfish bycatch and discards
17 revised ranking system for species of concern
a. continue to participate in development of mitigation 
measures to protect SSL including development of an EIS 
and participation in the ESA jeopardy consultation process
23
consider revisions to SSL management 
measures in 2006-07
b. recommend to NOAA Fisheries and participate in 
reconsideration of SSL critical habitat
23
NMFS requested to re-initiate FMP-level 
Section 7 consultation on DoC species
a. continue to participate in the development of "lumping and 
splitting" criteria
5
GOA 'other species' amd approved; 'other 
species' breakout analysis initiated
b. consider new harvest strategies for rockfish 4 MSE of rockfish harvest strategy
c. set TAC at or < ABC 1 Amendment approved by Council
a. revisit calculation of OY caps 11, 4 research paper presented to SSC in Feb 05
b. recommend to NOAA Fisheries and participate in the 
development and implementation of ecosystem indicators 
as part of stock assessment process
10
development ongoing; ecosystem SAFE to be 
presented each year; PICES workshop to 
develop indicators for the BS (Jun 06)
a. expand or modify observer coverage and sampling 
methods based on scientific data and compliance needs
38, 39
analysis reviews alternatives; final action 
scheduled for Jun 06
b. develop programs for economic data collection that 
aggregate data
40 partially addressed through GOA rationalization
c. modify VMS to incorporate new technology and system 
providers
41 global VMS analysis initial review in Jun 06
Prevent Overfishing
Protection of Habitat
Improve Data Quality 
and Management
Bycatch Reduction
Protection of Steller 
Sea Lions
Ecosystem 
Management
2007
Status
(updated 5-4-06)
General Priority
(in no particular order of 
importance)
2006
Specific priority actions
Related to 
management 
objective:
 
   
Legend: 
ABC acceptable biological catches NMFS National Marine Fisheries Service 
BS Bering Sea NOAA National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
BSAI Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands OY optimal yield 
EFH essential fish habitat PICES North Pacific Marine Science Organization 
ESA Endangered Species Act PSC prohibited species catch 
FMP Fisheries Management Plan SAFE Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation 
GOA Gulf of Alaska SSC Scientific and Statistical Committee 
IRIU improved retention/improved utilization SSL Steller sea lion 
MPA marine protected area TAC total allowable catches 
MSE Management Strategy Evaluation VMS Virtual Monitoring System 
    
 
 
17
Toward ecosystem-based management for the oceans:  A perspective for 
fisheries in the Bering Sea 
 
Andrea Belgrano
1
, Jennifer L. Boldt
1,2
, Patricia Livingston
2
, and Jeffrey M. Napp
2
 
 
1 
Joint Institute for the Study of the Atmosphere and Ocean (JISAO), University of Washington, Seattle, WA 
98185, U.S.A.  E-mail:  belgrano@u.washington.edu 
2
 NOAA/Alaska Fisheries Science Center, 7600 Sand Point Way NE, Bldg. 4, Seattle, WA  98115-6349, 
U.S.A. 
 
Abstract 
 
A large effort has advanced an ecosystem 
approach to fisheries management in Alaska and a 
framework has been developed to provide 
ecosystem-based information to support 
management decisions (Livingston, 2005).  This 
framework uses status and trend data of ecosystem 
components and information on human effects to 
assess impacts of individual fisheries on 
ecosystem components, ecosystem effects on 
particular stocks, and ecosystem-level impacts of 
both fishing and climate stressors.  Efforts are 
ongoing to develop associated ecosystem-level 
objectives, indicators and thresholds.  The 
continuing challenge is to define regional 
management objectives at an operational level and 
use ecosystem indicators to measure progress 
towards achieving management goals.   
  
In addition to identifying management objectives 
for a region, we also need a better understanding 
of the complex mechanisms underlying ecosystem 
function and structure linking climate variability, 
oceanographic processes, and ecology/fisheries. 
Accounting for the emergent properties of 
ecosystems (Carpenter and Folke, 2006) and 
deriving measures that provide a balance between 
diversity, productivity, stability and resilience, 
(Steele, 2006) will be important parts of a 
framework for sustainable ecosystem approach to 
management. 
 
We review objectives of ecosystem approaches to 
management and ecosystem approaches to 
fisheries management from a variety of 
organizations.  In addition, we review indicators in 
the Alaskan Ecosystem Considerations appendix 
in view of these objectives.  Gaps in the existing 
indicator framework are outlined and future work 
to improve indicators is outlined. 
 
Introduction 
 
In many cases fisheries management has focused 
on single species targets and management 
objectives, thereby ignoring many of the 
ecosystem components, processes and interactions 
(Pikitch et al., 2004).  In recent years there has 
been a global call for the implementation of an 
Ecosystem Approach to Management (EAM) and 
an Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries (EAF) to 
focus on different management priorities and to 
consider the ecosystem as a whole rather than 
single target species.  The overall objective of 
EAM is an integrated approach to management of 
land, water, and living resources that promotes 
conservation and sustainable use over a broad 
range of human uses in an ecosystem.  EAF is an 
integrated approach to fisheries management that 
takes ecosystem interactions and processes into 
account. 
 
There has been a large effort to advance an 
ecosystem approach to fisheries management in 
Alaska and a framework has been developed to 
provide ecosystem-based information to support 
management decisions (Livingston et al., 2005).  
This framework uses status and trend data of 
ecosystem components and information on human 
effects to assess impacts of individual fisheries on 
ecosystem components, ecosystem effects on 
particular stocks, and ecosystem-level impacts of 
both fishing and climate stressors.  Efforts are 
ongoing to develop ecosystem-level objectives, 
indicators and thresholds.  The continuing 
challenge is to account for the emergent properties 
of ecosystems (Carpenter and Folke, 2006), e.g., 
vulnerabilities, uncertainties, and biogeochemical 
cycles linked to biodiversity and fisheries 
production, and to provide a balance between 
diversity, productivity, stability and resilience, 
(Steele, 2006) to formulate a framework for 
adopting a sustainable ecosystem management 
strategy. 
 
18
In a recent article, Steele (2006) pointed out that, 
although an ecosystem-based management (EBM) 
approach to marine resources is a “worthy ideal,” 
there are shortcomings to be addressed.  The major 
task ahead of us is to untangle the complexity 
underlying the rates of ecological change (Jackson 
et al., 2001), and link it to patterns and policy 
(Fowler, 1999), and climate change (Hsieh et al., 
2005).  In other words, how does ecosystem 
science relate to ecosystem-based fishery 
management? 
 
In the current literature there is a wealth of 
information regarding management of ecosystems 
and resources (Christensen et al., 1996; Mangel et 
al., 1996), and some theoretical frameworks have 
been proposed  to translate ecosystems indicators 
to ecosystems-based fisheries management 
policies (Pikitch et al., 2004; Link, 2005; 
Livingston et al., 2005; Rice and Rochet, 2005; 
Rochet and Rice, 2005). 
 
In particular, we need to develop ecosystem 
indicators that can match and address each 
management action toward a specific goal (e.g., 
the reduction of bycatch).  Management actions 
also need to be placed in the context of climate 
change.  Major ecosystem shifts in the Bering Sea 
at the ecological level can be related to shifts in 
regional atmospheric and hydrographic forcing 
(Grebmeier et al., 2006; Overland and Stabeno, 
2004), and the response to quasi-decadal climate 
variability has been linked to the recruitment of 
commercially-exploited fishes in the northeast 
Pacific Ocean (Hollowed et al., 2001; Duffy-
Anderson et al., 2005), the eastern Bering Sea 
(Wilderbuer et al., 2002) and the Gulf of Alaska 
(Bailey et al., 2005; Ciannelli et al., 2005).   
 
In this review we evaluate the range of objectives 
being expressed by various international, national 
and regional groups with regard to EAF and EBM 
and evaluate the current indicators/indices for the 
Bering Sea proposed by current research 
programs, governmental agencies (National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
NOAA), and non-governmental organizations 
(NGOs), e.g., North Pacific Research Board 
(NPRB), and NGOs relative to these objectives. 
We will identify gaps or shortcomings with the 
existing indicators and provide suggestions for 
improvement. 
 
Ecosystem indicators/indices will be grouped in 
different domains: climate/oceanography (e.g., 
climate/atmosphere, hydrographic and physico-
chemical processes, climate regime shifts); 
ecological (e.g., primary producers, zooplankton, 
fish, food web and population dynamics, life 
history parameters, natural genetic variation, 
resilience); fisheries (e.g., catch per unit effort 
(CPUE), spawning biomass, recruitment, fish 
catch and fisheries mortality); and management 
and conservation (e.g., EAM, adaptive 
management, social-ecological system, and native 
knowledge of the ecosystem).  We will propose an 
aggregation of the existing ecosystem 
indicators/indices based on ecological information 
from correlative studies in retrospective analyses, 
model simulation and ongoing monitoring 
programs.  We will suggest types of statistical 
analyses that can be performed to provide a better 
understanding of the current use of the ecosystem 
indicators/indices, and outline current gaps in our 
knowledge of the Bering Sea ecosystem. 
 
Background information and terminology 
 
Here, we review some of the definitions, 
principles, goals and objectives described in recent 
reports from different agencies, and emphasize 
common objectives regarding how to implement 
an EAF. 
 
EAM can be defined according to the 
Communication Partnership for Science and the 
Sea (COMPASS; McLeod et al., 2005) as “an 
integrated approach to management that 
considers the entire ecosystem including humans. 
The goal of ecosystem-based management is to 
maintain an ecosystem in a healthy, productive 
and resilient condition so that it can provide the 
services humans want and need.  Ecosystem-based 
management differs from current approaches that 
usually focus on a single species, sector, activity 
or concern; it considers the cumulative impacts of 
different sectors.  Specifically, ecosystem-based 
management: 
• Emphasizes the protection of ecosystem 
structure, functioning, and key processes; 
 
19
• Is placed-based (e.g., specific geographic 
location) in focusing on a specific ecosystem 
and the range of activities affecting it; 
• Explicitly accounts for the interconnectedness 
within systems, recognizing the importance of 
interactions between many target species or key 
services and other non-target species; 
• Acknowledges interconnectedness among 
systems, such as between air, land and sea; and 
• Integrates ecological, social, economic, and 
institutional perspectives, recognizing their 
strong interdependences.” 
 
McLeod et al. (2005) also defined as EAM and 
EAF as being complementary but different. 
“Managing individual sectors, such as fishing, in 
an ecosystem context is necessary but not 
sufficient to ensure the continued productivity and 
resilience of an ecosystem.  Individual human 
activities should be managed in a fashion that 
considers the impacts of the sector on the entire 
ecosystem as well as on other sectors.  The longer-
term, integrated, cumulative impacts of all 
relevant sectors on an ecosystem must be 
evaluated, with a mechanism for adjusting impacts 
of individual sectors.” 
 
FAO (FAO 2001, 2003a,b, 2005) has described 
the main goal of EAF as: “to plan, develop and 
manage fisheries in a manner that addresses the 
multiple needs and desires of societies, without 
jeopardizing the options for future generation to 
benefit from the full range of goods and services 
provided by marine ecosystems.”  The FAO (2005) 
listed the following principles that should be 
addressed by EAF: 
• “Fisheries should be managed to limit their 
impact on the ecosystem to an acceptable level; 
• Ecological relationships between species 
should be maintained; 
• Management measures should be compatible 
across the entire distribution of the resource; 
• Precaution in decision-making and action is 
needed because the knowledge on ecosystems is 
incomplete; 
• Governance should ensure both human and 
ecosystem well-being and equity.” 
 
These principles are also consistent with the 
principles outlined by the UN Convention on 
Biological Diversity.  The EAF approach has to be 
initiated by fishery agencies; however, its 
implementation needs a wider support from other 
entities involved in the management of aquatic 
resources.  In this respect, the North Pacific 
Fishery Management Council (NPFMC, 2006) 
recognizes the importance of implementing an 
EAF and in June 2000, based on different 
guidelines, proposed a definition for Ecosystem-
based Fishery Management as “the regulation of 
human activity toward maintaining a long-term 
system sustainability (within the range of natural 
variability as we understand it) of the North 
Pacific covering the Gulf of Alaska, the Eastern 
and Western Bering Sea and the Aleutian Islands 
region.”  This definition is based on previous 
guidelines provided by NOAA and from a review 
by the Pacific States Marine Fisheries Commission 
(PSMFC). 
 
NOAA’s EAM: 
• Is adaptive; 
• Is regionally directed; 
• Takes account of ecosystem knowledge; 
• Considers multiple external influences; 
• Strives to balance diverse societal objectives. 
 
PSMFC’s EAF: 
• Employs spatial representation; 
• Recognizes the significance of climate/ocean 
conditions; 
• Emphasizes food web interactions; 
• Ensures broader societal goals are taken into 
account (possibly by incorporating broader 
stakeholder representation); 
• Utilizes and expanded scope of monitoring 
(total removal, cumulative effects, non-target 
species, environmental covariates); 
• Acknowledges and responds to higher levels of 
uncertainty; 
• Pursues ecosystem modeling/research; 
• Seeks improved habitat information (target and 
non-target species). 
 
The Ecosystem Principles Advisory Panel (EPAP) 
produced a report for the Congress in 1999 to 
describe the Fishery Ecosystem Plan (FEP).  As 
reported by NPFMC (2006), the EPAP’s main 
goal was to “Maintain ecosystem health and 
 
20
sustainability …” based on the following 
principles: 
• The ability to predict ecosystem behavior is 
limited; 
• Ecosystems have real thresholds and limits 
which, when exceeded, can effect major system 
restructuring; 
• Once thresholds and limits have been exceeded, 
changes can be irreversible; 
• Diversity is important to ecosystem 
functioning; 
• Multiple scales interact within and among 
ecosystems; 
• Components of ecosystems are linked; 
• Ecosystems boundaries are open; 
• Ecosystems change with time. 
 
These goals, objectives and definitions are in line 
with the FEP’s mission goals proposed by NOAA 
in their strategic plan for 2006–2011 (NOAA, 
2005).  The goals and priorities of NOAA for 
2006–2011 are focused on five NOAA Mission 
Goals and below are the first two of these goals 
more closely related with the implementation of an 
EAF: 
• “Protect, restore, and manage the use of 
coastal and ocean resources through an 
Ecosystem Approach to Management; 
• Understand climate variability and change to 
enhance society’s ability to plan and respond.” 
 
NOAA defines the following outcomes: 
• “Healthy and productive coastal marine 
ecosystems that benefit society; 
• A well-informed public that acts as a steward of 
coastal and marine ecosystems.” 
 
In order to achieve these outcomes, NOAA listed a 
number of performance objectives: 
• “Increase number of fish stocks managed at 
sustainable levels; 
• Increase the number of protected species that 
reach stable or increasing population levels; 
• Increase the number of regional coastal and 
marine ecosystems delineated with approved 
indicators of ecological health and 
socioeconomic benefits that are monitored and 
understood; 
• Increase the number of invasive species 
populations eradicated, contained, or 
mitigated; 
• Increase the number of habitat acres conserved 
or restored; 
• Increase the portion of population that is 
knowledgeable of and acting as stewards for 
coastal and marine ecosystems; 
• Increase environmentally sound aquaculture 
production; 
• Increase the number of coastal communities 
incorporating ecosystem and sustainable 
development principles into planning and 
management.” 
 
The Alaska Fishery Science Center (AFSC) 
develops and implements research programs to 
address the NOAA Fisheries objectives under 
NOAA Mission Goals 1 and 2 (Ecosystem 
Considerations, Boldt, 2005). 
 
These types of information are used to describe in 
more detail the Fishery Ecosystem Plans as 
reported by the EPAP (1999).  Further, the Pacific 
States Marine Fisheries Commission provided 
information for NPFMC and the Pacific Fishery 
Management Council on how to use an EBM 
approach within their fishery management 
programs. The EPAP provided a list of 
recommendations for developing an FEP and the 
PSMFC (2005) provided a list of actions from the 
National Marine Fishery Service (NMFS, 1999) 
and recommendations for implementing those 
actions, some of which are listed here: 
• “Define management goals to reflect the 
societal objectives; 
• Develop a conceptual model of the influence of 
oceanographic and climatic factors; 
• Expand/modify the conceptual of the ecosystem 
to include life history characteristics and 
spatial variation; 
• Develop a numerical representation combining 
the food web model (which include dynamic 
model of managed species), the oceanographic 
model, and explicit representation of 
management measures and quantities that have 
been identified as metrics of attainment of the 
management goals; 
• Use models to identify indices that are relevant 
for the stated goals.  Identify which indices can 
 
21
be used for the basis of decision making. 
‘Traffic light’ approaches may be useful.” 
 
From the analysis of these different sources of 
information, NPFMC (2006) provided some broad 
objectives for a management approach for the 
Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands Gulf of Alaska (BSAI 
[GOA]) Groundfish Fisheries as follows: 
• “Prevent overfishing; 
• Promote sustainable fisheries and 
communities; 
• Preserve the food web; 
• Manage incidental catch and reduce bycatch 
and waste; 
• Avoid impacts to seabirds and marine 
mammals; 
• Reduce and avoid impacts to habitat; 
• Promote equitable and efficient use of fishery 
resources; 
• Increase Alaska Native consultation; 
• Improve data quality, monitoring and 
enforcement.” 
 
From NOAA’s Goals and Priorities emerge the 
need to develop an EAF and EAM at a regional 
scale and allow inter-regional comparison.  For the 
implementation of this type of research plan, 
agencies such as NOAA will benefit from the 
research presented by independent organizations 
like the Pew Oceans Commission (2003), the 
World Wildlife Fund (WWF) and The Nature 
Conservancy (2004), COMPASS (McLeod et al., 
2005), North Pacific Marine Science Organization 
(PICES, 2004), as well as the U.S. Commission on 
Ocean Policy (2004).  Further information on 
policy and science related to EAF and EAM is 
discussed in Field and Francis (2006), and Scandol 
et al. (2005).   
 
A comparison of the broad-level objectives 
outlined by various groups for an EAM is shown 
in Table 1.  Similar objectives emerge from this 
comparison.  All acknowledge the need to:   
(1) protect ecosystem structure, functioning and 
key processes, including diversity and habitat,  
(2) account for food web interactions, (3) manage 
regionally, (4) incorporate precaution into 
decisions, (5) integrate broad societal goals, and 
(6) acknowledge multiple, external influences, 
including climate.  Sometimes diversity or habitat 
is not explicitly mentioned in the objectives but is 
inferred from the broad objective to protect 
ecosystem structure and functioning.   
 
Within this framework we need to develop 
regional research programs for place-based EAF 
and EAM.  In this respect, a framework of an 
ecosystem impacts assessment for the BSAI and 
GOA was developed (Livingston et al., 2005), 
which pointed out the need to define better 
ecosystem indicators that can be used to address 
the following goals and objectives: 
  
Goal:  Maintain predator–prey relationships 
Objectives: 
• Maintain pelagic forage availability; 
• Reduce spatial and temporal concentration of 
fishery impact on forage fish; 
• Reduce removals of top predators; 
• Reduce introduction of non-native species. 
 
Goal:  Maintain energy flow and balance 
Objectives: 
• Reduce human-induced energy redirection; 
• Reduce system impacts due to energy removal. 
 
Goal:  Maintain diversity 
Objectives: 
• Maintain species diversity; 
• Maintain functional (trophic, structural habitat) 
diversity; 
• Maintain genetic diversity. 
 
An annual Ecosystem Considerations appendix 
(Boldt, 2005) organizes knowledge of ecosystem 
change at a variety of levels and provides a 
scientific assessment of the roles of humans and 
climate in producing change and whether we are 
achieving the above goals and objectives. 
 
As pointed out by Scandol et al. (2005), EAF is 
closely connected to policies related to 
Ecologically Sustainable Development (ESD), but 
the science community has difficulties translating 
policy statements to specific ecosystem targeted 
studies directed toward the implementation of an 
EAF (Browman and Stergiu, 2004).  We will 
discuss and compare in more detail the need for an 
integration of ecological indicators in view of the 
goals and objectives proposed and discuss a subset 
of potential ecosystem indicators according to 
different domains. 
 
Table 1   Comparison of broad-level ecosystem protection objectives. 
 
Food and 
Agriculture 
(FAO) 
Communication 
Partnership for 
Science and the Sea 
(COMPASS) 
NOAA Ecosystem 
Approach to 
Management 
(EAM) 
Pacific States 
Marine Fisheries 
Commission 
(PSMFC) 
Ecosystem 
Principles Advisory 
Panel  
(EPAP) 
North Pacific 
Fishery 
Management 
Council (NPFMC) 
Ecosystem 
Considerations 
appendix 
Limit ecosystem 
impacts 
Protect  ecosystem 
structure, functioning, 
and key processes 
Take ecosystem 
knowledge into 
account   
Broad scope of 
monitoring, pursue 
ecosystem 
modeling research 
Ecosystems have real 
thresholds and limits 
Prevent overfishing, 
manage incidental 
catch and reduce 
bycatch, waste, avoid 
seabird and marine 
mammal impacts, 
avoid habitat impacts 
Maintain energy flow 
and balance 
Maintain 
ecological 
relationships 
between species 
Account for species 
interactions 
Take ecosystem 
knowledge into 
account  
Emphasize food 
web interactions 
Diversity is important, 
components are linked 
Preserve food web Maintain predator 
prey relationships 
Management 
measures 
compatible 
across entire 
resource 
distribution 
Place-based Regionally directed Employ spatial 
representation 
Multiple scales 
interact among and 
within ecosystems, 
boundaries are open 
(regional measures) (divided into regions) 
Precaution in 
decisions due to 
ecosystem 
uncertainty 
 Incremental and 
adaptive 
Acknowledge high 
levels of 
uncertainty 
Prediction of 
ecosystem behavior is 
limited, change may 
be irreversible, 
ecosystems change 
with time 
Improve data quality, 
monitoring, and 
enforcement 
Maintain diversity 
Governance 
ensures both 
human and 
ecosystem well-
being and equity 
Integrates ecological, 
social, and economic 
perspectives 
Balance diverse 
societal objectives, 
collaborative 
Account for broad 
societal goals 
 Promote sustainable 
fisheries and 
communities, 
equitable use, Native 
consultation 
Understand human 
impacts 
 Interconnectedness 
among air, land, sea 
Multiple, external 
influences 
Recognize 
climate/ocean 
conditions 
  Incorporate climate 
into analyses 
 
23
Ecological indicators 
 
For the Bering Sea, the indicators listed in Fig. 4 
(Boldt, 2005) have been used to examine 
correlations among climate, oceanography, and 
fisheries and are comparable with the indicators 
reported by Overland et al. (2004).  
 
With reference to the subset of goals and 
objectives in the Alaskan Ecosystem 
Considerations appendix, the following indicators 
have been suggested and are listed in relation to 
the potential indicators discussed in the PICES 
North Pacific Ecosystem Status report (PICES, 
2004) for the Bering Sea and the Gulf of Alaska 
(Table 2). 
 
 Indicators in the Alaskan Ecosystem 
Considerations appendix have been organized to 
assess impacts to predator–prey relationships, 
diversity, and ecosystem energy flows 
(Appendices 4 and 5).  However, indicators could 
also be arranged to relate to NPFMC Groundfish 
fishery management plans (FMP) goals (Table 3). 
 
Further development of aggregate indicators that 
can provide information on ecosystem changes in 
relation to climate shifts and changes in 
community species composition would be helpful 
to reduce the number of indicators presented in the 
Alaskan Ecosystem Considerations appendix.  We 
will now discuss the use of a subset of ecosystem 
indicators within three domains: climate and 
oceanography, ecology, and management and 
conservation. 
 
Climate and oceanographic domain 
 
Climate 
 
As described in Overland et al. (1999), three 
dominant modes of climate variability occur 
during the winter in the eastern Bering Sea, the 
Arctic Oscillation (AO), the Pacific Decadal 
Oscillation (PDO), and El Niño Southern 
Oscillation (ENSO) events.  They have an 
influence on both the spatial distribution and 
intensity of the winter storms in relation to the 
position and strength of the Aleutian Low (AL). 
These climate modes have been used to identify 
different periods and patterns during the winters 
for over 30 years in the eastern Bering Sea 
(Overland et al., 1999): 1967–1976 (negative 
PDO, mixed AO, and positive AL), 1977–1988 
(positive PDO, negative AO and AL), and 1989–
1998 (mixed PDO, positive AO, and negative AL), 
and major ecosystem shifts in the northern Bering 
Sea (Grebmeier et al., 2006).  Some of the links 
between climate change and ecosystem processes 
in the Bering Sea have been illustrated by 
Overland and Stabeno (2004) showing changes in 
the surface air temperature (SAT) in relation to sea 
ice concentration and other ocean processes, some 
of which ultimately affect the recruitment of 
Bering Sea winter spawning flatfish (Wilderbuer 
et al., 2002).  The effects of climate change in 
relation to pelagic ecosystem processes, including 
phytoplankton blooms, zooplankton abundance 
and the survival of larval/juvenile fish, and their 
recruitment, has been studied in the southeastern 
Bering Sea (Hunt et al., 2002). 
 
It is important to recognize the difference between 
regime shift and phase transition when we try to 
link climate and ecological processes.  According 
to Ciannelli et al. (2005) regime shifts can be seen 
as the changes of a forcing variable of a system, 
such as climate, and its effect on the entire 
ecosystem.  Phase transitions are related to the 
mechanistic properties of a system and how it 
responds to both exogenous (e.g., 
climate/environmental forcing) and endogenous 
forcing (e.g., density-dependence processes). 
Therefore, regime shifts can be regarded as a set of 
homogeneous controlling variables, whereas phase 
transitions can been seen as a set of homogeneous 
observational variables of the system attributes 
such as diversity patterns at the community level 
and recruitment processes at the population level 
(Ciannelli et al., 2005). 
 
24 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4  Bering Sea indicators combining climate, oceanography, fisheries.  Red colors indicate the large changes in 
recent years (largest one third of values in record).  The middle third is shown in grey and the lowest third is shown 
in green.  The combined indicators are the result of a mathematical analysis (principle component analysis) which 
resolves the trends in all the time series into two major components.  To demonstrate covariability over time, the 
values in the same series have been inverted, as noted by the asterisk (from the Bering Climate web page at: 
http://www.beringclimate.noaa.gov, Rodionov, 2004; Boldt, 2005). 
 
 
25
Table 2  Comparison of ecosystem indicators for the goals and objectives reported in the Alaskan Ecosystem 
Considerations for 2006 appendix (2005) and PICES North Pacific Ecosystem Status report (2004). 
 
Indicators 
Goals Objectives Ecosystem Considerations appendix 
PICES North Pacific 
Ecosystem Status report 
Maintain 
predator-prey 
relationships 
Maintain pelagic 
forage 
availability 
• Population trends in forage biomass 
(quantitative – walleye pollock biomass, 
Atka mackerel, non-target species such as 
squid and herring) 
• Biomass index, catch biomass, 
plankton (phytoplankton, 
zooplankton), 
• Changes in CPUE of non-
target species 
 Reduce spatial 
and temporal 
concentration of 
fishery impact 
on forage fish 
• Degree of spatial/temporal concentration 
on forage species (qualitative – species as 
above) 
• Geographic areas in relation to 
changes in biomass (basin, 
coastal domain, middle 
domain, outer domain), 
• Forage fishes biomass changes 
in CPUE* 
 Reduce 
removals of top 
predators 
• Trophic level of catch; sensitive bycatch 
levels (quantitative: sharks, birds; 
qualitative: pinnipeds), 
• Population status (whales, pinnipeds, 
seabirds) relative to MBAL 
• Marine birds and mammals, 
pinnipeds, cetaceans  
 Reduce 
introduction of 
non-native 
species 
• Total catch  
Maintain 
energy flow 
and balance 
Reduce human 
included energy 
redirection 
• Trends in discard (quantitative) and offal 
production, 
• Scavenger population trends relative to 
discard and offal production (qualitative), 
• Bottom gear effort (qualitative measure of 
unobserved gear mortality on bottom 
organisms) 
 
 Reduce system 
impacts due to 
energy removal 
• Trends in retained catch (quantitative) • Catch and abundance trends 
Maintain 
diversity 
Maintain species 
diversity 
• Population size relative to MSST or ESA 
listing thresholds, linked removals 
(qualitative), 
• Bycatch of sensitive (low population 
turnover rate) species that lack population 
estimates (quantitative: sharks, birds, 
structural habitat biota) 
• Species diversity measures 
 Maintain 
functional 
(trophic, 
structural 
habitat) 
diversity 
• Guild diversity or size diversity changes 
linked to fishing removals (qualitative), 
• Bottom gear effort (measure of benthic 
guild disturbance), 
• Structural habitat biota bycatch 
• Shifts in demersal fish and 
benthic invertebrates 
 Maintain genetic 
diversity 
• Degree of fishing on spawning 
aggregations or larger fish (qualitative), 
• Older-age-group abundance of target 
groundfish stocks 
• Groundfish recruitment 
* CPUE = catch per unit effort; MBAL = minimum biological acceptable level; MSST = minimum stock size 
thresholds; ESA = Endangered Species Act 
 
26 
Table 3   Comparison of Alaska groundfish fishery management plan (FMP) goals to indicators in the Ecosystem 
Considerations for 2006 appendix.  
 
Groundfish FMP Goals Ecosystem Considerations Indices 
Prevent overfishing Status of stocks, annual surplus productivity 
Promote sustainable fisheries and communities Fishing overcapacity programs 
Preserve food web 
 
 
Many indices of pelagic forage availability, spatial/temporal 
conc. of fishery impact on forage fish, removals of top 
predators, introduction of non-native species 
Manage incidental catch and reduce bycatch and 
waste  
Prohibited species, discards, bycatch 
Avoid impacts to seabirds and marine mammals 
productivity, and chronology trends 
Seabird and mammal incidental take, population abundance  
Reduce and avoid impacts to habitat EFH research, effects of fishing gear on habitat research 
Promote equitable and efficient use of fishery 
resources  
Fishing overcapacity programs, groundfish fleet 
composition 
Increase Alaska native consultation 
 
Alaska Native Traditional Environmental Knowledge of 
climate regimes 
Improve data quality, monitoring and 
enforcement 
 
EFH = Essential Fish Habitat 
 
Time lags between climate, ecological processes 
and fisheries 
 
There is a need to understand the complex 
mechanisms underlying the connections between 
climate variability and the ecological response to 
this exogenous forcing in relation to fisheries 
management.  In the present fisheries management 
framework there are no specific considerations of 
the importance of time-lags and delayed responses 
or of the type of actions to be taken to respond to 
climate/fishery related processes (King and 
McFarlane, 2006).  However, their framework 
approach to incorporate climate regime shifts into 
management strategies and policy is a single-
species approach and is far from the essence of an 
EAF and EAM that require moving from a single-
species to a multi-species framework. 
 
In order to implement a framework that includes 
climate-driven changes in the ecosystem as regime 
shifts or phase transitions, we need to further 
understand the links between climate processes, 
physical oceanographic processes and primary 
productivity.  There is the need to develop 
adequate methods for the detection of regime 
shifts (Rodionov and Overland, 2005) to allow a 
better definition of the type of climate/physical 
oceanographic indicators we can use to explain the 
variability we observed at the population, 
community and ecosystem level at different 
temporal and spatial scales.  We need to look in 
more detail at the importance of time lags when 
considering potential causal direct/indirect links 
between climate and ecological processes 
(Belgrano et al., 1999). 
 
Climatic, atmospheric, and oceanic variables need 
to be first linked to the variations in 
phytoplankton, primary production (e.g., Chl a, 
SeaWiFS data) and nutrients (e.g., BASIS survey 
2000–2004; BS FOCI; SEBSCC nutrients), since 
we need to understand the links between climate 
forcing and changes in the primary production 
required (PPR), Pauly and Christensen (1995) for 
recruitment processes, predator-prey relationships, 
and diversity.  We need to consider the importance 
of spatial autocorrelation (Legendre, 1993) and 
adequate multivariate analysis approaches 
(Borcard et al., 1992) to define the ecological 
variation explained by exogenous and endogenous 
processes. 
 
The Alaskan ecosystem protection goals, such as 
the maintenance of predator–prey relationships 
and biological and genetic diversity, are closely 
 
27
related to exogenous forcing and further research 
is necessary to capture the complexity of these 
relationships to refine the existing “ecological 
indicators” used to describe variability patterns. 
 
Ecological domain 
 
We will consider a subset of ecological processes 
that are part of a broader ecological domain that 
are related to these goals: 
• Maintain predator–prey relationships; 
• Maintain energy flow and balance; 
• Maintain diversity, including genetic diversity. 
 
Ecology 
 
The analysis of food webs has been used to 
describe communities as complex adaptive 
systems as well as to look at the links between 
food-web complexity and ecosystem stability. 
Food webs can provide a working framework for 
linking observed/predicted patterns to specific 
management issues. 
 
For the maintenance of predator-prey relationships 
we have to realize that aquatic food webs are 
strongly size-based (Sheldon et al., 1972).  
Therefore, individual body size provides a link 
between individual organisms making up a 
community and predator-prey interactions.  As 
pointed out by earlier studies individual body mass 
can be described by scaling laws (West and 
Brown, 2005) and linked to the biological 
properties of a system to provide estimates of 
ecosystem properties such as production (Kerr, 
1974; Boudreau and Dickie, 1992; Kerr and 
Dickie, 2001; Jennings and Blanchard, 2004). 
 
There is the need to link the structure of size-based 
food webs to predator-prey body-size ratios, 
trophic transfer efficiency, and abundance-body-
size relationships.  These properties have been 
recognized since the earlier work by Sheldon and 
Kerr (1972) and more recently by others (Link, 
2002a,b; Nicholson and Jennings, 2004) to be 
important ecosystem descriptors used for assessing 
the effect of both climate change and fishing 
pressure on marine ecosystems, but they have not 
yet been used to link patterns to policy.  A key 
issue is to understand the relationships between 
structure and diversity in food webs (Jennings et 
al., 2002; Cohen et al., 2003) that includes the 
recent development in scaling theory and 
macroecology (Belgrano et al., 2002; Li, 2002; 
Jennings and Mackinson, 2003) applied to marine 
systems. 
 
In this context the use of a size-based food web 
approach framework will allow us to better 
understand the abundance-body-size relationship 
for communities that share a common energy 
source (Cyr, 2000; Ware, 2000; Brown and 
Gillooly, 2003; Cohen et al., 2003).  In this 
respect, the following indicators can be used 
examine the links between predator–prey 
relationships in relation to specific management 
issues: 
• body size, 
• Predator–Prey Mass Ratio (PPMR), 
• Trophic Efficiency (TE), 
• Trophic Level (TL). 
 
The investigation of complexity and stability 
issues in food webs dates back to the early work 
by May (1972, 1973) when he developed a 
framework to relate the number of species, S, the 
connectance in the food web, C, and the number of 
links, L, (e.g., species interactions).  More recently 
these food web properties have been extended into 
network analysis and theory (Williams and 
Martinez, 2000; Dunne et al., 2002, 2004; Krause 
et al., 2003; Morris et al., 2005).  However, 
further work is necessary on the use of statistical 
inference in food web models (Solow and Beet, 
1998; Neubert et al., 2000; Solow, 2005). 
Complexity–stability implications are related to 
both food web dynamics and biodiversity process 
and have been recently reviewed by Dunne et al. 
(2005), Kondoh (2005), and Naeem (2006).  This 
particular aspect is related to the third Alaska 
ecosystem protection goal “Maintain diversity 
including genetic diversity.” 
 
In particular we can refer to the re-analysis of the 
Benguela food web dynamics by Yodzis (1998, 
2000) where he used an energetic and allometric 
modeling approach to show that the interaction 
between hake and fur seals is linked to many other 
species in the food web.  As Kondoh (2005) points 
out it is important to understand the relationship 
between connectance, C, and population 
28 
persistence in the presence of adaptive foragers in 
relation to the adaptive food web hypothesis 
(Kondoh, 2003a,b), “where the effect of changing 
species richness on population stability depends 
on the fraction of adaptive foragers and their 
adaptation rate (Kondoh, 2005).”  
 
In the context of species diversity and biodiversity 
measurements related to fisheries (Hoff, 2006) we 
often see the use of a richness index, evenness 
index, and the Shannon-Weaver, or Shannon-
Wiener index of diversity based on Simpson’s 
(1949) indices.  This measurement is the alpha ( α) 
diversity that measures the diversity in species at 
individual sites.  Since we are interested in the 
variation in species composition among locations 
in a geographic area (e.g., Bering Sea, GOA) we 
need to use the beta ( β) diversity.  As pointed out 
by Legendre et al. (2005), “If the variation in 
community composition is random, and 
accompanied by biotic processes (e.g., 
reproduction) that generate spatial 
autocorrelation, a gradient in species composition 
may appear and beta diversity can be interpreted 
in terms of rate of change, or turnover, in species 
composition along that gradient.”   
 
In this respect, the following indicators can be 
used to link species diversity and trophic, 
structural habitat diversity to specific management 
issues: 
• species body-size, 
• beta ( β) diversity, 
• species richness, 
• species rank, 
• habitat conservation. 
 
However, as pointed out by Bascompte et al. 
(2006), there is a need to understand further how 
communities shape co-evolutionary interactions 
and how these networks are related to biodiversity 
maintenance.  In this respect it is important to 
maintain genetic diversity and to develop 
management tools aimed at preserving natural 
genetic variation in fish populations and 
maintaining genetic diversity (Conover and 
Munch, 2002): 
• Size-dependent mortality. 
 
With reference to the second Alaska marine 
protection goal, Maintain energy flow and 
balance, in a recent review by Morris et al. (2005), 
Zorach and Ulanowicz (2003) and Krause et al. 
(2003), some of the current metrics used to 
understand the interrelationships between food 
webs and the properties of ecosystems have been 
discussed in the context of food web complexity. 
The following indicators may be tested in the 
context of food web stability and energy flow, and 
balance: 
• Trophic Efficiency (TE), 
• Trophic Level (TL), 
• Interactive Connectance (IC), 
• Total System Throughput (TST), 
• Average Mutual Information (AMI). 
 
Fisheries 
 
When we turn to fisheries, the kind of ecological 
indicators used in relation to an ecosystem-based 
fishery management approach (EAF) are 
overwhelming (e.g., CPUE, spawning biomass, 
recruitment, production biomass, consumption 
biomass, fishing mortality, etc.).  Cury et al. 
(2005a,b) used a subset of indicators in relation to 
trophodynamics derived from model output as 
well as from observed patterns emerging from 
field data.  With reference to the three goals from 
the Alaskan Ecosystem Considerations appendix: 
(1) Maintain predator–prey relationships, (2) 
Maintain energy flow and balance, and  
(3) Maintain diversity including genetic diversity, 
some ecological indicators have been used to 
integrate similar goals.  For example: 
• Trophic Level of the Catch (TLC), 
• Trophic Level (TL), 
• Mixed Trophic Impact (TI), 
• Fishing-in Balance (FIB) index, 
• recruitment indices, 
• total biomass,  
• forage biomass indices, 
• fishery bycatch, 
• Primary Production Required (PPR). 
 
However, we need to provide ecological indicators 
that can account for ecosystem-level patterns and 
match them with the criteria for implementing an 
EAF.  
 
 
29
Management and conservation domain 
 
To have an ecologically sound approach to 
managing uses of marine resources, we need to 
clarify and understand that there are links between 
the rates of ecological change, climate change and 
human disturbance (Jackson et al., 2001). 
 
Recalling the overall objectives of EAF (Pikitch et 
al., 2004):  
1. “avoid degradation of ecosystems, as measured 
by indicators of environmental quality and 
system status 
2. minimize the risk of irreversible change to 
natural assemblages of species and ecosystem 
processes 
3. obtain and maintain long-term socioeconomic 
benefits without compromising the ecosystem 
4. generate knowledge of ecosystem processes 
sufficient, robust and precautionary fishery 
management measures that favor the ecosystem 
should be opted.” 
 
Development of aggregate indicators of 
sustainable use limits is important.  As an 
example, Fowler and Hobbs (2002) used empirical 
information to estimate the Ecologically 
Allowable Take (EAT) for the Bering Sea and 
Georges Bank, (northwestern Atlantic) to address 
questions regarding total biomass that can 
sustainably be consumed by humans as predators 
in such systems.  Validating the information used 
to derive such indicators and ensuring that they are 
based on contemporary, well-estimated parameters 
is ongoing.  Aggregate indicators can also be 
derived from whole-ecosystem approaches, such 
as those obtained from ECOPATH/ECOSIM 
models. 
 
A systemic management approach is proposed 
(Fowler 1999, 2003) to understand ecosystem 
dynamics and the emergence of ecosystem 
patterns to management issues.  Systemic 
Management (SM) can be defined as a 
macroecological approach that is based on 
emergent patterns (probability distributions) that 
are directly relevant to specific management 
questions.  Macroecology (Brown, 1995) is a 
statistical approach used to investigate processes 
related to invariant–variant patterns of structured 
class-size, body mass, species abundances, 
composition and interactions across different 
spatial and temporal scales (Belgrano and Brown, 
2002; Jonsson et al., 2006; Naeem, 2006). 
Therefore, a SM approach could also be used to 
address questions related to the spatial and 
temporal distribution of fisheries harvest, as well 
as to the establishment of marine reserves and 
closed seasons (Fowler and Crawford, 2004), 
which are part of EAF and EAM.  An example of 
other management questions that have been 
addressed systemically include how to allocate 
catches over space, time, and alternative resources 
species (Fowler, 1999; Fowler and Crawford, 
2004).  
 
As pointed out by Baskett et al. (2005), in the 
context of Marine Protected Areas, we need to 
consider the importance of evolutionary changes 
induced by fishing (e.g., changing size-dependent 
mortality) in relation to the harvested species. 
Management and conservation actions need to be 
taken in consideration of the knowledge that the 
interactions between species are embedded in 
multispecies food webs with different degrees of 
complexity that cannot be ignored (Yodzis, 2000). 
We need to maintain the natural variability in 
populations and species diversity by reducing the 
selective pressure exerted by commercial fisheries 
on prey stock by taking into account predation 
patterns observed in large predators (e.g., marine 
mammals).  Therefore, we need to define what is 
sustainable in terms of selectivity by body size to 
address genetic effects of commercial harvesting, 
as pointed out by Birkeland and Dayton (2005) 
and Etnier and Fowler (2005), and to better 
describe the trophic position of the harvested 
species in relation to the patterns of predation rates 
(Melian and Bascompte, 2004; Bascompte et al., 
2005), as well as by accounting for natural 
mortality, M, that in current fisheries models is 
often attributed a constant value (Yodzis, 2001).  
 
If we now return to the subset of ecological 
indicators to be used in implementing an EAF and 
EAM we need to consider the temporal and spatial 
scales at which ecosystems operate (Naeem, 
2006), and match those with the scale at which 
policy and management decisions and actions 
operate.  We also need to address the issue of 
complexity (Taylor, 2005) in EBM and to consider 
ecosystems as complex adaptive systems (Lansing, 
30 
2003), where the emergence of patterns is often 
the result of local interactions operating at 
different spatial and temporal scales.  In a fisheries 
co-management context, for example, the 
application of game theory combining economic 
and biological parameters showed interesting 
results in addressing problems related to a fishery 
cooperative system (Trisak, 2005). 
 
Outlook 
 
Given the urgency of moving toward sustainable 
fisheries, we need to consider the use of ecological 
and socio-economic indicators as part of a 
framework for an EAF and EAM of marine 
resources and promote the health of the oceans 
(Cury et al., 2005a,b; Livingston et al., 2005) by 
addressing long-term objectives. 
  
Models 
We often turn to models to address both 
theoretical and applied questions.  Fisheries 
management has used, to date, single-species 
models focused on target species (Hilborn and 
Walters, 1991; Quinn and Deriso, 2000) and 
embedded in stock assessment estimates using 
virtual population analysis tools (Yodzis, 2001). 
The maximum sustainable yield (MSY) fishing 
rate concept, criticized by Larkin (1977) and 
Walters et al. (2005), was shown to be 
inappropriate for use in the context of ecosystem-
based fishery management.  Despite efforts to 
move toward a multi-species approach (Walters et 
al., 1997) single-species management approaches 
are the current management practice (Hoffman and 
Powell, 1998). Single-species approaches typically 
used in stock assessment need to take into 
consideration allometric relations involving 
individual body-size (Yodzis, 1998).  Also, the 
intrinsic growth rate, r, should be used in a 
stochastic framework that takes into account both 
endogenous and exogenous forcing, if we need 
ecological/fisheries oriented indicators from stock 
assessment studies. 
Multi-species modeling uses a bioenergetic 
approach (Christensen and Pauly, 1992) and 
simulations using the (ECOPATH/ECOSIM) 
modules have been used successfully for 
addressing fishery-induced ecosystem changes in 
the Gulf of Thailand, but less successfully to 
address, for example, the decline of Steller sea 
lions in relation to fisheries management in the 
Bering Sea (Trites, 1999).  The ECOPATH model 
approach has also been tested in the context of 
fishing effects on food web dynamics in the 
eastern and western Bering Sea ecosystems (Aydin 
et al., 2002).  Other applications of multi-species 
ecosystem models have been developed for the 
eastern Bering Sea using a multi-species virtual 
population analysis (MVPA) as described by 
Livingston and Jurado-Molina (2000) and for the 
Bering Sea groundfish fisheries (Jurado-Molina 
and Livingston, 2002). 
 
As part of the process to move toward a multi-
species approach to EAF, we need to describe and 
evaluate the many ecological indicators so far 
proposed in the context of fisheries management. 
Ecological indicators have been evaluated from 
model output (Fulton et al., 2005), and by 
statistical approaches (Link et al., 2002; Mueter 
and Megrey, 2005).  However, we may need to 
consider the spatial variation of community 
composition data and apply statistical methods that 
include space as a variable (Legendre, 1993).  We 
need models that combine the effects of different 
mortality factors as shown, for example, in the 
case study for collapse of the Barents Sea capelin 
(Hjermann et al., 2004) and we need to consider 
the non-linearity present in the dynamics of large-
scale marine ecosystems (Hsieh et al., 2005).  
 
Ecological indicators 
 
Future work will take the multiple ecological 
indicators for each of the three ecosystem 
protection objectives outlined for the Bering Sea 
ecosystem and develop aggregate indicators.  In 
the PICES report (2004), information gaps are 
listed for three major areas or domains: climate, 
ocean productivity, and living marine resources; 
suggesting the need to link climate and 
oceanographic process to nutrients dynamics, 
phytoplankton and zooplankton variability, and 
food web dynamics.  We need to develop 
ecological indicators that can be used for EAF and 
EAM at different spatial scales across 
geographical areas and integrate this information 
with GIS data.  We need to maintain and expand 
the current monitoring programs and combine the 
 
31
information with oceanographic data derived from 
satellites (Polovina and Howell, 2005).  Toward 
this end there are initiatives to develop a 
theoretical framework to provide environmental 
vulnerability indicators (EVI) which provide a 
way to quantify environmental vulnerability, 
conservation status and resilience across different 
spatial and temporal scales (Villa and McLeod, 
2002). 
 
There is a need to understand the complexity and 
the mechanisms underlying the ecological 
processes that are at the core for improving our 
ability to translate this type of information into 
tools that can be used to sustain ecosystem 
services (Carpenter and Folke, 2006), but as 
pointed out by Steele (2006), “At present, the 
science is unable to measure and relate the 
fundamental concepts of diversity, productivity 
and resilience for management decisions.”  
Although this might be true for ecosystem-level 
measures of these attributes, certainly these 
attributes are considered in decision-making at 
lower organizational levels (e.g., species) by 
fishery managers.  Thus, the implementation of 
system-level management measures is not likely in 
the short-term.  In the meantime, definition of 
more specific, operational objectives in regions 
will allow the measurement of more refined, sub-
system level indicators to measure performance.  
  
References 
 
Aydin, K.Y., Lapko, V.V., Radchenko, V.I. and 
Livingston, P.A. 2002. A comparison of the eastern 
and western Bering Sea shelf and slope ecosystems 
through the use of mass-balanced food web models. 
NOAA Technical Memorandum, NMFS-AFSC-130 
pp. 78. 
Bailey, K.M., Ciannelli, L., Bond, N.A., Belgrano, A. 
and Stenseth, N.C. 2005. Recruitment of walleye 
pollock in a physically and biologically complex 
ecosystem: A new perspective. Progr. Oceanogr. 
67: 24–42. 
Bascompte, J., Jordano, P. and Olsen, J.M. 2006. 
Asymmetric coevolutionary networks facilitate 
biodiversity maintenance. Science 312: 431–433. 
Bascompte, J., Melian, C.J. and Sala, E. 2005. 
Interaction strength combinations and the 
overfishing of a marine food web. Proc. Nat. Acad. 
Sci. 102: 5443–5447. 
Baskett, M.L., Levin, S.A., Gaines, S.D. and Dushoff, 
J. 2005. Marine reserve design and the evolution of 
size at maturation in harvested fish. Ecol. Appl. 15: 
882–901. 
Belgrano, A. and Brown, J.H. 2002. Oceans under the 
macroscope. Nature 419: 128-129. 
Belgrano, A., Lindahl, O. and Henroth, B. 1999. North 
Atlantic Oscillation primary productivity and toxic 
phytoplankton in the Gullmar Fjord, Sweden (1985–
1996). Proc. Roy. Soc. B 266: 425–430. 
Belgrano, A., Allen., A.P., Enquist, B.J. and Gillooly, 
J.F. 2002. Allometric scaling of maximum 
population density: a common rule for marine 
phytoplankton and terrestrial plants. Ecol. Lett. 5: 
611–613. 
Birkeland, C. and Dayton, P.K. 2005. The importance 
in fishery management of leaving the big ones. 
Trends Ecol. Evol. 20: 356–358. 
Boldt, J.L. (Editor). 2005. Ecosystem Considerations 
for 2006. Appendix C of Bering Sea/Aleutian 
Islands and Gulf of Alaska Stock Assessment and 
Fishery Evaluation Reports. North Pacific Fishery 
Management Council, 605 W 4th Avenue, Suite 
306, Anchorage, AK, 99501. 
Borcard, D., P. Legendre, and P. Drapeau. 1992. 
Partialling out the spatial component of ecological 
variation. Ecology 73: 1045–1055.   
Boudreau, P.R. and Dickie, L.M. 1992. Biomass spectra 
of aquatic ecosystems in relation to fisheries yield. 
Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 49: 1528–1538. 
Browman, H.I. and Stergiu, K.I. 2004. Introduction. 
Politics and socio-economics of ecosystem-based 
management of marine resources. Mar. Ecol. Progr. 
Ser. 300: 241–242. 
Brown, J.H. 1995. Macroecology. University of 
Chicago Press, Chicago. 
Brown, J.H. and Gillooly, J.F. 2003. Ecological food 
webs: high quality data facilitate theoretical 
unification. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 1467–1468. 
Carpenter, S.R. and Folke, C. 2006. Ecology for 
transformation. Trends Ecol. Evol. 21: 309–315. 
Christensen, V. and Pauly, D. 1992. ECOPATH II: a 
software for balancing steady-state models and 
calculating network characteristics. Ecol. Model. 61: 
169–185. 
Christensen, N.L., Bartuska, A.M., Brown, J.H., 
Carpenter, S., D’Antonio, C., Francis, R., Franklin, 
J.F., MacMahon, J.A., Noss, R.F., Parsons, D.J., 
Peterson, C.H., Turner, M.G. and Woodmansee, 
R.G. 1996.The report of the Ecological Society of 
America committee on the scientific basis of 
ecosystem management. Ecol. Appl. 6: 665–691. 
Ciannelli, L., Bailey, K.M., Chan, K-S., Belgrano, A. 
and Stenseth, N.C. 2005. Climate change causing 
phase transitions of walleye Pollock (Theragra 
chalcogramma) recruitment dynamics. Proc. Roy. 
Soc. B 272: 1735–1743. 
32 
Cohen, J.E., Jonsson, T. and Carpenter, S.R. 2003. 
Ecological community description using the food 
web, species abundance and body size. Proc. Nat. 
Acad. Sci. 100: 1781–1786. 
Conover, D.O. and Munch, S.B. 2002. Sustaining 
fisheries yields over evolutionary time scales. 
Science 297: 94–96. 
Cury, P.M., Shannon, L.J., Roux, J-P., Daskalov, G.M., 
Jarre, A., Moloney, C.L. and Pauly, D. 2005a. 
Trophodynamic indicators for an ecosystem 
approach to fisheries. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 62:  
430–442. 
Cury, P.M., Mullon, C., Garcia, S.M. and Shannon, L.J. 
2005b. Trophodynamic indicators for an ecosystem 
approach to fisheries. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 62: 577–
584. 
Cyr, H. 2000. Individual energy use and the allometry 
of population density. pp 267–295. In Scaling in 
Biology. Edited by J.H. Brown and G.B. West, 
Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
DFO (Department of Fisheries and Oceans). 2003. 
Pacific Region State of the Ocean. Department of 
Fisheries and Oceans (DFO) Science Ocean Status 
Report, Ottawa, Canada, 2002. 
Duffy-Anderson, J.T., Bailey, K., Ciannelli, L., Cury, 
P., Belgrano, A. and Stenseth, N.C. 2005. Phase 
transitions in marine fish recruitment processes. 
Ecol. Complexity 2: 205–218. 
Dunne, J., Williams, R.J. and Martinez, N.D. 2002. 
Food web structure and network theory: the role of 
connectance and size. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 
12,917–12,922. 
Dunne, J., Williams, R.J. and Martinez, N.D. 2004. 
Network structure and robustness of marine food 
webs. Mar. Ecol. Progr. Ser. 273: 291–302. 
Dunne, J., Brose, U., Williams, R.J. and Martinez, N.D. 
2005. Modeling food-web dynamics: complexity-
stability implications. pp. 117–129. In Aquatic Food 
Webs: An Ecosystem Approach. Edited by A. 
Belgrano, U.M. Scharler, J. Dunne and R.E. 
Ulanowicz, Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
EPAP (Ecosystem Principles Advisory Panel) 1999. 
Ecosystem-based fishery management: A report to 
Congress by the Ecosystem Principles Advisory 
Panel, National Marine Fisheries Service, 
Washington, DC. 
Etnier, M.A. and Fowler, C.W.  2005.  Comparison of 
size selectivity between marine mammals and 
commercial fisheries with recommendations for 
restructuring management policies.  U.S. Dep. 
Commer., NOAA Technical Memorandum, NMFS-
AFSC-159.  274 pp. 
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2001. 
Towards ecosystem-based fishery management: A 
background paper prepared by FAO for the 
Reykjavik conference on Responsible Fisheries in 
the Marine System. Reykjavik 2001/4, FAO 
Reykjavik. 
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization).  2003a. 
FAO technical guidelines for responsible fisheries: 4 
Fisheries Management (2) The ecosystem approach 
to fisheries. Food and Agriculture Organization of 
the United Nations, Rome. 
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2003b. 
Towards ecosystem-based fisheries management: A 
background paper prepared by FAO for the 
Reykjavik conference on Responsible Fisheries in 
the Marine System. pp. 393–403. In Responsible 
fisheries in the marine ecosystem. Edited by M. 
Sinclair and G. Valdimrssen, FAO and CABI 
Publishing, Cambridge. 
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2005. 
Putting into practice the ecosystem approach to 
fisheries. Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations, Rome. 
Fowler, C.W.  1999.  Management of multi-species 
fisheries: from overfishing to sustainability.  ICES J. 
Mar. Sci. 56: 927–932. 
Fowler, C.W.  2003. Tenets, principles, and criteria for 
management: the basis for systemic management.  
Mar. Fish. Rev. 65: 1–55. 
Fowler, C.W. and Crawford, R.J.M.  2004.  Systemic 
management of fisheries in space and time: 
tradeoffs, complexity, ecosystems, sustainability. 
Biosphere Conserv.  6: 25–42. 
Fowler, C.W. and Hobbs, L.  2002.  Limits to Natural 
Variation: Implications for Systemic Management.  
Animal Biodivers. Conserv. 25: 7–45. 
Field, J.C. and Francis, R.C. 2006. Considering 
ecosystem-based fisheries management in the 
California current. Mar. Policy 30: 552–569. 
Fulton, E.A., Smith, A.D.M. and Punt, A. 2005. Which 
ecological indicators can robustly detect effects of 
fishing? ICES J. Mar. Sci. 62: 540–551. 
Grebmeier, J.M., Overland, J.E., Moore, S.E., Farley, 
E.V., Carmack, E.C., Cooper, L.W., Frey, K.E., 
Helle, J.H., McLaughlin, F.A. and McNutt, S.L. 
2006. A major ecosystem shift in the northern 
Bering Sea. Science 311: 1461–1464. 
Hilborn, R. and Walters, C.J. 1991. Quantitative 
fisheries stock assessment. Chapman and Hall, NY. 
Hjermann, D.O., Ottersen, G. and Stenseth, N.C. 2004. 
Competition among fishermen and fish causes the 
collapse of Barents Sea capelin. Proc. Nat. Acad. 
Sci.  101: 11,679–11,684. 
Hoff, G.R. 2006. Biodiversity as an index of regime 
shift in the eastern Bering Sea. Fish. Bull. 104: 226–
237.  
Hoffmann, E.E. and Powell, T.M. 1998. Environmental 
variability effects on marine fisheries: four case 
histories. Ecol. Appl. 8 Suppl.: S23–S32. 
 
33
Hollowed, A.B., Hare, S.R. and Wooster, W.S. 2001. 
Pacific basin climate variability and patterns of 
northeast Pacific marine fish production. Progr. 
Oceanogr. 49: 257–282. 
Hsieh, C., Glaser, S.M., Lucas, A.J. and Sugihara, G. 
2005. Distinguishing random environmental 
fluctuations from ecological catastrophes for the 
North Pacific Ocean. Nature 435: 336–340. 
Hunt G.L., Jr., Stabeno, P., Walters, G., Sinclair, E., 
Brodeur, R.D., Napp, J.M. and Bond, N.A. 2002. 
Climate change and control of the southeastern 
Bering Sea pelagic ecosystem. Deep-Sea Res. II 49: 
5821–5853. 
Jackson, J.B.C., Kirby, M.X., Berger, W.H., Bjorndal, 
K.A., Botsford, L.W., Bourque, B.J., Bradbury, 
R.H., Cooke, R.G., Erlandson, J., Estes, J.A., 
Hughes, T.P., Kidwell, S., Lange, C.B., Lenihan, 
H.S., Pandolfi, J.M., Peterson, C.H., Steneck, R.S., 
Tegner, M.J. and Warner, R.R.  2001. Historical 
overfishing and the recent collapse of coastal 
ecosystems. Science 293: 629–638. 
Jennings, S. and Blanchard, J.L. 2004. Fish abundance 
with no fishing: predictions based on 
macroecological theory. J. Animal Ecol. 73: 632-
642. 
Jennings, S. and Mackinson, S. 2003. Abundance-body 
mass relationship in size-structured food webs. Ecol. 
Lett. 6: 971–974. 
Jennings, S., Warr, K.J., and Mackinson, S. 2002. Use 
of size-based production and stable isotope analyses 
to predict trophic transfer efficiencies and predator-
prey body mass ratios in food webs. Mar. Ecol. 
Progr. Ser. 240: 11–20. 
Jonsson, T., Cohen, J.E. and Carpenter, S.R. 2005. 
Food webs, body size, and species abundance in 
ecological community description. Advances Ecol. 
Res. 36: 1–84 
Jurado-Molina, J., and Livingston, P.A. 2002. 
Multispecies perspectives on the Bering Sea 
groundfish fisheries management regime. North Am. 
J. Fish. Mgmt. 22: 1164–1175. 
Kerr, S.R. 1974. Theory of size distribution in 
ecological communities. J. Fish. Res. Bd. Can. 31: 
1859-1862. 
Kerr, S.R., and Dickie, L.M.  2001. The biomass 
spectrum: A predator-prey theory of aquatic 
production. Columbia University Press, New York. 
King, J.R. and McFarlane, G.A.  2006. A framework 
for incorporating climate regime shifts into the 
management of marine resources. Fish Mgmt. Ecol. 
13: 93–102. 
Kondoh, M. 2003a. Foraging adaptation and the 
relationship between food-web complexity and 
stability. Science 299: 1388–1391. 
Kondoh, M. 2003b. Response to comment on “foraging 
adaptation and the relationship between food-web 
complexity and stability.” Science 301:  918. 
Kondoh, M. 2005. Is biodiversity maintained by food-
web complexity? – the adaptive food-web 
hypothesis. pp. 130–142. In Aquatic Food Webs: An 
Ecosystem Approach. Edited by A. Belgrano, U.M. 
Scharler, J. Dunne and R.E. Ulanowicz, Oxford 
University Press, Oxford. 
Krause, A.E., Frank, K.A., Mason, D.M. and 
Ulanowicz, R.E. 2003. Compartments revealed in 
food-web structure. Nature 426: 282–285. 
Lansing, J.S. 2003. Complex adaptive system. Ann. 
Rev. Anthropol. 32: 183–204. 
Larkin, P.A. 1977. An epitaph for the concept of 
maximum sustained yield. Trans. Am. Fish. Soc. 
106: 1-11. 
Legendre, P. 1993. Spatial autocorrelation: trouble or 
new paradigm. Ecology 74: 1659–1673. 
Legendre, P., Borcard, D. and Peres-Neto, P.R.  2005. 
Analyzing beta diversity: partitioning the spatial 
variation of community composition data. Ecol. 
Monogr. 75: 435–450.  
Li, W.K.W. 2002. Macroecological patterns of 
phytoplankton in the northwestern Atlantic Ocean. 
Nature 419: 154–157. 
Link, J.S. 2002a. Ecological considerations in fisheries 
management: What does it matter? Fisheries 27: 
10–17. 
Link, J.S. 2002b. Does food web theory work for 
marine ecosystems? Mar. Ecol. Progr. Ser. 230:  
1–9. 
Link, J.S. 2005. Translating ecosystem indicators into 
decision criteria. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 62: 569–576. 
Link, J.S., Brodziak, J.K.T., Edwards, S.F., Overholtz, 
W.J., Mountain, D., Jossi, J.W., Smith, T.D. and 
Fogarty, M.J. 2002c. Marine ecosystem assessment 
in a fisheries management context. Can. J. Fish. 
Aquat. Sci. 59: 1429–1440.  
Livingston, P.A. and Jurado-Molina, J. 2000. A 
multispecies virtual population analysis of the 
eastern Bering Sea. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 57: 249–299. 
Livingston, P.A., Aydin, K., Boldt, J., Ianelli, J. and 
Jurado-Molina, J. 2005. A framework for ecosystem 
impacts assessment using an indicator approach. 
ICES J. Mar. Sci. 62: 592–597. 
Mangel, M., Talbot, L.M., Meffe, G.K., Agardy, M.T., 
Alverson, D.L. et al. 1996. Principles for the 
conservation of wild living resources. Ecol. Appl. 6: 
338–362. 
May, R.M. 1972. Will a large complex system be 
stable? Nature 238: 413–414. 
May, R.M. 1973. Stability and Complexity in Model 
Ecosystems, second edition, Princeton University 
Press, NJ. 
34 
McLeod, K.J., Lubchenco, J., Palumbi, S.R. and 
Rosenberg, A.A.  2005. Scientific consensus 
statement on marine ecosystem-based management. 
Signed by 219 academic scientist and policy expert 
with relevant expertise and published by the 
Communication Partnership for Science and the Sea 
(COMPASS) at http://compassonline.org/?q =EBM. 
Melian, C.J. and Bascompte, J. 2004. Food web 
cohesion. Ecology 88:352–358.  
Morris, J.T., Christian, R.R. and Ulanowicz, R.E.  
2005. Analysis of size and complexity of randomly 
constructed food webs by information theoretic 
metrics. pp. 73-85.  In Aquatic Food Webs: An 
Ecosystem Approach. Edited by A. Belgrano, U.M. 
Scharler, J. Dunne, and R.E. Ulanowicz, Oxford 
University Press.  
Mueter, F.J. and Megrey, B.A.  2005. Distribution of 
population-based indicators across multiple taxa to 
assess the status of Gulf of Alaska and Bering Sea 
groundfish communities. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 62: 344–
352. 
Naeem, S. 2006. Expanding scales in biodiversity-
based research: challenges and solutions for marine 
systems. Mar. Ecol. Progr. Ser. 311: 273–283. 
NMFS (National Marine Fishery Service). 1999. 
Ecosystem-based fishery management: A report to 
Congress by the Ecosystems Principles Advisory 
Panel. 
NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmosphere 
Administration). 2005. New priorities for the 21
st
 
Century. National Marine Fisheries Service 
Strategic Plan. pp. 1–19. 
Neubert, M.G., Blumenshire, S.C., Duplisea, D.E., 
Jonsson, T. and Rashleigh, B. 2000. Body size and 
food web structure testing the equprobability 
assumption of the cascade model. Oecologia 123: 
241–251. 
Nicholson, M.D. and Jennings, S. 2004. Testing 
candidate indicators to support ecosystem-based 
management: the power of monitoring surveys to 
detect temporal trends in fish community metrics. 
ICES J.Mar. Sci. 61: 35–42. 
NPFMC (North Pacific Fishery Management Council). 
2006. Fishery ecosystem plan for the Aleutian 
Islands. Revised discussion paper. NPFMC. 
Overland, J.E., Adams, J.M. and Bond, N.A. 1999. 
Decadal variability of the Aleutian low and its 
relation to high-latitude circulation. J. Climate 12: 
1542–1548. 
Overland, J.E., Bond, N.A. and Wang, M. 2004. Ocean 
and Climate Changes. pp. 39–57. In Marine 
ecosystems of the North Pacific. PICES special 
publication number 1, 280 p. 
Overland, J.E. and Stabeno, P.J. 2004. Is the climate of 
the Bering Sea warming and affecting the 
ecosystem? Eos, Trans. Am. Geophys. Union 85: 
309–312. 
PSMFC (Pacific State Marine Fishery Commission). 
2005. Strengthening scientific input and ecosystem-
based fishery management for the Pacific and North 
Pacific Fishery Management Councils. Seattle, 
Washington. 
Pauly, D. and Christensen, V. 1995. Primary production 
required to sustain global fisheries. Nature 374: 
255–257. 
PEW Oceans Commission. 2003. Managing marine 
fisheries in the United States. Proceedings of the 
PEW Commission Workshop on Marine Fishery 
Management. 
PICES. 2002. PICES Science: The first ten years and a 
look to the future. PICES Scientific Report No. 22, 
102 pp. 
PICES. 2004. Marine ecosystems of the North Pacific 
Ocean. PICES Spec. Pub. 1, 280 pp. 
Pikitch, E.K., Santora, C., Babcock, E.A., Bakun, A., 
Bonfil, R., Conover, D.O., Dayton, P., Doukkis, P., 
Fluharty, D., Heneman, B., Houde, E.D., Link, J., 
Livingston, P.A., Mangel, M., McAllister, M.K., 
Pope, J. and Sainsbury, K.J. 2004. Ecosystem-based 
fishery management. Science 305: 346–347. 
Polovina, J.J. and Howell, E.A. 2005. Ecosystem 
indicators derived from satellite remotely sensed 
oceanographic data for the North Pacific. ICES J. 
Mar. Sci. 62: 319–327. 
Quinn, T.J. and Deriso, R.B. 2000. Quantitative Fish 
Dynamics. Oxford University Press. 
Rice, J.C. and Rochet, M.-J. 2005. A framework for 
selecting a suite of indicators for fisheries 
management. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 62: 516–527. 
Rochet, M.-J. and Rice, J.C. 2005. Do explicit criteria 
help in selecting indicators for ecosystem-based 
fisheries management? ICES J. Mar. Sci. 62: 528–
539. 
Rodionov, S.N. 2004. A sequential algorithm for testing 
climate regime shift. Geophys. Res. Lett. 31: 
doi:10.1029/2004GL019448 (L09204). 
Rodionov, S.N. and Overland, J.E. 2005. Application of 
a sequential regime shift detection method to the 
Bering Sea ecosystem. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 62: 328–
332. 
Scandol, J.P., Holloway, M.G., Gibbs, P.J. and Astles, 
K.L. 2005. Ecosystem-based fisheries management: 
An Australian perspective. Aquat. Living Res. 18: 
261–273. 
Sheldon, R.W. and Kerr, S.R. 1972. The population 
density of monster in Loch Ness. Limnol. Oceanogr. 
17: 769–797. 
Sheldon, R.W., Prakash, A. and Sutcliffe, W.H. 1972. 
The size distribution of particles in the Ocean. 
Limnol. Oceanogr. 17: 327-340. 
 
35
Simpson, E.H. 1949. Measurement of diversity. Nature 
163: 688. 
Solow, A.R. 2005. Some random thoughts on the 
statistical analysis of food-web data. pp. 69-72. In  
Aquatic Food Webs: An Ecosystem Approach 
Edited by A. Belgrano, U.M. Scharler, J. Dunne, and 
R.E. Ulanowicz, Oxford University Press.  
Solow, A.R. and Beet, A.R. 1998. On lumping species 
in food webs. Ecology 79: 1294–1297. 
Steele, J.H. 2006. Are there eco-metrics for fisheries? 
Fish. Res. 77: 1–3. 
Taylor, P.J. 2005. Unruly Complexity: Ecology, 
Interpretation, Engagement. University of Chicago 
Press, Chicago. 
Trisak, J. 2005. Applying game theory to analyze the 
influence of biological characteristic on 
fishers’cooperation in fisheries co-management. 
Fish. Res. 75: 164–174. 
Trites, A.W. 1999. Ecosystem considerations and the 
limitations of ecosystem models in fisheries 
management: insight from the Bering Sea. pp. 609-
620. In Ecosystem Approaches for Fisheries 
Management, University of Alaska, Fairbanks. 
U.S. Commission on Ocean Policy Report. 2004. An 
Ocean Blueprint for the 21
st
 Century. Final Report, 
Washington, DC.  
Villa, F. and McLeod, H. 2002. Environmental 
vulnerability indicators for environmental planning 
and decision-making: guidelines and applications. 
Environ. Mgmt. 29: 335–348. 
Walters, C.J., Christensen, V. and Pauly, D. 1997. 
Structuring dynamic models of exploited 
ecosystems from trophic mass-balance assessments. 
Rev. Fish Biol. Fish. 7: 139–172. 
Walters, C.J., Christensen, V., Martell, S.T. and 
Kitchell, J.F. 2005. Possible ecosystem impacts of 
applying MSY policies from single-species 
assessment. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 62: 558–568.   
Ware, D.M. 2000. Aquatic ecosystems: properties and 
models. pp. 267-295. In Fisheries Oceanography: 
An Integrative Approach to Fisheries Ecology and 
Management. Edited by P.J. Harrison and T.R. 
Parson, Blackwell Science, Oxford. 
West, G.B. and Brown, J.H. 2005. The origin of 
allometric scaling laws in biology from genomes to 
ecosystems: towards a quantitative unifying theory 
of biological structure and organization. J. Exper. 
Biol. 208: 1575–1592. 
Wilderbuer, T.K., Hollowed, A.B., Ingraham, W.J., Jr., 
Spencer, P.D., Conners, M.E., Bond, N.A. and 
Walters, G.E. 2002. Flatfish recruitment response to 
decadal climatic variability and ocean conditions in 
the eastern Bering Sea. Prog. Oceanogr. 55: 235–
247. 
Williams, R.J. and Martinez, N.D. 2000. Simple rules 
yield complex food webs. Nature 404: 180–183. 
(WWF) World Wildlife Fund and The Nature 
Conservancy (TNC). 2004. Bering Sea ecoregion 
strategic action plan. Part I and II. WWF Alaska and 
TNC Alaska.  
Zorach, A.C. and Ulanowicz, R.E. 2003. Quantifying 
the complexity of flow networks: how many roles 
are there? Complexity 8: 68–76. 
Yodzis, P. 1998. Local trophodynamics and the 
interaction of marine mammals and fisheries in the 
Benguela ecosystem. J. Animal Ecol. 67: 635–658.  
Yodzis, P. 2000. Diffuse effects in food webs. Ecology 
81: 261–266. 
Yodzis, P. 2001. Must top predators culled for the sake 
of fisheries? Trends Ecol. Evol. 16: 78–84. 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 4  Descriptions and sources of Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands time series presented in Table 2 of Appendix C: Ecosystem Considerations for 2006.  
  
BERING SEA, ALEUTIAN ISLANDS
Class Attribute Index Series Description Source
Climate Physical Environ. Ice index 1954-2004 A combination of 6 highly correlated ice variables http://www.beringclimate.noaa.gov/index.html
Climate Physical Environ. SAT 1916-2004 Surface winter air temperature http://www.beringclimate.noaa.gov/index.html
Climate Physical Environ. PDO 1901-2004 Pacific Decadal Oscillation http://jisao.washington.edu/pdo/PDO.latest
Climate Physical Environ. MaySST 1970-2004 May sea surface temperature http://www.beringclimate.noaa.gov/index.html
Climate Physical Environ. AOI 1951-2004 Arctic Oscillation Index http://www.beringclimate.noaa.gov/index.html
Climate Physical Environ. Summer BT 1982-2003 Summer bottom temperature http://www.beringclimate.noaa.gov/index.html
Pelagic forage Predator-prey Herring 1978-2004 Togiak herring age-4 recruits West, this report
Pelagic forage Predator-prey A.Mackerel 1977-2002 Atka mackerel log-transformed recruit per spawning biomass NPFMC 2004a
Pelagic forage Predator-prey Pollock 1964-2002 Walleye pollock log-transformed recruit per spawning biomass NPFMC 2004a
Pelagic forage Predator-prey Forage fish 1997-2002 Forage fish bycatch Gaichas, this report
Pelagic forage Predator-prey Squid 1997-2002 Squid bycatch Gaichas, this report
Top predators Predator-prey BS Trophic level 1954-2003 Bering Sea trophic level of the catch Livingston, this report
Top predators Predator-prey AI Trophic level 1962-2003 Aleutian Island trophic level of the catch Livingston, this report
Top predators Predator-prey Sharks 1997-2002 Shark bycatch Gaichas, this report
Top predators Predator-prey Pinnipeds 1989-2004 Non-pup Steller sea lion counts Sinclair and Testa, this report
Top predators Predator-prey GT 1973-2003 Greenland turbot log-transformed recruit per spawning biomass NPFMC 2004a
Top predators Predator-prey ATF 1976-2000 Arrowtooth flounder log-transformed recruit per spawning biomass NPFMC 2004a
Intro non-natives Predator-prey log(CPUE) 1982-2003 Total catch per unit effort of fish and invertebrates in bottom trawl surveys Mueter, this report
Energy redirection Energy flow Cod 1977-2003 Pacific cod log-transformed recruit per spawning biomass NPFMC 2004a
Energy redirection Energy flow BLKI 1975-2002 Black-legged kittiwake productivity (fledglings per egg) at St. Paul Island D.E. Dragoo, USFWS, pers. comm.
Energy redirection Energy flow RLKI 1975-2002 Red-legged kittiwake productivity (fledglings per egg) at St. Paul Island D.E. Dragoo, USFWS, pers. comm.
Energy redirection Energy flow BS H+L 1990-2001 Bering Sea Hook and line (longline) effort (number of hooks) Coon, this report
Energy redirection Energy flow AI H+L 1990-2001 Aleutian Islands Hook and line (longline) effort (number of hooks) Coon, this report
Energy redirection Energy flow BS Bottom Trawl 1990-2003 Bering Sea bottom trawl duration (24 hour days) Coon, this report
Energy redirection Energy flow AI Bottom Trawl 1990-2003 Aleutian Island bottom trawl duration (24 hour days) Coon, this report
Energy redirection Energy flow BS Pelagic Trawl 1995-2003 Bering Sea pelagic trawl duration (24 hour days) Coon, this report
Energy removal Energy flow BS catch 1954-2003 Total catch Bering Sea NPFMC 2004a
Energy removal Energy flow AI catch 1962-2003 Total catch Aleutian Islands NPFMC 2004a
Species diversity Diversity HAPC 1997-2002 HAPC non-target catch Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands Gaichas, this report
Species diversity Diversity BS Diversity 1982-2003 Bering Sea groundfish diversity (Shannon-Wiener index) Mueter, this report
Species diversity Diversity BS Richness 1982-2003 Bering Sea groundfish richness (avg. #  species per survey haul) Mueter, this report
Other Other COMU 1976-2002 Common murre productivity (fledglings per egg) at St. Paul Island D.E. Dragoo, USFWS, pers. comm.
Other Other TBMU 1976-2002 Thick-billed murre productivity (fledglings per egg) at St. Paul Island D.E. Dragoo, USFWS, pers. comm.
Other Other BB Salmon 1956-2003 Total catch of Bristol Bay salmon Eggers and Fair, this report
Other Other Jellyfish 1982-2003 Jellyfish biomass in survey catches Lauth, this report
Other Other AK plaice 1975-1999 Alaska plaice log-transformed recruit per spawning biomass NPFMC 2004a
Other Other Crab biomass 1980-2002 Total crab biomass Otto and Turnock, this report
Other Other YFS 1964-1998 Yellowfin sole log-transformed recruit per spawning biomass NPFMC 2004a
Other Other POP 1960-1993 Pacific Ocean perch log-transformed recruit per spawning biomass NPFMC 2004a
Other Other Northerns 1977-1993 Northern rockfish log-transformed recruit per spawning biomass NPFMC 2004a
Other Other Rock sole 1975-1997 Rock sole log-transformed recruit per spawning biomass NPFMC 2004a
Other Other FHS 1977-2000 Flathead sole log-transformed recruit per spawning biomass NPFMC 2004a
 
 
Anomalies for each of 34 time series were calculated by subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard error, based on the time series reported below.  Most 
data were taken from the Ecosystem Indicators section, and the author is noted with the year of the Ecosystem Considerations appendix.  
 
   
Appendix 5   Standardized anomalies time series in the Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands from 1970 to the present, using a similar method as Link et al. (2002) and 
DFO (2003) used for ecosystems on the east coasts of the U.S. and Canada.  (See next page for symbol explanation.)  
o + o - o +
+ + - - o +
- - - - o o + + + o
o ++ o o o -
- + + o - -
o o o - - + o ++ o
o - - - - o - + o o o o o +++
- - - o - o + + o + o + + --
- - - - - + o o + + o ++
-- - - - + + + + o + o -
+ + o - - o o o o + + - + + o
++ + o - + o + - - + - o o + o + - o o + -
- - - - - - - - - - o o - o o o + + + + ++ ++ + ++ +
-- -- - -- - - - o o o o + + + + + + + + o o o o +
- - o - - o - - - - o - o + ++ + + ++ o o ++ + o o +
+ + + o - - - - - - - - - + o - - o + + o - - o o + ++ o + + +
+ o - - - + + - - o ++ - - - o o o +
- - - - - o o o + + ++ + + ++ + + + + + o o o o o o
- - - - o - - - o - - - - - - - o - o o o o o + + ++ ++ ++ + +
+ - + o + o - o o o o + o o - o - + ++ o
+ o o o -- - o o o o o o o o -- + o ++
++ - + - + o - - o o o - + o o o - + o + + +
- - - - o o o o o o o ++ ++ + o o - - - - o o +
++ - + o o + o o - o + o + o - - -- - -- o + +
- - - o o - - o - - - + o o o - -- -- - o - + o + + ++ + + + + o o o -
o o o o + o o o o - - o o - o - - - - o o + + o ++ ++ +++
+ o o o - o o - o - o - o - o - - o - - o + + + + ++ ++
o o o +++ + + + + o + o o o - - - - - - - - -
- - + o o ++ + + + + o + + o - - - - - - - -
++ o o o o o o o + ++ + o o o o o o - -- - o -
o - + ++ + - -- o - - o o - o ++ o + o o - - - o o o ++
o - - o o - - o o o o o o + - - o o - o o + +++ +++ - - o
- o + - + + o o - + o ++ + + + ++ o - - - o o o o o - - -- + + o + o o -
+ + o - - o o o o + o + + o o + o o o - - -- - - - - -- - o + + ++ ++ o
+ + o o o - - o + - o + - o o o o o - - - + - ++ + ++ ++ + - - + o - - +
o ++ o o - o + o o - + o o -- o - + ++ + + + + o + o - o + - - - o -- - +
+ + - ++ - o o o ++ - o o o - o + - + o + o o + + + ++ + o -- -- - o -- -- o
o - o o + - - + ++ + + + + + + o o o + + + o o ++ + o - - o - - - - +
o o o o o + + ++ ++ + ++ + o o ++ - - o o + o o o o - - - - - - -- - -- -
o o o o o o o o o o + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + o o o o o + o - -
- - + -- + o + o -- + o - + + o - o - o o o o - - o -- - o + + + o + + o
+ + + + + o o + + o o o o + o o o o o o + + + + o o + + + + + + o o
o + o - o +
+ + - - o +
- - - - o o + + + o
o ++ o o o -
- + + o - -
o o o - - + o ++ o
o - - - - o - + o o o o o +++
- - - o - o + + o + o + + --
- - - - - + o o + + o ++
-- - - - + + + + o + o -
+ + o - - o o o o + + - + + o
++ + o - + o + - - + - o o + o + - o o + -
- - - - - - - - - - o o - o o o + + + + ++ ++ + ++ +
-- -- - -- - - - o o o o + + + + + + + + o o o o +
- - o - - o - - - - o - o + ++ + + ++ o o ++ + o o +
+ + + o - - - - - - - - - + o - - o + + o - - o o + ++ o + + +
+ o - - - + + - - o ++ - - - o o o +
- - - - - o o o + + ++ + + ++ + + + + + o o o o o o
- - - - o - - - o - - - - - - - o - o o o o o + + ++ ++ ++ + +
+ - + o + o - o o o o + o o - o - + ++ o
+ o o o -- - o o o o o o o o -- + o ++
++ - + - + o - - o o o - + o o o - + o + + +
- - - - o o o o o o o ++ ++ + o o - - - - o o +
++ - + o o + o o - o + o + o - - -- - -- o + +
- - - o o - - o - - - + o o o - -- -- - o - + o + + ++ + + + + o o o -
o o o o + o o o o - - o o - o - - - - o o + + o ++ ++ +++
+ o o o - o o - o - o - o - o - - o - - o + + + + ++ ++
o o o +++ + + + + o + o o o - - - - - - - - -
- - + o o ++ + + + + o + + o - - - - - - - -
++ o o o o o o o + ++ + o o o o o o - -- - o -
o - + ++ + - -- o - - o o - o ++ o + o o - - - o o o ++
o - - o o - - o o o o o o + - - o o - o o + +++ +++ - - o
- o + - + + o o - + o ++ + + + ++ o - - - o o o o o - - -- + + o + o o -
+ + o - - o o o o + o + + o o + o o o - - -- - - - - -- - o + + ++ ++ o
+ + o o o - - o + - o + - o o o o o - - - + - ++ + ++ ++ + - - + o - - +
o ++ o o - o + o o - + o o -- o - + ++ + + + + o + o - o + - - - o -- - +
+ + - ++ - o o o ++ - o o o - o + - + o + o o + + + ++ + o -- -- - o -- -- o
o - o o + - - + ++ + + + + + + o o o + + + o o ++ + o - - o - - - - +
o o o o o + + ++ ++ + ++ + o o ++ - - o o + o o o o - - - - - - -- - -- -
o o o o o o o o o o + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + o o o o o + o - -
- - + -- + o + o -- + o - + + o - o - o o o o - - o -- - o + + + o + + o
+ + + + + o o + + o o o o + o o o o o o + + + + o o + + + + + + o o
70   71   72   73    74   75   76   77    78   79   80    81    82     83   84   85  86   87   88   89    90    91   92  93   94 95   96   97  98   99    00    01   02   03   04
HAPC
Squid
Pinnipeds
Sharks
Forage fish
BS Pelagic Trawl
AI Bottom Trawl
BS Bottom Trawl
AI H+L
BS H+L
COMU
Summer BT
FHS
Rock sole
ATF
GT
Northerns
POP
YFS
RLKI 
TBMU 
BLKI
Crab biomass
BS Richness
Pollock
Cod
AK plaice
Jellyfish
BS Diversity
log(CPUE)
A.Mackerel
Herring
AOI 
BS catch
MaySST
PDO
SAT
BB Salmon
AI catch
AI Trophic level
Ice index
BS Trophic level 
Indicator
Species diversity
Pelagic forage
Top predators
Top predators
Pelagic forage
Energy redirection 
Energy redirection 
Energy redirection 
Energy redirection 
Energy redirection 
Other
Climate
Other
Other
Top predators
Top predators
Other
Other
Other
Energy redirection 
Other
Energy redirection 
Other
Species diversity
Pelagic forage
Energy redirection 
Other
Other
Species diversity
Intro non-natives
Pelagic forage
Pelagic forage
Climate
Energy removal
Climate
Climate
Climate
Other
Energy removal
Top predators
Climate
Top predators
Class
-
1997-2002
1997-2002
1989-2004
1997-2002
1997-2002
1995-2003
1990-2003
1990-2003
1990-2001
1990-2001
1976-2002
1982-2003
1977-2000
1975-1997
1976-2000
1973-2003
1977-1993
1960-1993
1964-1998
1975-2002
1976-2002
1975-2002
1980-2002
1982-2003
1964-2002
1977-2003
1975-1999
1982-2003
1982-2003
1982-2003
1977-2002
1978-2004
1951-2004
1954-2003
1970-2004
1901-2004
1916-2004
1956-2003
1962-2003
1962-2003
1954-2004
1954-2003
Normalized 
time series
o + o - o +
+ + - - o +
- - - - o o + + + o
o ++ o o o -
- + + o - -
o o o - - + o ++ o
o - - - - o - + o o o o o +++
- - - o - o + + o + o + + --
- - - - - + o o + + o ++
-- - - - + + + + o + o -
+ + o - - o o o o + + - + + o
++ + o - + o + - - + - o o + o + - o o + -
- - - - - - - - - - o o - o o o + + + + ++ ++ + ++ +
-- -- - -- - - - o o o o + + + + + + + + o o o o +
- - o - - o - - - - o - o + ++ + + ++ o o ++ + o o +
+ + + o - - - - - - - - - + o - - o + + o - - o o + ++ o + + +
+ o - - - + + - - o ++ - - - o o o +
- - - - - o o o + + ++ + + ++ + + + + + o o o o o o
- - - - o - - - o - - - - - - - o - o o o o o + + ++ ++ ++ + +
+ - + o + o - o o o o + o o - o - + ++ o
+ o o o -- - o o o o o o o o -- + o ++
++ - + - + o - - o o o - + o o o - + o + + +
- - - - o o o o o o o ++ ++ + o o - - - - o o +
++ - + o o + o o - o + o + o - - -- - -- o + +
- - - o o - - o - - - + o o o - -- -- - o - + o + + ++ + + + + o o o -
o o o o + o o o o - - o o - o - - - - o o + + o ++ ++ +++
+ o o o - o o - o - o - o - o - - o - - o + + + + ++ ++
o o o +++ + + + + o + o o o - - - - - - - - -
- - + o o ++ + + + + o + + o - - - - - - - -
++ o o o o o o o + ++ + o o o o o o - -- - o -
o - + ++ + - -- o - - o o - o ++ o + o o - - - o o o ++
o - - o o - - o o o o o o + - - o o - o o + +++ +++ - - o
- o + - + + o o - + o ++ + + + ++ o - - - o o o o o - - -- + + o + o o -
+ + o - - o o o o + o + + o o + o o o - - -- - - - - -- - o + + ++ ++ o
+ + o o o - - o + - o + - o o o o o - - - + - ++ + ++ ++ + - - + o - - +
o ++ o o - o + o o - + o o -- o - + ++ + + + + o + o - o + - - - o -- - +
+ + - ++ - o o o ++ - o o o - o + - + o + o o + + + ++ + o -- -- - o -- -- o
o - o o + - - + ++ + + + + + + o o o + + + o o ++ + o - - o - - - - +
o o o o o + + ++ ++ + ++ + o o ++ - - o o + o o o o - - - - - - -- - -- -
o o o o o o o o o o + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + o o o o o + o - -
- - + -- + o + o -- + o - + + o - o - o o o o - - o -- - o + + + o + + o
+ + + + + o o + + o o o o + o o o o o o + + + + o o + + + + + + o o
o + o - o +
+ + - - o +
- - - - o o + + + o
o ++ o o o -
- + + o - -
o o o - - + o ++ o
o - - - - o - + o o o o o +++
- - - o - o + + o + o + + --
- - - - - + o o + + o ++
-- - - - + + + + o + o -
+ + o - - o o o o + + - + + o
++ + o - + o + - - + - o o + o + - o o + -
- - - - - - - - - - o o - o o o + + + + ++ ++ + ++ +
-- -- - -- - - - o o o o + + + + + + + + o o o o +
- - o - - o - - - - o - o + ++ + + ++ o o ++ + o o +
+ + + o - - - - - - - - - + o - - o + + o - - o o + ++ o + + +
+ o - - - + + - - o ++ - - - o o o +
- - - - - o o o + + ++ + + ++ + + + + + o o o o o o
- - - - o - - - o - - - - - - - o - o o o o o + + ++ ++ ++ + +
+ - + o + o - o o o o + o o - o - + ++ o
+ o o o -- - o o o o o o o o -- + o ++
++ - + - + o - - o o o - + o o o - + o + + +
- - - - o o o o o o o ++ ++ + o o - - - - o o +
++ - + o o + o o - o + o + o - - -- - -- o + +
- - - o o - - o - - - + o o o - -- -- - o - + o + + ++ + + + + o o o -
o o o o + o o o o - - o o - o - - - - o o + + o ++ ++ +++
+ o o o - o o - o - o - o - o - - o - - o + + + + ++ ++
o o o +++ + + + + o + o o o - - - - - - - - -
- - + o o ++ + + + + o + + o - - - - - - - -
++ o o o o o o o + ++ + o o o o o o - -- - o -
o - + ++ + - -- o - - o o - o ++ o + o o - - - o o o ++
o - - o o - - o o o o o o + - - o o - o o + +++ +++ - - o
- o + - + + o o - + o ++ + + + ++ o - - - o o o o o - - -- + + o + o o -
+ + o - - o o o o + o + + o o + o o o - - -- - - - - -- - o + + ++ ++ o
+ + o o o - - o + - o + - o o o o o - - - + - ++ + ++ ++ + - - + o - - +
o ++ o o - o + o o - + o o -- o - + ++ + + + + o + o - o + - - - o -- - +
+ + - ++ - o o o ++ - o o o - o + - + o + o o + + + ++ + o -- -- - o -- -- o
o - o o + - - + ++ + + + + + + o o o + + + o o ++ + o - - o - - - - +
o o o o o + + ++ ++ + ++ + o o ++ - - o o + o o o o - - - - - - -- - -- -
o o o o o o o o o o + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + o o o o o + o - -
- - + -- + o + o -- + o - + + o - o - o o o o - - o -- - o + + + o + + o
+ + + + + o o + + o o o o + o o o o o o + + + + o o + + + + + + o o
70   71   72   73    74   75   76   77    78   79   80    81    82     83   84   85  86   87   88   89    90    91   92  93   94 95   96   97  98   99    00    01   02   03   04
HAPC
Squid
Pinnipeds
Sharks
Forage fish
BS Pelagic Trawl
AI Bottom Trawl
BS Bottom Trawl
AI H+L
BS H+L
COMU
Summer BT
FHS
Rock sole
ATF
GT
Northerns
POP
YFS
RLKI 
TBMU 
BLKI
Crab biomass
BS Richness
Pollock
Cod
AK plaice
Jellyfish
BS Diversity
log(CPUE)
A.Mackerel
Herring
AOI 
BS catch
MaySST
PDO
SAT
BB Salmon
AI catch
AI Trophic level
Ice index
BS Trophic level 
Indicator
HAPC
Squid
Pinnipeds
Sharks
Forage fish
BS Pelagic Trawl
AI Bottom Trawl
BS Bottom Trawl
AI H+L
BS H+L
COMU
Summer BT
FHS
Rock sole
ATF
GT
Northerns
POP
YFS
RLKI 
TBMU 
BLKI
Crab biomass
BS Richness
Pollock
Cod
AK plaice
Jellyfish
BS Diversity
log(CPUE)
A.Mackerel
Herring
AOI 
BS catch
MaySST
PDO
SAT
BB Salmon
AI catch
AI Trophic level
Ice index
BS Trophic level 
Indicator
Species diversity
Pelagic forage
Top predators
Top predators
Pelagic forage
Energy redirection 
Energy redirection 
Energy redirection 
Energy redirection 
Energy redirection 
Other
Climate
Other
Other
Top predators
Top predators
Other
Other
Other
Energy redirection 
Other
Energy redirection 
Other
Species diversity
Pelagic forage
Energy redirection 
Other
Other
Species diversity
Intro non-natives
Pelagic forage
Pelagic forage
Climate
Energy removal
Climate
Climate
Climate
Other
Energy removal
Top predators
Climate
Top predators
Class
-
Species diversity
Pelagic forage
Top predators
Top predators
Pelagic forage
Energy redirection 
Energy redirection 
Energy redirection 
Energy redirection 
Energy redirection 
Other
Climate
Other
Other
Top predators
Top predators
Other
Other
Other
Energy redirection 
Other
Energy redirection 
Other
Species diversity
Pelagic forage
Energy redirection 
Other
Other
Species diversity
Intro non-natives
Pelagic forage
Pelagic forage
Climate
Energy removal
Climate
Climate
Climate
Other
Energy removal
Top predators
Climate
Top predators
Class
-
1997-2002
1997-2002
1989-2004
1997-2002
1997-2002
1995-2003
1990-2003
1990-2003
1990-2001
1990-2001
1976-2002
1982-2003
1977-2000
1975-1997
1976-2000
1973-2003
1977-1993
1960-1993
1964-1998
1975-2002
1976-2002
1975-2002
1980-2002
1982-2003
1964-2002
1977-2003
1975-1999
1982-2003
1982-2003
1982-2003
1977-2002
1978-2004
1951-2004
1954-2003
1970-2004
1901-2004
1916-2004
1956-2003
1962-2003
1962-2003
1954-2004
1954-2003
Normalized 
time series
1997-2002
1997-2002
1989-2004
1997-2002
1997-2002
1995-2003
1990-2003
1990-2003
1990-2001
1990-2001
1976-2002
1982-2003
1977-2000
1975-1997
1976-2000
1973-2003
1977-1993
1960-1993
1964-1998
1975-2002
1976-2002
1975-2002
1980-2002
1982-2003
1964-2002
1977-2003
1975-1999
1982-2003
1982-2003
1982-2003
1977-2002
1978-2004
1951-2004
1954-2003
1970-2004
1901-2004
1916-2004
1956-2003
1962-2003
1962-2003
1954-2004
1954-2003
1997-2002
1997-2002
1989-2004
1997-2002
1997-2002
1995-2003
1990-2003
1990-2003
1990-2001
1990-2001
1976-2002
1982-2003
1977-2000
1975-1997
1976-2000
1973-2003
1977-1993
1960-1993
1964-1998
1975-2002
1976-2002
1975-2002
1980-2002
1982-2003
1964-2002
1977-2003
1975-1999
1982-2003
1982-2003
1982-2003
1977-2002
1978-2004
1951-2004
1954-2003
1970-2004
1901-2004
1916-2004
1956-2003
1962-2003
1962-2003
1954-2004
1954-2003
Normalized 
time series
Legend
  X>2.6 +++
  2.6>X>1.6 ++
  1.6>X>0.5 +
  0.5>X>-0.5 o
 -0.5>X>-1.6 -
 -1.6>X>-2.6 --
  X<-2.6 ---
 
Symbols and shading represent seven divisions of anomalies; blank cells indicate no data.  Time series were arranged on the y-axis so that variables with similar 
responses were grouped together.  The time series presented were chosen because of their importance to ecosystem processes in the Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands, 
however, there are some variables that will be added when those time-series become available.  See Appendix C: Ecosystem Considerations for 2006 for a 
description of the time series included in this table. 
 
Legend 
AI Aleutian Islands GT Greenland turbot 
AK Alaska HAPC habitat area of particular concern 
AOI Arctic Oscillation Index H+L Hook and line 
ATF Arrowtooth flounder PDO Pacific Oscillation Index 
BB Bristol Bay POP Pacific Ocean perch 
BLKI Black-legged kittiwake RLKI Red-legged kittiwake 
BS Bering Sea SAT surface air temperature 
COMU Common murre SST sea surface temperature 
CPUE catch per unit effort TBMU Thick-billed murre  
FHS Flathead sole YSF Yellowfin sole 
    
 
 
References 
 
DFO.  2003.  State of the Eastern Scotian Shelf Ecosystem. Department of Fisheries and Oceans (DFO) Can. Sci. Advis. Sec. Ecosystem Status Rep. 2003/004. 
Link, J.S., Brodziak, J.K.T., Edwards, S.F., Overholtz, W.J., Mountain, D., Jossi, J.W., Smith, T.D. and Fogarty, M.J.  2002.  Marine ecosystem assessment in a 
fisheries management context. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 59: 1429–1440. 
 
39 
Ecological indicators:  Software development 
 
Sergei N. Rodionov 
 
Joint Institute for the Study of the Atmosphere and Ocean, University of Washington, Seattle, WA  98185, 
U.S.A.   E-mail:  sergei.rodionov@noaa.gov 
 
 
Upgrade to the sequential regime shift detection 
method 
 
The sequential regime shift detection method, 
described in Rodionov (2004), was based on the 
assumption that observations in the series are 
independent of each other.  Many ecological 
indicators, however, exhibit serial correlation (also 
referred to as red noise).  Due to the presence of 
red noise, these time series are characterized by 
long intervals when the observations remain above 
or below the overall mean value.  These intervals 
can be easily misinterpreted as genuine regimes 
with different statistics, as illustrated in Fig. 5. 
01 02 03 04 0
-2
0
2
-4
-2
0
2
4
a)
b)
Regime 1
Regime 2
AR(1) = 0.8
 
Fig. 5   Realizations of a) white noise process with a 
shift in the mean at t =21 from –1 to 1, and b) red noise 
process with AR1 = 0.8.  The shift at t = 29 in the latter 
case would be statistically significant at the 3 · 10
-9
 
level, if the data points were independent. 
 
There are two approaches to deal with the serial 
correlation.  The first approach is to reduce the 
degrees of freedom used to determine the 
significance level of the shifts in proportion to the 
magnitude of the serial correlation.  The second 
approach is to use a prewhitening procedure, 
which removes red noise from a time series prior 
to applying a regime shift detection method. Both 
approaches require an estimation of lag-1 
autoregressive coefficient (AR1).  A known 
problem is that regime shifts in a time series often 
lead to overestimates of the magnitude of the AR1 
coefficient.  A possible solution to this problem is 
to break the time series into subsamples, so that 
the majority of them do not contain change points, 
and then use the median value of all AR1 
estimates.  
 
It is well known, however, that conventional 
estimators, such as the ordinary least squares 
(OLS) or maximum likelihood techniques, yield 
biased estimates for AR1, particularly for small 
samples.  Rodionov (2006) discusses two bias 
correction procedures of the OLS estimator for 
short time series.  The first procedure is called 
MPK after Marriott, Pope and Kendall, who 
proposed a formula for the expected value of the 
OLS estimator of AR1.  The second procedure, 
called IP4 (Inverse Proportionality with 4 
corrections), is based on the assumption that the 
first approximation of the bias is approximately 
inversely proportional to the subsample size and is 
always negative.  Both procedures are included in 
the new version of the sequential regime shift 
detection method (Fig. 6).  The software can be 
downloaded from   http://www.beringclimate.noaa 
.gov/regimes. 
 
Extensive Monte Carlo experiments have 
demonstrated that the MPK and IP4 bias 
correction techniques produce similar AR1 
estimates for subsample sizes greater than 10. For 
smaller subsample sizes, however, IP4 
substantially outperforms MPK in terms of both 
the magnitude of the bias and variability of the 
estimates.  
 
To illustrate the effect of prewhitening the regime 
shift detection, the method was applied to the 
annual series of the Pacific Decadal Oscillation 
(PDO) index, 1900–2005.  Figure 7 illustrates 
changes in AR1 estimates depending on the bias 
correction technique and subsample size.  The 
MPK and IP4 estimates are practically the same 
for subsample size m > 11.  The estimates remain 
relatively stable at about 0.45, as m increases 
40 
to 27.  For greater m, AR1 estimates jump to a 
higher level of about 0.60.  This behavior of AR1 
is typical for the time series that represent a 
mixture of red noise with shifts in the mean.  It 
shows that a characteristic time scale of the PDO 
regimes is about 25–30 years. 
 
 
 
Fig. 6  Entry form of the regime shift detection 
method. 
 
 
 
01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 0
Subsample size.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
AR1 coefficient
MPK
IP4
OLS
 
Fig. 7  Ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates of 
AR1 in the annual PDO index with no bias correction 
and using the Marriot, Pope, Kendall (MPK) and 
Inverse Proportionality with 4 corrections (IP4) 
techniques. 
After prewhitening, statistically significant (at p < 
0.01) regime shifts in the PDO are still detected in 
1948 and 1976, although their magnitudes are 
smaller than those in the observed time series 
(Fig. 8).  The red noise component (Fig. 8c), 
which accounts for about 25% of the total 
variance in PDO, enhances the shifts.  The overall 
conclusion is that the PDO appears to be more 
than just a manifestation of red noise, as was 
suggested in some recent publications (Rudnick 
and Davis, 2003; Hsieh et al., 2005). 
 
1900 1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
-1
0
1
-2
-1
0
1
2
-2
-1
0
1
2
a) PDO
b) After Prewhitening
c) Residuals
1948
1976
1999
1948
 
Fig. 8  a) Annual PDO index, 1900-2005, with a 
stepwise trend, b) the same time series after 
prewhitening, and c) difference between the time series 
in a and b.  
 
Vitus: Knowledge management system for the 
Bering Sea  
An increasingly large number of ecological 
indicators call for methods to deal with 
information overload.  One large group of methods 
tries to resolve this problem by reducing the 
dimensionality of the system.  This group includes 
principal component analysis, singular value 
decomposition, multidimensional scaling and 
other methods.  These methods proved to be useful 
in analysis of large sets of indicators (e.g., Hare 
and Mantua, 2000), although there is often a 
problem in interpreting the results.  Another 
important drawback of those methods is that they 
do not preserve information about the relationships 
between the indicators. 
An alternative approach to information overload is 
to use a tool that can help manage information in 
such a way that only the information relevant to 
the problem or question at hand is provided to the 
user at any given point of the analysis.  With this 
in mind, a prototype of a knowledge management 
41 
system for the Bering Sea (“Vitus”) has been 
developed.  The system itself is far from 
completion, that is, its data and knowledge bases 
are not filled, but about 80% of its functionality is 
in place.  It is written in VB.NET with the use of 
several off-the-shelf Microsoft products: Word, 
Excel, Access, and Visio. 
  
The major components of Vitus are: Data 
Explorer, Rule Explorer, Inference Engine, 
Graphical Interface, Search and Reporting 
Facilities.  In many respects, Vitus is similar to an 
expert or decision support system, but unlike those 
commercial expert systems that I am familiar with, 
both the knowledge presentation and inference 
process are more transparent to the user and 
designed to be used in environmental research.   
 
The Data Explorer (Fig. 9) organizes information 
about indicators based on geographical hierarchy. 
The user can easily create his/her own 
geographical domain with the necessary level of 
details.  The data for each variable are kept in a 
separate Excel file and the descriptive information 
in a Word file.  The user can see a list of rules, for 
which a selected variable participates in the IF or 
THEN clauses (Fig. 10).  With a click of the 
mouse, the variable can be inserted into the 
project, which is visualized as an influence 
diagram (Fig. 11). 
 
The domain knowledge is presented in the form of 
IF-THEN rules and is controlled via the Rule 
Explorer (Fig. 12).  The number of variables in the 
IF part of a rule is unlimited.  For example, a rule 
may look like: 
 
IF ENSO event = warm, 
AND Aleutian low circulation type = W1, 
THEN SAT at St. Paul = above normal; CF = 10. 
 
Here, CF is the confidence factor for the rule 
(more about it is below).  It is important to note 
that the data and code for each rule are placed in a 
separate Excel file.  Therefore, although the IF-
THEN form is default, the user can write his/her 
own code to express the relationship between the 
IF and THEN variables.  For example, the user can 
program the Ricker stock-recruitment formula, or 
use linear regression instead of a simple IF-THEN 
relationship.  Another advantage of this rule 
information storage is that the user can easily 
experiment with each rule separately and develop 
a better feeling of confidence in it.  
 
 
 
Fig. 9  Data Explorer interface. 
 
42 
 
Fig. 10 A list of rules that describe factors affecting walleye pollock recruitment. 
 
 
 
Fig. 11  Part of the influence diagram for walleye pollock recruitment. 
43 
 
 
Fig. 12 The Rule Explorer. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 13  Running the project in the forecast mode. 
 
44 
 
 
Fig. 14 The system asks questions about the variables in the terminal nodes. 
 
 
When the influence diagram is prepared, the user 
may run the project in the forecast or hindcast 
mode to infer the value of the target variable in a 
given year (Fig.13).  During this process, the 
system asks for the information about the variables 
in the terminal nodes of the diagram (Fig. 14).  To 
facilitate the answer to those questions, the user is 
provided with the access to the data and 
descriptive information about the variable and 
related rule.  The user can also search for any 
other pertinent information (Fig. 15).  
 
Previous experience of working with climatic 
expert systems (Rodionov and Martin, 1996; 
1999) showed that, in assigning confidence factors 
to the rules, it is important to maintain the relative 
importance of each rule in the system.  In other 
words, it is not the numbers themselves, but the 
consistency in procedure of their assignment, that 
should be of major concern to the user.  Therefore, 
although the CF is equivalent to the subjective 
probability, whenever possible, it is recommended 
to estimate its value based on the formula: 
 
CF = (P(C | e) − P(¬C | e)) * 100%, 
 
which is the difference between the probability of 
category C of the variable given the evidence e 
and probability of any other category of the 
variable given the same evidence e, expressed in 
percent.  When CF = 0, it means that observing e 
will not change our prior confidence (if any) in C.  
45 
  
 
 
Fig. 15  Search for the relevant information. 
 
 
The value of CF = 100 means that we can be 
100% confident in C, given the evidence e.  The 
confidence factors, calculated using the above 
formula, should be adjusted for the number of 
observations.  The formula for adjustment (A) 
used here is as follows: 
 
A = 100 − log (N)/2 * 100, 
 
where N is the sample size. 
 
As an example, Table 4 shows the contingency 
table for the Pacific/North American (PNA) 
teleconnection index and North-South winds at 
St. Paul.  The CF for an anomalously strong 
northerly wind in the case of positive PNA will 
be 
  
CF (Wind+ | PNA+) = (17/24 – 7/24) * 100%  = 
42, 
 
and after adjustment 
CF
adj
 (Wind+ | PNA+) = 42 – 100 – log ( 24)/2 * 100 
= 42 – 31 = 11. 
The value of CF
adj
 (Wind–  | PNA–) is calculated 
similarly, so that the rule for these two variables will 
be as follows: 
IF PNA index = positive (negative), 
THEN NS wind anomaly = positive (negative); CF = 
11 (9). 
 
Table 4  Contingency table for the Pacific/North 
American (PNA) teleconnection index and North-South 
winds at St. Paul (Pribilof Islands).  Both variables are 
broken into two categories of above and below normal 
values.  Data: 1949–2005. 
NS wind 
 anomaly 
PNA 
+ 
PNA 
− 
Total 
Wind + 17 11 28 
Wind − 7 22 29 
Total 24 33 57 
46 
The evidence from different sources is combined 
using the following formula: 
CF
comb
 = CF
old
 + CF
new
 − (CF
old
 * CF
new
)/100. 
In addition to the CF algebra, a Bayesian 
inference technique may be added later.  When 
all the evidence is collected, a forecast for the 
target variable is issued either in the form of odds 
(e.g., strong versus weak year class of walleye 
pollock) or probabilities.  The user can also open the 
Custom Property window (Fig. 16) and check the 
information about individual variables and rules, or 
open the report that traces the logic behind the 
forecast (Fig. 17).  
 
 
 
Fig. 16  Displaying information about the variables and rules in the property window. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 17  An example of the report that traces the inference procedure. 
47 
References 
 
Hare, S.R. and Mantua, N.J. 2000. Empirical evidence 
for North Pacific regime shifts in 1977 and 1989. 
Progr. Oceanogr.  47: 103–146. 
Hsieh, C.H., Glaser, S.M., Lucas, A.J. and Sugihara, G. 
2005. Distinguishing random environmental 
fluctuations from ecological catastrophes for the 
North Pacific Ocean. Nature 435: 336–340. 
Rodionov, S. 2004. A sequential algorithm for testing 
climate regime shifts. Geophys. Res. Lett. 31: 
L09204, doi:10.1029/2004GL019448. 
Rodionov, S. 2006. The use of prewhitening in climate 
regime shift detection. Geophys. Res. Lett. 33: 
L12707, doi:10.1029/2006GL025904. 
Rodionov, S.N. and Martin, J.H. 1996. A knowledge 
based system for the diagnosis and prediction of 
short term climatic changes in the North Atlantic. J. 
Climate  9:  1816–1823. 
Rodionov, S.N. and Martin, J.H. 1999. An expert 
system-based approach to prediction of year-to-year 
climatic variations in the North Atlantic region. Int. 
J. Climatol. 19:  951–974. 
Rudnick, D.I. and Davis, R.E. 2003. Red noise and 
regime shifts. Deep-Sea Res. 50: 691–699. 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ECOSYSTEM REPORTS
 
  51 
Structure and purpose of the Alaskan Ecosystem Considerations appendix 
 
Patricia Livingston 
 
NOAA/Alaska Fisheries Science Center, 7600 Sand Point Way NE, Bldg. 4, Seattle, WA  98115-6349, U.S.A. 
E-mail:  pat.livingston@noaa.gov 
 
 
As fishery management organizations move 
toward ecosystem-oriented management, there is a 
need to more clearly define the ecosystem 
management goals of the organization and the 
tools available to managers to attain those goals.  
Parallel to this must be an expansion of the 
scientific advice provided to management beyond 
traditional single-species stock assessment advice.  
Although there have been advances in multi-
species and ecosystem modeling approaches, these 
approaches have not yet been embraced 
completely by the fishery management 
community.  In some cases, this situation arises 
from the difficulties in validating these models and 
in other cases, because of the lack of sufficient 
data and knowledge of the critical processes to 
develop an appropriate model.  Progress can be 
made, however, in providing ecosystem advice to 
managers while waiting for these approaches to 
mature.  GLOBEC and GLOBEC-like research 
efforts are going on throughout the world, with 
increasing emphasis on habitat research, trophic 
interactions, and long-term monitoring of non-
commercial species to provide useful information 
on ecosystem status and trends.  Some of this 
ecological information can be used to gauge the 
success of various management schemes that have 
been put in place to meet ecosystem management 
goals.   
 
The Ecosystem Considerations appendix is a 
compilation and synthesis of ecosystem status and 
trend information for the eastern Bering Sea, 
Aleutian Islands, and Gulf of Alaska shelf/slope 
ecosystems.  The most recent version of this report 
and associated data can be found on the web at:  
http://access.afsc.noaa.gov/reem/EcoWeb/index.cfm.  
It includes information on climate forcing and 
fishing, along with information on individual 
ecosystem components from nutrients to marine 
mammals and aggregate indicators of changes in 
ecosystem production and composition.  The 
status and trend information is organized 
taxonomically by region.  The assessment section 
of the appendix links the status and trend 
information to objectives for an ecosystem 
approach to management.  As multi-species and 
ecosystem models are validated, they will be used 
to assess the possible future ecosystem status 
under varying scenarios of climate and human 
interactions.  Details of the genesis of the report 
and the framework for the indicator report are 
included in Livingston et al. (2005).   
 
Reference 
 
Livingston, P.A., Aydin, K., Boldt, J., Ianelli, J. and 
Jurado-Molina, J.  2005.  A framework for 
ecosystem impacts assessment using an indicator 
approach.  ICES J. Mar. Sci.  62: 592–597. 
 
 
 
 
53
PICES report on Marine Ecosystems of the North Pacific:  Towards ecosystem 
reporting for the North Pacific basin 
 
R. Ian Perry
1
 and Jeffrey M. Napp
2 
 
1 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Pacific Biological Station, Nanaimo, BC, V9T 6N7, Canada 
 E-mail:  perryi@pac.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
2 
NOAA/Alaska Fisheries Science Center, 7600 Sand Point Way NE, Bldg. 4, Seattle, WA  98115-6349, 
 U.S.A.   
 
 
In 2004, the North Pacific Marine Science 
Organization (PICES) published its first report on 
the marine ecosystems of the North Pacific, which 
had been in preparation since 2002 (PICES, 2004).  
The objectives of the report were to: 
1. describe the present state of marine ecosystems 
of the North Pacific Ocean (Status), in the 
context of their recent (past 5 years) and longer 
variability; 
2. summarise assessments of conditions in the 
various marine ecosystems and regions of the 
North Pacific into a broad basin-wide synthesis;  
3. identify critical factors causing changes in these 
ecosystems; and 
4. identify key questions and critical data gaps 
inhibiting understanding of these marine 
ecosystems.  
 
An important point to note is that the report was 
not explicitly designed to provide advice for 
ecosystem-based management, and no explicit 
management objectives were identified in the 
report.  The report was built around individual 
chapters on specific themes and geographic 
regions: 
• Large-scale ocean and climate indices, 
• Yellow and East China seas, 
• Japan/East Sea, 
• Okhotsk Sea, 
• Oyashio/Kuroshio, 
• Western Subarctic Gyre, 
• Bering Sea, 
• Gulf of Alaska, 
• California Current, 
• Gulf of California, and  
• North Pacific Transition Zone. 
 
It also included chapters on individual species of 
particular importance and for which international 
management agencies were responsible, such as 
Pacific halibut, tuna, and Pacific salmon.  Each 
regional chapter addressed the same topics: 
• background (setting), 
• climate, 
• hydrography, 
• nutrients, 
• plankton, 
• phytoplankton (chlorophyll), 
• zooplankton, 
• fish/invertebrates, 
• seabirds, 
• marine mammals, 
• issues, 
• critical factors causing change. 
 
The first chapter of the report used a thematic 
approach cutting across all regions.  For example, 
it addressed large-scale atmospheric and ocean 
forcing of these ecosystems and, in particular, 
looked across all regions at subarctic coastal 
systems, central oceanic gyres, and temperate 
coastal and oceanic systems.  In addition, the 
synthesis examined (briefly) the human pressures 
on the North Pacific, aquaculture, and other pan-
Pacific issues. 
 
The emphasis in each chapter was on the “most 
recent” data and information, i.e., conditions over 
the past 5 years (if available), put into the context 
of the existing time series.  The readership was 
assumed to be interested marine scientists, and 
possibly the interested public and non-
governmental organizations.  More work could be 
done for future releases to better identify and 
clarify the audience, which would make a more 
54 
targeted product.  For example, if the goal of 
future reports is to advise citizens and 
governments of Pacific Rim countries on the state 
of the ocean, then better development of synthetic 
indicators would be required.  
 
In producing each chapter, information was drawn 
from existing ocean status reports (e.g., Canada) 
and ecosystem summaries (e.g., California 
Current, Bering Sea) whenever possible.  Where 
such reports were not available, regional 
workshops were convened with local experts to 
present and synthesize recent information.  This 
was the approach used for the Japan/East Sea 
(workshop held at Seoul National University, 
August 2002), the Okhotsk Sea (workshop held at 
TINRO Center, June 2003), and the Yellow and 
East China Seas (workshop held during the PICES 
Twelfth Annual Meeting in Seoul, Korea, October 
2003).  For some regions, individual “countries” 
were invited to convene local experts to develop 
the various chapter sections.  This was the 
approach taken for the Eastern Subarctic Gyre 
(Alaska), the Oyashio/Kuroshio region and the 
Western Subarctic Gyre (Japan), and the Gulf of 
California (Mexico). For each of the species-
specific chapters (tuna, Pacific halibut, and 
salmon) fishery organizations were responsible for 
their content.  
 
Significant data gaps 
 
This first report on North Pacific marine 
ecosystems was intended as a pilot project.  As 
such, it was not expected to cover all topics in 
equal detail.  Indeed, it is not possible to cover all 
topics in equal detail as such data do not exist for 
many topics.  Regional coverage of some chapter 
components was uneven, in particular for chemical 
oceanography (especially nutrients), and benthos. 
It is not clear whether the absence of these issues 
in the report represents an actual lack of data or 
lack of awareness of data.  Another notable 
omission was regional data on harmful algal 
blooms.  An active Section of the PICES Marine 
Environmental Quality (MEQ) Committee is 
examining harmful algal blooms in the North 
Pacific; their participation in the next report would 
serve to greatly increase the information on this 
important topic.  Future efforts to produce the 
PICES marine ecosystem report might make good 
progress at filling these data gaps by convening 
workshops of disciplinary experts from around the 
North Pacific to address specific topics, e.g., 
nutrient data. 
 
The report also contained several themes that were 
only weakly developed in the various chapters. 
These include: 
• contaminants, 
• inter-tidal / sub-tidal ecosystems, 
• “human dimensions” (e.g., fishing effort, etc.), 
• large, basin-scale physical oceanography/ocean 
circulation (in particular with Argo data), 
• development and presentation of common and 
synthetic “ecosystem indicators”. 
 
All chapters have some level of abundance and/or 
biomass measures for fish.  Several chapters have 
some level of abundance and/or biomass 
information for highest and lowest trophic levels. 
However, only a few chapters (e.g., the eastern 
Bering Sea and Gulf of Alaska) include synthetic 
information, such as information on species 
diversity and recruitment.  
 
Eastern Bering Sea chapter highlights 
 
The report highlights the following recent general 
conditions in the eastern Bering Sea:  
• Oceanographic and ecosystem dynamics are 
dominated by sea ice, and sea ice has been 
diminishing in recent years; 
• There have been shifts in abundance of fish and 
invertebrates over past 20 years; groundfish 
populations appear to have stabilized, whereas 
some crab stocks remain at low levels;  
• There are concerns about declines of western 
Steller sea lion and northern fur seal and North 
Pacific Right whale populations;  
• Significant issues include sea ice and climate 
warming, unusual phyto- and zooplankton 
blooms, interactions of fishing with bottom 
habitats, marine mammal population declines 
and their unusual distributions. 
   
 
55
Key messages 
 
Key messages from the synthesis of these regional 
and species chapters include: 
 
Climate 
 
A new atmospheric pattern altered storm tracks 
across the North Pacific after 1998.  This new 
climate pattern was associated with a change from 
warm to cool conditions from northern Vancouver 
Island to the Baja California Peninsula, and 
warming in the central Pacific, but had little effect 
in the northern Gulf of Alaska and Bering Sea 
which stayed warm or in the Okhotsk Sea which 
stayed cool.  This pattern, named the Victoria 
Pattern, has subsequently changed again. 
 
Ocean productivity 
 
Blooms of various species of harmful 
phytoplankton are increasing around the North 
Pacific.  Some species are detrimental to fish and 
shellfish mariculture operations, and some species 
have harmful effects on marine mammals as the 
toxins are passed up the food web.  An unusual 
bloom of coccolithophorid phytoplankton occurred 
in the Bering Sea during equally unusual ocean 
conditions in the summer of 1997, which created 
milky-coloured water visible from space.  Jellyfish 
blooms have appeared and disappeared in Asian 
waters and Bering Sea without satisfactory 
explanations.  Large changes in the mix of 
subarctic and temperate zooplankton species have 
occurred in the eastern North Pacific. 
 
Living marine resources 
 
There have been significant successes in 
maintaining productive fish stocks through a 
combination of active and conservative 
management.  Total Pacific salmon catches were 
at historical high levels through the 1990s, 
supported by large releases of chum and pink 
salmon from hatcheries on both sides of the 
Pacific, and wild sockeye salmon.  Walleye 
pollock abundance in the eastern Bering Sea has 
been relatively stable while elsewhere in the North 
Pacific, its abundance has been declining.  The 
total biomass of Pacific halibut has remained high 
in the Gulf of Alaska throughout the 1990s as a 
result of several years of good recruitment. 
 
Some species/stocks, however, have not fared so 
well.  Rockfishes in the California Current 
System, walleye pollock in the Okhotsk Sea, and 
hairtail in the Yellow Sea are heavily or 
overexploited. Many individual salmon 
populations, especially of coho and chinook, 
declined dramatically during the 1990s in the 
southern part of their North American range, but 
there have been encouraging signs of recovery 
since 1999.  Small pelagic fishes, which naturally 
undergo very large changes in abundance, have 
also undergone fluctuations in recent times. 
Pacific sardine abundances were very high in the 
late 1980s throughout the entire North Pacific, 
except in California, but declined abruptly in the 
early 1990s and have generally remained low 
since then.  This synchrony suggests an important 
role of a large-scale force such as climate in 
determining abundance.  In the California Current 
System, sardines remained low in the 1980s but 
began recovering in the late 1990s.  The western 
populations of Steller sea lions are currently at 
very low abundances.  Despite new conservation 
measures (and increased research), large-scale 
recovery has not yet occurred.  Mass mortalities of 
marine mammals (pinnipeds) have occurred over 
the past decade in the Gulf of California and off 
the State of California, due to unusual harmful 
algal blooms.  Intensive mariculture is increasing 
dramatically around the North Pacific rim and is 
well-established in the southwestern North Pacific. 
 
Future plans for the marine ecosystem report 
 
PICES convened a workshop at its 2005 Annual 
Meeting (PICES XIV) to review the successes and 
shortcomings of the first (pilot) report and to 
decide how future reports should look.  Discussion 
focused on several key topics or questions: 
• What should the report contain? 
• Who is the intended audience? 
• How often should it be “published”? 
• What form should it take? 
• Who would be responsible for preparing it? 
 
Those attending emphasized the need for timely 
information and suggested that the product, 
56 
audience, and format might be best addressed in 
future iterations if a staggered or nested approach 
was used, whereby some (easy to obtain) 
information would be readily available on an 
annual basis, while some of the more synthetic 
information and analyses would be available less 
frequently.  The group also discussed the need to 
make some products specifically for policy makers 
from the PICES member countries.  The group 
settled on the following approach (Table 5), 
whereby some of the time series were made 
available to users on an annual basis via the 
worldwide web.  Syntheses and interpretations 
(similar to the first North Pacific Ecosystem Status 
report) would be published on the web and in 
hardcopy less frequently (say every 3 to 5 years) 
and longer range outlooks for policy makers might 
be published once every 5 to 10 years or more 
frequently if there were emerging issues that 
warranted concern or special attention. 
 
 
Table 5  Proposed system of future PICES North Pacific Ecosystem Status report products, audience, and which 
group within PICES should be responsible for their preparation. 
 
Product Audience Period Form Who 
time series • scientists, 
• public 
annual web ? 
syntheses/interpretations of 
ecosystem status 
• scientists, 
• public, 
• policy makers 
3–5 years web and hardcopy Working Group 
outlooks • policy makers 5–10 years brochure Study Group 
 
 
 
 
 
Main conclusions  
 
• The PICES North Pacific Ecosystem Status 
report (2004) was a highly successful pilot 
project, and it will evolve with the next 
iteration. Discussions have begun to define its 
audience more clearly, e.g., decision makers 
and general public, or ocean management 
specialists and scientists, and to consider best 
formats to present the varying types of 
information contained in the first report; 
• The process to define significant data gaps has 
also begun.  What are the gaps and what is the 
best way to fill them?  Should PICES conduct 
its own analyses and develop indicators?  
Which indicators would it use?  Should it 
connect with PICES/NPRB Indicators 
workshop conclusions? 
• PICES workshops continue to address the 
significant information and understanding that 
can be gained by using large-scale, basin-wide 
comparisons.  To do these comparisons of large 
marine ecosystems (LMEs) we must consider 
developing indices based on selected 
species/functional species groups or key 
features which are shared or common across 
LMEs. 
 
In developing ecosystem indicators, in particular 
for the eastern Bering Sea and coastal Gulf of 
Alaska, the experience of the PICES report on 
Marine ecosystems of the North Pacific 
demonstrates the value of a comparative approach 
in which (at least) key indicators and key species 
are compared across a geographic area wider than 
just the target region. 
 
Reference 
 
PICES. 2004. Marine ecosystems of the North Pacific 
Ocean. PICES Spec. Publ. 1, 280 p. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDICATOR USAGE IN OTHER REGIONS AND SUGGESTIONS FOR THE 
NORTH PACIFIC/BERING SEA 
 
 
59 
SCOR/IOC Working Group 119 on Quantitative ecosystem indicators for 
fisheries management  
 
Villy Christensen 
 
Fisheries Centre, University of British Columbia, 2204 Main Mall, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z4, Canada 
E-mail:  v.christensen@fisheries.ubc.ca 
 
 
Working Group 119 on Quantitative ecosystem 
indicators for fisheries management was 
established in 2001, with 32 members from 19 
countries.  The working group, co-chaired by Drs. 
Philippe Cury and Villy Christensen, was designed 
to support the scientific aspects of using indicators 
for an ecosystem approach to fisheries, to review 
existing knowledge in the field, to demonstrate the 
utility and perspectives for new indicators 
reflecting the exploitation and state of marine 
ecosystems, as well as to consider frameworks for 
their implementation. 
 
The Working Group met first in October 2001, in 
Reykjavik, Iceland, to plan and report on progress; 
and then in December 2002, in Cape Town, South 
Africa, to organize its efforts with a series of task 
forces working in parallel on: 
• environmental indicators including habitat 
changes, 
• species-based indicators, 
• size-based indicators, 
• trophodynamic indicators, 
• integrated indicators, 
• selection criteria, 
• data sets and reviews, and 
• frameworks for implementing indicators. 
 
As part of their work, the task forces reviewed the 
current status of using indicators for ecosystem 
approaches to fisheries, as well as seeking to 
develop new theory, applying it, and evaluating 
the performance of indicators.  The major results 
of these endeavours formed the core of the 
presentations at an international symposium held 
at the UNESCO headquarters in Paris, in April 
2004.  The symposium received wide interest with 
more than 200 abstracts submitted for 
presentation, and 160 of these presented.  
 
The symposium was organized with two major 
themes. Theme 1 discussed how indicators 
synthesize the structure and functioning of 
ecosystems in time and space, and, in turn, how 
fisheries influence them.  It considered how the 
indicators have been, or should be, applied to 
different types of ecosystems or fisheries 
exploitation, and covered the following topics:  
• Environmental indicators that quantify climate 
change or environmental variability and their 
ecosystem effects (e.g., regime shifts) as well 
as the quantification of habitat modification 
induced by fisheries;  
• Ecological indicators that characterize the 
functioning and the dynamics of marine- 
exploited ecosystems on the basis of species 
composition, size distribution, and 
trophodynamics;  
• Fisheries indicators that quantify the impact of 
fishing on exploited and unexploited 
components of ecosystems.  The session 
presentations outlined a vast array of well-
defined indicators for fisheries management, 
described their properties, evaluated how they 
can be used at an ecosystem level to describe 
the impact of fisheries, and also evaluated the 
relative contribution of environmental and 
fisheries impacts.  Given the number of 
available, applied indicators, it is also clear that 
emphasis must be given to methodologies for 
selecting indicators and evaluating how capable 
they are of detecting trends in a noisy 
environment. 
 
Theme 2 addressed the evaluation, 
implementation, communication, and use of 
indicators.  Quantitative indicators of ecosystem 
status have many uses, and ecosystems have many 
properties that are critical to conservation and 
management.  As a consequence, a large number 
of indicators have already become available within 
60 
a relatively short time. Evaluating indicators 
relative to management objectives needs to be 
achieved by defining appropriate criteria.  Several 
contributions presented methodologies for 
evaluating and comparing various indicators, as 
well as methods for elaborating and constructing 
data sets for evaluation of indicators.  
 
To implement an operational ecosystem approach 
to fisheries, selected indicators have to be 
assembled into frameworks within which they can 
be aggregated and combined.  Institutional 
frameworks may include indicators of the 
exploitation and state of ecosystems, and 
indicators relating to social and economic aspects. 
Contributions showed how such frameworks can 
facilitate indicator development and 
implementation.  Studies of trade-offs between 
frameworks that tend to make incremental 
improvements to conventional methods versus the 
more difficult design and implementation of 
completely new approaches for aggregating 
indicators were also debated.  Communicating the 
relevance of indicators among stakeholders is an 
important aspect of their usefulness, and means for 
achieving this were addressed.  Contributions 
reviewed how indicators can be communicated 
efficiently in practical situations.  These reviews 
include aspects of decision-making, and of how 
ecosystem indicators are currently, or may be, 
used.  
 
Recognizing that communication is an important 
aspect of scientific work, the symposium was 
organized with only plenary sessions for oral 
presentations, and with ample time set aside for 
poster sessions.  Approximately three-quarters of 
the 160 symposium presentations were displayed 
as posters, indicating the important role posters 
play in international symposia.  
 
Some of the findings from the symposium are 
listed below:  
• Defining, selecting, evaluating, and 
implementing indicators is an achievable task 
given present knowledge, available data, and 
existing frameworks;  
• Environmental and low trophic-level indicators 
(e.g., for plankton) capture environmental 
change and bottom-up effects in a spatially 
explicit manner.  However, the global effect of 
environmental change on higher trophic levels 
in the foodweb is not well captured by most 
indicators (e.g., regime shifts);  
• Top predators or high-trophic-level indicators 
(e.g., birds and marine mammals) summarize 
changes in the fish communities which are 
most often (but not always) related to 
exploitation.  Top-down effects, such as trophic 
cascades, that occur in several ecosystems can 
be quantified using trophodynamic indicators;  
• Several trophodynamic indicators are needed to 
measure the strength of the interactions 
between the different living components, and of 
structural ecosystem change resulting from 
exploitation.  Those indicators are sometimes 
sensitive to the choice of trophic level made for 
certain species;  
• Size-based indicators have received 
considerable scientific attention and are 
perceived as promising for characterizing fish 
community dynamics in a context of 
overexploitation;  
• An ecosystem approach to fisheries (EAF) 
requires integration of the spatial dynamics of 
the various components (including fishers).  It 
also requires quantification of the interactions 
between different components of the 
ecosystem.  Spatial indicators are currently 
developed in many ecosystems and are key to 
understanding the interaction between the 
different components of the ecosystem and 
human activities;  
• No single indicator (or single ecosystem model) 
describes all aspects of ecosystem dynamics; 
we need a suite of indicators (covering different 
data, groups, and processes), because indicator 
performance may differ (with ecosystem, 
history of exploitation, and other pressures, 
e.g., pollution);  
• Aggregated indicators can provide a quick 
evaluation of the state of marine ecosystems; 
they should be used simultaneously with a suite 
of indicators to understand the mechanisms and 
processes that are acting;  
• Ecosystem-based indicators are conservative in 
the sense that they only show if the ecosystem 
is strongly affected, so trends and rapid changes 
must be acknowledged in, and evaluated by, 
management, even if reference points are 
lacking;  
61 
• Interpretation of indicators requires scientific 
expertise because of potential, often subtle, 
error and bias in their analysis;  
• Considering both target reference points (TRP) 
and limit reference points (LRP) in the same 
framework or model represents a promising 
way to reconcile constraints and objectives 
when exploiting natural resources.  This may be 
a promising way also to reconcile the principles 
of conservation and exploitation;  
• Several indicators are better used for 
surveillance than for prediction.  Regime shifts, 
a feature often associated with the North 
Pacific Ocean, illustrates a situation where 
surveillance indicators may be useful;  
• In an EAF, the objective is not to find the best 
indicator, but rather a relevant suite of 
indicators with known properties; developing 
methodologies for selecting indicators forms an 
integral part of the process.  Guidelines for how 
to test indicators and develop frameworks for 
their application are essential;  
• Analysis of single-species versus ecosystem 
harvest strategies shows that we need to 
provide explicit protection for those species 
whose value derives, in part, from support of 
other species as well as from harvesting. 
Harvesting all species at their single-species 
maximum sustainable yield may lead to 
ecosystem erosion;  
• Reinforce (or start) the process of 
implementing ecosystem-based indicators (TRP 
and LRP) and a framework for fisheries 
worldwide.  Pragmatic approaches need to be 
taken to move towards an EAF.  This may be 
viewed as a stepwise process that needs to 
integrate scientific results (data, models, and 
indicators) and management expertise in a 
spatially explicit manner;  
• A strong feedback between scientific expertise 
and management is necessary to ameliorate 
indicators and their practical use.  The 
conclusion of the symposium as expressed 
through a closing panel discussion is clear: with 
regard to ecosystem indicators, the science that 
is needed to make an ecosystem approach to 
fisheries operational is in place.  
 
The proceedings from the Paris symposium is 
published as a special issue of the ICES Journal of 
Marine Science 62(4), and it was published within 
a year of the symposium, thanks not the least to 
the dedicated effort of the guest editor, Professor 
Niels Daan. 
  
  
 
 
 
63 
Eastern Canada – Ecosystem approach to fisheries in DFO Maritimes Region  
 
Robert O’Boyle and Tana Worcester 
 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Bedford Institute of Oceanography, Dartmouth, NS, B2Y 4A2, Canada 
E-mail:  oboyler@mar.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
 
Prompted by proclamation of Canada’s Ocean Act 
in 1997, the Department of Fisheries and Oceans 
(DFO) initiated a pilot project on the Eastern 
Scotian Shelf as a “laboratory” to test 
implementation approaches for integrated 
management (IM).  Since its inception, the Eastern 
Scotian Shelf Integrated Management (ESSIM) 
project has explored both governance frameworks 
(Rutherford et al., 2005) and the development of 
conceptual and operational ecosystem objectives. 
ESSIM evolved before national policy and 
guidelines were available; now ESSIM is retracing 
some of its steps to be compliant with these.  In 
addition, since 2004, collaboration with the U.S. 
National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) is 
leading to another IM experiment in the Gulf of 
Maine area (GOMA).  
 
The boundaries of the ESSIM area illustrate some 
of the pragmatic decisions being made.  While the 
desire is for ESSIM to encompass the inshore 
zone, given the governance complexities in this 
area, efforts have so far been restricted to the 
offshore.  In addition, with the dialogue on an 
ecosystem approach to fisheries (EAF) in the Gulf 
of Maine, there has been recent discussion on the 
possibility of moving the current western 
boundary farther south.  While it might be a better 
reflection of administrative jurisdiction, it would 
not be as optimal as the current one for reflecting 
shelf-wide ecosystem differences (DFO, 2004a). 
 
The ESSIM planning hierarchy (overarching 
ecosystem objectives, conceptual and operational 
objectives, and ocean sector operational 
objectives) is not dissimilar from that used 
elsewhere (e.g., Australia).  The overarching 
ecosystem objectives were developed in 2001 as 
national policy.  The planning area conceptual 
objectives, released in draft form in fall 2005, 
were based upon conservation issues, impacted 
ecosystem components, and threats identified with 
the input of stakeholders (O’Boyle et al., 2005; 
O’Boyle and Jamieson, 2006).  These will be 
updated once ecologically and biologically 
significant species and areas, and depleted species 
and areas have been identified (DFO, 2004b).  
Thus far, a formal risk analysis is not part of the 
process to determine priority issues and objectives, 
which is seen as a requirement. 
 
A science working group had developed a work 
plan to associate indicators and reference 
points/directions with the ESSIM draft objectives 
but this has been put on hold until the latter are 
updated.  At the same time, another science group 
had been collaborating with NMFS on the 
monitoring requirements of an EAF in the Gulf of 
Maine, relying on earlier ESSIM work.  An 
opportunity was thus afforded to compare and 
contrast progress to date in ESSIM and GOMA, 
engage and educate DFO staff on EAF, and 
develop a generic set of operational objectives that 
could be discussed with the fisheries sector (DFO, 
2005).  These generic objectives highlight not only 
the need to keep fishing mortality at a moderate 
level, but also to control incidental mortality and 
impacts on the benthic habitat.  The latter is an 
issue across a number of ocean industries and has 
been the focus of a three-phase program led by 
DFO science to classify the benthic communities 
of the Scotian Shelf and to manage human 
impacts.  The draft suite of operational objectives 
has received the support of the fishing industry, 
and regional fisheries management plans are being 
evaluated to see how they comply with these 
objectives.  A number of the objectives have been 
completed for Georges Bank (groundfish, herring, 
scallop, lobster and crab), which highlight the 
need to address discarding and benthic impacts of 
fishing in these plans. 
 
In addition to the identification of management 
performance indicators, over 60 contextual 
indicators, although not associated directly with 
management actions, have been useful in 
64 
furthering understanding of ecosystem processes 
and detecting regimes shifts.  The latter are related 
to overall system productivity and thus influence 
the population-specific performance indicator 
reference points.  In 2003, the first Ecosystem 
Status Report for the Eastern Scotian Shelf (DFO, 
2003) described a shift in this ecosystem from 
predominantly groundfish in the 1970s–80s to 
predominantly pelagics and invertebrates in the 
1990–2000s.  Three hypotheses were suggested to 
explain this shift: (1) top-down control,  
(2) increased stratification, and (3) cooling – 
although it was not possible to determine which of 
these was most plausible. An ecosystem status 
report is being considered for GOMA, which 
would take into consideration the ecosystem 
objectives that are being discussed for this 
ecosystem.  
 
The linkage between regime shifts and reference 
points is illustrated by changes in the performance 
indicator reference points of the 4TVW haddock 
fishery (DFO, 2002) which are associated with 
bottom water temperature fluctuations.  The suite 
of operational objectives and contextual objectives 
at the planning area level could form the basis of 
future reports of ecosystem health. 
 
Lessons for the PICES/NPRB Indicators 
workshop 
 
• There is a need to develop a common 
understanding of the high-level ecosystem 
objectives for the Bering Sea amongst the 
various institutions with responsibilities and 
interests in the area; 
• There is a need to develop a suite of contextual 
objectives that report on ecosystem processes 
and which could be used to inform the 
performance indicator reference points;  
• It will be useful to keep the PICES North 
Pacific Ecosystem Status report rather general 
in its approach but to consider ecosystem 
objectives in its structure to increase its utility 
in a management context; 
• Rather than striving for a small subset of 
indicators, as understanding is limited, the suite 
of indicators should be maintained, perhaps 
emphasising which indicators are most 
pertinent to monitoring ecosystem change. 
 
References 
 
DFO (Department of Fisheries and Oceans). 2002. 
Biological Considerations for the Re-opening of the 
Eastern Scotian Shelf (4TVW) Haddock fishery. 
DFO Science Fishery Status Report. 2002/03. 
DFO (Department of Fisheries and Oceans). 2003. State 
of the Eastern Scotian Shelf Ecosystem. DFO. Can. 
Sci. Advisory Sec. Ecosystem Status Report 
2003/004. 
DFO (Department of Fisheries and Oceans). 2004a. 
Proceedings of the Canadian Marine Ecoregions 
Workshop, March 23–25, 2004. DFO Can. Sci. 
Advis. Sec. Proceed. Ser. 2004/016. 
DFO (Department of Fisheries and Oceans). 2004b. 
Identification of Ecologically and Biologically 
Significant Areas. DFO Can. Sci. Advis. Sec. 
Ecosystem Status Rep. 2004/06. 
DFO (Department of Fisheries and Oceans). 2005. 
Proceedings of the Workshop on Implementation of 
the Oceans Action Plan in the Maritimes Region: A 
Focus on Ecosystem-Based Management; 12-14 
October 2005. DFO Can. Sci. Advis. Sec. Proceed. 
Ser. 2005/025. 
O’Boyle, R. and Jamieson, G. 2006. Observations on 
the implementation of ecosystem-based 
management: experiences on Canada’s East and 
West Coasts. Fish. Res. 79: 1–12.  
O’Boyle, R., Sinclair, M., Keizer, P., Lee, K., Ricard, 
D. and Yeats, P. 2005. Indicators for ecosystem-
based management on the Scotian Shelf: bridging 
the gap between theory and practice. ICES J. Mar. 
Sci. 62: 598 – 605 
Rutherford, R.J., Herbert, G.J. and Coffen-Smout, S.S. 
2005. Integrated ocean management and the 
collaborative planning process: the Eastern Scotian 
Shelf Integrated Management (ESSIM) initiative. 
Mar. Policy 29: 75–83. 
 
 
65 
Northeastern United States 
 
Jason S. Link 
 
NOAA/Northeast Fisheries Science Center, Woods Hole, MA 02543, U.S.A.  E-mail:  jason.link@noaa.gov 
 
 
Most ecological indicators are invoked in a 
broader, more holistic ecosystem-based fisheries 
management (EBFM) context.  Although there are 
several indicator taxonomies or frameworks, there 
are some common approaches and properties to 
consider when selecting which ones to use.  Our 
empirical and simple modeling results generally 
concur with model results from elsewhere in the 
world.  Most ecological indicators in an EBFM 
context typically include some metrics associated 
with: 
• size, 
• production,  
• diversity, 
• “canary” species, 
• energy flow – trophodynamics, 
• habitat, 
• physio-chemical regime. 
 
Socio-economic and management performance/ 
response indicators also merit consideration.  
Many of the data needed to develop these 
indicators are extant; producing the indicators 
often requires a new perspective on data mining.  
Once a set of indicators has been identified and 
culled, there are three main ways that we and 
others tend to present them: traffic lights, surfaces 
or polar coordinates, and multivariate components.   
 
Linking indicators to decision criteria remains a 
key challenge.  We have studied two main 
approaches to this end.  First, we explored 
multivariate approaches to identify reference 
directions, surfaces, poles, quadrats, etc. ( i.e., 
regions) that provide a strategic, bounding (of 
what is scientifically possible) of potential 
ecosystem states.  This approach is helping us to 
define aggregate or systemic regions of 
desirability (or non-desirability).  The second 
approach seeks to develop ecosystem or aggregate 
reference points that are more tactical (i.e., 
binding) in nature, analogous to many of the 
traditional fishery or toxicological reference 
points.  Additional research is needed to establish 
relationships between these indicators and their 
major drivers, particularly fishing pressure in an 
EBFM context. 
 
The use of indicators has been varied in our 
region, much like in the rest of the world.  
Currently indicators are used primarily to elucidate 
ecosystem status, effectively serving as a heuristic 
tool to reveal key ecosystem processes and 
patterns.  The emphasis on status is common, 
needed, and should not be overlooked; we can 
now feasibly assess the status of marine 
ecosystems, in an integrated and holistic manner in 
ways that previously were never done.  Even 
providing this material as contextual background 
for EBFM is useful from many perspectives.  
Although still in development, we are exploring 
the strategic use of indicators to set feasibility 
bounds on various ecosystem configurations.  Like 
elsewhere in the world, the tactical use of 
indicators remains a longer-term prospect, but 
there have been some instances when ecological 
indicators have been used in this manner to affect 
change in how we manage living marine 
resources.   
 
We note, positively, that status indicators exist, 
management indicators exist, and ecosystem 
reference points/regions exist.  But we are cautious 
to note that ecological indicators do not equate to 
reference points, and reference points do not equal 
control rules; i.e., one needs to be judicious in the 
use of indicators.  Given this concern, we are 
optimistic that ecological indicators can be quite 
useful for further development of EBFM 
approaches.  Finally, continuing to develop 
indicators for EBFM use also highlights the 
continued commitment necessary for the 
underlying monitoring and modeling efforts that 
provide information requisite to producing these 
indicators. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STATUS OF THE BERING SEA
 
 
69 
Ecosystem Considerations for 2006 in fishery management – Upper trophic 
level and aggregate indicators for the status of the southeastern Bering Sea 
 
Jennifer L. Boldt
1,2
, Kerim Y. Aydin
2
, Patricia Livingston
2
, and Anne B. Hollowed
2
 
 
1
  School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, U.S.A. 
2
  NOAA/Alaska Fisheries Science Center, 7600 Sand Point Way NE, Seattle, WA 98115-0070, U.S.A. 
 E-mail:  jennifer.boldt@noaa.gov 
 
 
Ecosystem Considerations for 2006 is an appendix 
of the Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluations 
(SAFE) report, produced annually by the Alaska 
Fishery Science Center (AFSC) for the North 
Pacific Fishery Management Council (NPFMC).  
The appendix includes three sections:  (1) an 
ecosystem assessment, (2) updated status and 
trend indices, and (3) ecosystem-based 
management indices and information for the 
Bering Sea (BS), Aleutian Islands (AI) and the 
Gulf of Alaska (GOA) ecosystems.   
 
The purpose of the first section, Ecosystem 
Assessment, is to summarize historical climate and 
fishing effects from an ecosystem perspective and 
to provide an assessment of the possible future 
effects of climate and fishing on ecosystem 
structure and function.  The purpose of the second 
section, Ecosystem Status Indicators, is to supply 
new information and updates on the status and 
trends of ecosystem components to stock 
assessment scientists, fishery managers, and the 
public.  The goals are to give stronger links 
between ecosystem research and fishery 
management, and to spur new understanding of the 
connections between ecosystem components by 
bringing together many diverse research efforts 
into one document.  The purpose of the third 
section, Ecosystem-based Management Indices 
and Information, is to provide either early signals 
of direct human effects on ecosystem components 
that might warrant management intervention, or to 
provide evidence of the efficacy of previous 
management actions.  
 
Previous ecosystem analyses for the draft 
groundfish Fishery Management Plan 
environmental impact statements categorized 
effects into three main classes: predator–prey, 
energy flow and removal, and diversity.  The 
Ecosystem Assessment section of the Ecosystem 
Considerations appendix adapts these as the three 
main objectives for ecosystem protection.  
Livingston et al. (2005) outline several topics 
within each of these objectives (Table 6).  Several 
indices were chosen from the second and third 
sections of the appendix to address these 
objectives and topics.  Trends in upper trophic 
level species/groups and aggregate indicators for 
the Bering Sea were reviewed. 
 
No significant adverse impacts of fishing on the 
ecosystem relating to predator–prey interactions, 
energy flow/removal, or diversity were noted.  
There are gaps in understanding the system-level 
impacts of fishing and spatial/temporal effects of 
fishing on community structure and prey 
availability.  Fishing mortalities from a 
multispecies bycatch model can be used to drive 
multispecies and ecosystem predator–prey 
simulations to evaluate the predator–prey 
implications of these fishing strategies.  
Predictions from multispecies models will be 
incorporated into the ecosystem assessment in 
future drafts when bycatch data can be updated 
and when some methodological problems are 
solved.  Validation of models, research and 
models focused on understanding spatial 
processes, and improvements in monitoring 
systems would further our current understanding.  
Until more accurate predictions of climate status 
and effects can be made, a range of possible 
climate scenarios and plausible effects on 
recruitment should be entertained. 
 
Reference 
 
Livingston, P.A., Aydin, K., Boldt, J., Ianelli, J. and 
Jurado-Molina, J.  2005.  A framework for 
ecosystem impacts assessment using an indicator 
approach.  ICES J. Mar. Sci.  62: 592–597. 
70 
Table 6  Significance thresholds for fishery induced effects on ecosystem attributes. 
 
Issue Effect Significance Threshold Indicator 
Predator–
prey 
relationships 
Pelagic forage 
availability 
Fishery induced changes outside the 
natural level of abundance or variability 
for a prey species relative to predator 
demands 
• Population trends in pelagic 
forage biomass (quantitative - 
pollock, Atka mackerel,  
catch/bycatch trends of forage 
species, squid and herring) 
 Spatial and temporal 
concentration of 
fishery impact on 
forage 
Fishery concentration levels high enough 
to impair the long term viability of 
ecologically important, non-resource 
species such as marine mammals and 
birds 
• Degree of spatial/temporal 
concentration of fishery on 
pollock, Atka mackerel, herring, 
squid  and forage species 
(qualitative) 
 Removal of top 
predators 
Catch levels high enough to cause the 
biomass of one or more top level predator 
species to fall below minimum 
biologically acceptable limits   
• Trophic level of the catch, 
• Sensitive top predator bycatch 
levels (quantitative: sharks, 
birds; qualitative: pinnipeds), 
• Population status of top predator 
species (whales, pinnipeds, 
seabirds) relative to minimum 
biologically acceptable limits 
 Introduction of non-
native species 
Fishery vessel ballast water and hull 
fouling organism exchange levels high 
enough to cause viable introduction of one 
or more non-native species, invasive 
species 
• Total catch levels 
Energy flow 
and balance 
Energy re-direction Long-term changes in system biomass, 
respiration,  production or energy cycling 
that are outside the range of natural 
variability due to fishery discarding and 
offal production practices 
• Trends in discard and offal 
production levels (quantitative 
for discards), 
• Scavenger population trends 
relative to discard and offal 
production levels (qualitative), 
• Bottom gear effort (qualitative 
measure of unobserved gear 
mortality particularly on bottom 
organisms) 
 Energy removal Long-term changes in system-level 
biomass, respiration,  production or 
energy cycling that are outside the range 
of natural variability due to fishery 
removals of energy  
• Trends in total retained catch 
levels (quantitative) 
  
Diversity Species diversity Catch removals high enough to cause the 
biomass of one or more species (target, 
nontarget) to fall below or to be kept from 
recovering from levels below minimum 
biologically acceptable limits   
• Population levels of target, 
nontarget species relative to  
MSST or ESA listing thresholds, 
linked to fishing removals 
(qualitative), 
• Bycatch amounts of sensitive 
(low potential population 
turnover rates) species that lack 
population estimates 
(quantitative: sharks, birds, 
HAPC biota), 
• Number of ESA listed marine 
species, 
• Area closures 
 
71 
Table 6  Continued 
 
Issue Effect Significance Threshold Indicator 
Diversity Functional (trophic, 
structural habitat) 
diversity  
Catch removals high enough to cause a 
change in functional  diversity outside the 
range of natural variability observed for 
the system 
• Guild diversity or size diversity 
changes linked to fishing 
removals (qualitative), 
• Bottom gear effort (measure of 
benthic guild disturbance) 
• HAPC biota bycatch 
 Genetic diversity Catch removals high enough to cause a 
loss or change in one or more genetic 
components of a stock that would cause 
the stock biomass to fall below minimum 
biologically acceptable limits 
• Degree of fishing on spawning 
aggregations or larger fish 
(qualitative), 
• Older age group abundances of 
target groundfish stocks 
 
MSST = minimum stock size thresholds; ESA = Endangered Species Act; HAPC = habitat of particular concern 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PERSPECTIVES ON INDICATORS 
 
 
75 
Perspective on ecological indicators 
 
Daniel Goodman 
 
Department of Ecology, Montana State University, Bozeman, MT 59717-0346, U.S.A. 
E-mail:  goodman@rapid.msu.montana.edu 
 
 
The North Pacific Research Board issued a call for 
indicator science, and we are reminded that this 
will have to be solid science, because when it is 
used to make management decisions, the issues 
will be contentious.  This is to say that the science 
needs to be solid enough to stand up in court. 
 
The presentations these past days have painted a 
bewildering picture of the state of indicator 
science for the Bering Sea, because the Stock 
Assessment and Fishery Evaluation (SAFE) 
document reports 100+ indicators without a clear 
enough representation of which indicate what, 
how they are used, or how they could be used. 
 
In fact, this list of 100+ indicators includes several 
different kinds of quantities, which complicates 
the message that they convey.  What we have at 
the moment should be sorted so that we can 
categorize them in a way that clarifies what each 
is, what it does, and why we think it is worth 
measuring and reporting.  This sidesteps, at least 
for the moment, the prescriptive definition of 
“what is an indicator” and instead, asks for a 
descriptive taxonomy of “what are the kinds of 
things that are in the present list of indictors in the 
SAFE document.” 
 
This way, rather than ask for a cosmic definition 
of a “good indicator,” we can consider for each 
distinct kind of thing we are calling an indicator, 
what would constitute a good one within that 
class.  This might serve as a basis for ranking 
priorities both for investment and for emphasis in 
communication.  What might be grounds for 
dropping an indicator from the Ecosystem 
Considerations appendix of the SAFE report? 
What might be grounds for stopping monitoring 
one of those indicators? 
 
The indicators reported in the SAFE report, as a 
set, are just time series of variables that have been 
measured.  There seem to be three main kinds of 
measures: 
1.  direct measures of system state,  
2.  summaries of measures of system state,  
3.  surrogate measures of system state. 
 
Examples of direct measures of system state might 
be chlorophyll, or ice, possibly measured at a 
defined set of locations, possibly reported as a 
spatial average.  We think that these are 
informative in their own right. 
 
Examples of summaries of measures of system 
state might be PDO or trophic level biomass 
ratios.  Note that the summaries do not relieve the 
need for the underlying measurement.  
Mathematically, PDO is a linear combination of 
sea surface temperatures over a spatial field.  We 
may believe scientifically that this is a very 
revealing way to describe climate state. But we 
still need to measure sea surface temperatures in 
order to calculate PDO.  Fortunately there are lots 
of other reasons for measuring sea surface 
temperature, and it is now routinely done by 
means of remote sensors, so the marginal cost of 
obtaining a measurement of PDO is very small. 
 
Surrogate measures are proxies for things that are 
too expensive to measure directly on a routine 
basis, but hopefully the proxy is well enough 
correlated with the object of our actual interest.  
For example, sea bird reproduction may correlate 
well with zooplankton production within a known 
radius of their rookery, and may be simpler to 
monitor than the zooplankton production itself. 
 
The index of biotic integrity, used extensively in 
surveys for freshwater systems, is another example 
of a surrogate measure.  The procedure for 
development and validation of this index is well 
documented.  A set of reference sites ranging from 
degraded to pristine, within a defined habitat type 
 
76 
and geographic region, are selected and sampled; 
easily identifiable biota are counted across that 
gradient; statistical operations identify a surrogate 
index, based on easy sampling of recognizable 
biota, that is correlated with the degree of 
degradation of the site.  Once this calibration has 
been done, the index based on easy sampling can 
replace the possibly more difficult direct 
measurement of environmental stress at new sites 
that were not involved in the calibration. Different 
habitat types and geographic regions, of course, 
harbor different biota regardless, so for each 
habitat type and geographic region a distinct index 
of biotic integrity must be developed and 
calibrated. 
 
What must we ask about these measures that we 
are calling indicators? The first question, as with 
any environmental measure is how well it is 
measured.  There is often a serious amount of 
measurement error in the technology of 
measurement itself.  Sampling error often is even 
more serious since, as a practical matter, the 
measurements may be made at a very limited 
number of times and places, yet the result may be 
taken to represent a field that is known to be very 
heterogeneous and which is known to exhibit large 
temporal variation. 
 
When developing a surrogate index, another 
important issue arises.  The surrogate is not 
credible as an index without documentation of the 
degree of correspondence with ground truth. A 
proposed index for which a ground truth is 
unmeasured or unmeasurable is not subject to 
validation.  A surrogate for which a ground truth is 
not operationally defined as a measurable should 
be a non-starter.  Note that ecosystem health is a 
metaphor, not a measurable. 
 
The possible reasons for reporting an indicator are 
fourfold.  The indicator may serve to quantify: 
• utility,  
• attainment, 
• normalcy,  
• forecast. 
An example of an indicator that directly represents 
a measure of utility would be fisheries yield.  Our 
interest in this is self-explanatory. The importance 
of an indicator with this motivation depends on the 
value of the utility that it measures. 
 
An indicator of attainment is a measure of a 
quantity for which a management reference point 
has already been agreed upon.  In one sense the 
importance of an indicator with this motivation is 
a social construct – it is as important as the 
agreement that is behind it. But if the agreement 
rested on a belief about ecological consequences 
(such as the amount of escapement necessary for 
maintenance of higher trophic levels, as in the 
international Commission for the Conservation of 
Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) 
agreement for managing fisheries in the 
Antarctic), the stability of the agreement may 
change with changes in scientific knowledge about 
the connection to consequences. 
 
The interest in indicators of “normalcy” is based 
on the expectation that the system is unlikely to 
confront us with unwelcome surprises as long as 
the system is operating within known historic 
bounds.  Thus the indicators of normalcy may be 
measures of state or rate or correlation for 
properties that we believe to be significant to 
system function, and for which we have a long 
enough historic record to have convincingly 
identified normal bounds. 
 
The reasons for interest in a reliable forecast will 
depend on the quantity that is being predicted.  It 
may be a description of system state, where the 
interest in the prediction is scientific.  The quantity 
predicted may be of interest because it directly 
constitutes utility in its own right, as in forecasts 
of fishery yield, or the quantity being predicted 
may have broad ramifications, such as predictions 
of regime change or ecosystem upheaval. 
 
Note that the claim for any of these reasons for 
interest in an indicator may merit a second look.  
If the claim is utility, is there wide acceptance that 
this is a measure of value? If the claim is 
attainment, is there an actual governing policy, 
and are the reasons for that policy sound? If the 
claim is normalcy, what are the defining 
boundaries for the normal envelope, and what is 
the empirical evidence for these boundaries? If the 
claim is forecast, what is the statistical confidence 
77 
in the forecast, and what is the empirical basis 
underlying the calculation of confidence? 
 
The preceding taxonomy of indicators suggests a 
descriptive definition of ecosystem indicators. An 
ecosystem indicator is something we can measure 
that in turn serves as a measure, an estimate, or a 
prediction of something we care about.  In every 
case there is room to ask hard questions about how 
well we measure, how accurately we estimate, 
how reliably we predict, and why we care.  It 
would be helpful if the 100+ indicators in the 
SAFE report were catalogued in this way, with an 
examination of the hard questions, and 
documentation of the available answers. 
 
It may emerge that some of the hard questions 
cannot be answered very well for some subset of 
the indicators.  In particular, it is imaginable that 
documentation for performance for some of the 
surrogates and predictors may be thin.  If so, it is 
important to recognize that interest in these is 
speculative, so each must be treated as a scientific 
hypothesis which carries a scientific responsibility 
to test the hypothesis.  Therefore, for any indicator 
which does not convincingly pass the first layer of 
hard questions, there should be a second layer of 
hard questions about how the hypothesis is being 
tested, what is the design of that test, and how 
ongoing measurements, monitoring both the 
indicator and the ground truth, will eventually 
resolve the hypothesis. 
 
 
 
79 
Comments on the SAFE Ecosystem Considerations appendix and the PICES 
North Pacific Ecosystem Status report, and review of Day 1 
 
Jake Rice  
 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada, 200 Kent Street, Stn. 12S015, Ottawa, ON, K1A 0E6, Canada 
E-mail:  ricej@dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
 
My comments arise from reading the SAFE 
Ecosystem Considerations appendix and the 
PICES North Pacific Ecosystem Status report, all 
the background papers, listening to the first day’s 
presentations, and to the discussions that took 
place between the presentations.  These are placed 
within the context of my experience in several 
other domestic (Canada) and international (ICES, 
EU, FAO, etc.) fora.  My comments are structured 
as follows.  First, I looked at the overall messages 
from the reports.  Then I tried to assess what was 
missing, present but vague, or present but 
requiring greater discussion.  Finally, I provide my 
own ideas of useful ways ahead. 
 
My first observation is that you are in pretty good 
shape.  A considerable amount of effort has been 
spent on objectives where there is an appreciation 
of the need for specificity, noting that objectives 
are converging from many sources.  There is 
recognition of the need for socio-economic 
objectives and their differences from ecological 
objectives, on matching indicators to objectives, 
acknowledging two modes of use, and especially, 
there is no indication that the region is in 
desperation mode. 
 
Both of the major ecosystem reports are very 
good, but I note that their different audiences are 
matched by their different content.  Both reports 
have enough detail to allow users with 
preconceptions to guide the selection of the 
content.  My suggestion for improvement is to 
avoid including details in the report that a 
reader/user of the report will not want.  You 
should aim for a guidebook rather than an 
encyclopaedia and try to motivate and guide 
readers.  Finally, make the big messages clearer. 
 
Features that were either missing or under-
represented in the papers and talks include the 
following:  
• The DPSIR (Driver, Pressure, State, Impact, 
Response) structure has proven useful for 
organizing dialogue and in reducing numbers of 
indicators, and for matching indicators to their 
use in the overall processes.  
• There was an overall absence of a risk 
management framework in the papers.  The 
Fulton presentation has demonstrated one way 
for making progress on this topic.  There is a 
need to focus more on displaying uncertainty.  
Of the suites of indicators, spatial content was 
missing everywhere, and I noted that size-based 
indicators are under-represented relative to 
their performance elsewhere (especially ICES). 
• There does not appear to be a formal indicator 
selection process.  
 
Several facets of the indicator issue were present 
but vague.   
• There was no discussion of how to test the 
performance of indicators during the selection 
process. 
   NOT the same for indictors used in AUDIT 
function and indicators used in 
CONTROL function 
   AUDIT – Targets primary, limits secondary 
   CONTROL – Limits primary, Targets 
secondary 
   METHODS EXIST FOR TESTNG BOTH 
 
• Where do we get the reference points? 
   Differentiate Indicator (say, SSB) from 
Reference Points (Bmsy, B35%, etc.) 
   Reversibility of impact? Responsiveness to 
management at all? 
80 
   The “classic” three-stage model (discussed 
below) should have ONE (NOT two) 
biological (or socio-economic) fixed points 
and the rest is making uncertainty explicit. 
 
There are several areas that could use more critical 
thinking.  These include when and how to use 
absolute-scale indicators versus relative-scale 
indicators.  The experience with IUCN decline 
criterion for marine species is a case in point.  
Should there be different reference points for 
different regimes?  Perhaps for the population size, 
NO, but for the uses of populations, YES, 
especially if likelihood of prompt detection of 
regime change is low.  If the “traffic light” style of 
presentation is preferred, then the biological 
calibration of the cut-points is a crucial research 
topic, as are strategies for dealing with 
redundancies among indicators, and weighting of 
indicators when providing support for decisions.  
There is a need to understand what to do with 
tough decisions and multiple indicators that might 
reflect opposing trends.  An example of this is the 
EU experience using just B and F (biomass and 
fishing mortality).  I note that U.S. legislation on 
over-fishing and over-fished will not transfer 
readily to ecosystem metrics. 
 
I was stimulated to ask what other field of science 
works with indicators in a similar context?  My 
experience in psychometric research has some 
similarities.  The fundamental underlying 
processes are critically important but they are 
NOT accessible to direct measurement.  Therefore, 
indirect indices have proliferated and they are 
flexible, and are easily adopted.  In psychometrics, 
“normal” is not a fixed point on ANY scale, but is 
a general “neighbourhood” in the centriod of the 
multi-dimensional space of the indicators.  Usage 
focuses not on how close an individual subject is 
to exact centre of the neighbour, but rather on 
whether an individual subject is deviant in some 
particular direction and if so, by how much and 
what might be done about it.  In psychometrics, a 
lot hinges on decisions based on the indicators and 
the ability to abuse and/or misinterpret indices is 
relatively easy.  Hence the field has developed 
quite explicit and detailed guidelines for their use. 
 
An important step is the selection process when 
indicators are being used in their Control function.  
A process which I find particularly attractive is 
derived from signal detection theory and its 
application to Human Factors Research.  It has a 
70-year history with its first flowering during 
WWII.  It requires reconstructions of historical 
time series of indicator values.  Once this has been 
developed, the next step is to reconstruct what a 
history of good decisions would have been.  If it is 
not possible to do this retrospectively, how can we 
support any decision-making into the future, based 
on these indicators.  Four outcomes are possible in 
evaluating an indicator: 
 
1. HIT (something should have been done and  the 
indicator said DO IT), 
2. TRUE NEGATIVE (no management response 
was needed and the indicator said status quo 
OK), 
3. MISS (something should have been done but 
the indicator did not say action was needed), 
4. FALSE ALARM (nothing needed to be done 
but the indicator called for management 
intervention). 
 
The results of this exercise can be represented in a 
2 × 2 table.  A perfect indicator has no Misses or 
False Alarms.  The approach explicitly 
acknowledges that the costs associated with 
Misses and False Alarms are not the same.  The 
approach allows users to choose a decision point 
on an indicator (“reference point”) that minimizes 
the overall error rate or, controls the ratio of 
Misses and False Alarms that reflect their relative 
costs (e.g., medical situations).  In this way, it 
becomes easy to compare the performance of 
indicators. 
 
Considering the Audit function in psychometrics, 
the diagnostics have a history of over a century of 
use.  Many mistakes (and advocacy abuses) have 
occurred but many lessons were learned.  The uses 
are numerous, from career aptitude testing, to 
assessing legal competency for actions, and 
diagnosing personality disorders.  Their 
application has involved extensive validation 
testing and codification of professional standards.   
 
The general approach is to have a large battery of 
“questions” (= “suites of indicators”) – Binet, 
MMPI, Rorschach, etc., then test a large populace 
with the battery of questions.  In addition to a 
81 
HEALTHY
CAUTIOUS
CRITICAL 
H
A
R
V
E
S
T 
 
R
A
T
E 
                               BIOMASS
LRP
EN       TH ?
WHERE IS SC?
CONVENTIONAL 
FISHERIES 
MANAGEMENT 
REBUILDING
ENDANGERED 
SPECIES TOOLS 
large number of subjects chosen at random from 
the general population, there is a special role for 
test sets, which involve individuals that are known 
with confidence to have specific disorders.  The 
diagnostic tools are developed by determining a 
combination of weighted questions that group 
subjects known to share a specific pathology as 
distinct, while leaving most of the populace in a 
central cloud.  To my knowledge, this approach 
has not been tried in ecology. 
 
In the classic 3-stage mode (Fig. 18) for using 
indicators and reference points to guide decision-
making, there is one fixed reference point.  This is 
determined by some government responsibility – 
law or policy.  The objective is typically to prevent 
any “serious or irreversible harm” (language of the 
Precautionary Approach from Agenda 21 of Rio). 
The best biological estimate of that property is 
determined (e.g., in ICES it is Blim – damaged 
productivity).  The next issue is estimate the 
current status relative to that point with some 
measure of uncertainty, so a buffer is needed (e.g., 
Bpa).  This is the point where the probability that 
true stock biomass may be at the limit exceeds 
0.05.  This framework allows the current value of 
an indicator to guide risk-averse management, and 
makes the whole system precautionary. 
 The issue of predictability requires us to consider 
various temporal scales of interest.  It is also 
instructive to consider whether “scenario 
explorations” associated with climate change and 
with marine ecosystem dynamics have important 
differences.  Climate change has no expectation of 
accuracy on timescales greater than 30 days or less 
than 30 years.  Ecosystem dynamics, on the other 
hand, at lead times of 3 to 7 (10?) years provide 
some of the core decision support for 
management.  The climate change decisions are 
long-term strategic, but the ecosystem dynamics 
decisions are medium-term and tactical. 
 
In considering what to predict, it seems that one 
should not try to capture inter-annual flutter.  It 
will be more important to know how the 
probability of an extreme event (good or bad) 
varies with natural or anthropogenic forcers, rather 
than try to predict minor deviations up or down 
from long-term average conditions   Multi-factor 
non-parametric probability density estimation 
methods do show inflections in plot of P (extreme 
event) as f (specified forcers).  The predictions 
should be easy to use and to interpret but they do 
require decisions about what is “extreme.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 18  The classic 3-stage model.  
82 
Ecosystem indicators have also been a priority for 
OSPAR (the Oslo–Paris Commission) to use in 
fulfilling their mandate for protection of 
environmental quality of the North East Atlantic.  
ICES was requested to advise on the suitability of 
different sorts of ecosystem indicators, and the 
Working Group on Ecosystem Effects of Fishing 
was asked to undertake the evaluation.  Over a 
series of several meetings in the late 1990s and 
early 2000s, they developed screening criteria for 
ecosystem indicators, reviewed literature on 
marine ecosystem indicators, and tested both their 
criteria and a number of classes of indicators with 
some extensive data sets from the ICES area.  
Starting with a suite of more than 60 types of 
indicators, the ICES Working Group on 
Ecosystems (WGECO) found that the best 
alternatives included: 
 
For the biodiversity/fish community 
• slope of size-spectrum; 
• mean length of fishes from a standardized 
survey; 
• % of fish greater than some system-specific 
size in a standardized survey; 
• bycatch rate of “particularly sensitive” species 
in observer data, where “particularly sensitive” 
is determined by rough estimates of “q” for the 
gear and an estimate of sustainable Z from life 
history parameters and 
• survey-based abundance estimates; 
• K-dominance (ABC) curves; 
• frequency distribution of L
max
 in a standardized 
survey; 
• species richness. 
 
For trophodynamic processes/status 
• No model-based indicators were found to 
perform well, and size-based indicators are 
better, even though they are surrogates for the 
processes. 
 
For spatial integrity  
• No suitable indicators were found. 
 
Group discussion 
 
James Overland:  I have a hard time imagining 
applying the psychometric analogue to marine 
ecosystems.  Where might we find a significant 
population of marine ecosystems? Do we need to 
compute a pdf of ecosystem responses?  
 
Jake Rice:  No one has tried to do this…it works 
in psychometrics. 
 
Jason Link:  The leads like a commercial for the 
comparative ecosystem session at the 2007 ICES 
Annual Science Conference that will try to pull all 
of the high latitude ecosystem comparisons 
together (Convenors: Ian Perry, Bernard Megrey, 
Jason Link). 
 
Andrea Belgrano:  How do they deal with the 
multi-dimensional issues that are so critical to the 
study of ecosystems, in psychometrics? 
 
Rice:  They would argue that human personality is 
a dimensionally complex problem. 
 
Overland: I think that it relates to overfishing; our 
problem is shifted to looking at the shift in the 
system dynamics or response to climate, etc. 
which may eventually have a management 
implication but does not have one right now.  Is 
there a different way that we should be thinking 
about things? 
 
Rice:  Indicators are used widely in environmental 
health reporting, e.g., coastal pollution.  There 
they ask, “What is the optimal way to use a 
community that has this common trait compared to 
one that does not?” 
 
Francis Wiese: I like the idea of retrospective 
studies of indicators. 
 
Rice: For regimes, you do not want to base 
decision making on insensitive indicators.  The 
indicator needs to have a history. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DISCUSSION GROUP RESULTS 
 
85 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
During the second day of the workshop, participants were divided into smaller groups to facilitate 
discussion.  During the morning session, participants were randomly assigned to one of four discussion 
groups, and each group was asked to consider the same topic: objectives and indicators.  There were no 
strict guidelines, allowing the discussion to be free to explore whatever issues that it deemed appropriate. 
During the afternoon, four aspects of the ecosystem indicators issue were discussed in three groups:   
(1) Matching objectives with indicators;  (2) Methodologies to monitor ecosystem-wide structural change; 
(3) Communicating results.  Participation in these groups was by personal preference.  The following are 
short summaries of the discussions in each of these groups. 
 
 
Convenors and discussion group leaders (clockwise from far left): Glen Jamieson, George Hunt Jr., 
Sarah Kruse, Gordon Kruse, Patricia Livingston, James Overland, Nathan Mantua, Franz Mueter, Ian 
Perry, Anne Hollowed, and Robert O’Boyle. 
 
87 
Objectives and use of indicators in the Bering Sea/North Pacific 
 
 
GROUP 1:  Robert O’Boyle (facilitator), Skip McKinnell (rapporteur), Franz Mueter, Sergei 
Rodionov, James Overland, Ian Perry, David Fluharty, Andrea Belgrano, Kerim Aydin, Jeffrey Napp, and  
Carl Schoch 
 
To stimulate the discussion, the facilitator outlined 
issues that he thought might be useful to pursue.  
These were related to high level objectives, and to 
Bering Sea fishery objectives, both conceptual and 
operational.  The latter of these includes indicators 
and reference points.  He also highlighted the use 
of “contextual” indicators that could be used to 
monitor ecosystem state. The following is a 
summary of the discussion. 
 
Issues 
 
A number of overarching issues were identified by 
the group.  The first was that, while the workshop 
terms of reference focused on an ecosystem 
approach to fisheries, there is a need to put this in 
the context of other human activities (e.g., oil and 
gas exploration) through an overall ecosystem 
approach to management.  This will require 
harmonization of the high-level objectives to 
ensure that all sectors are striving toward the same 
ends. 
 
While there were fisheries management issues 
noted by the group (e.g., abundance of Steller sea 
lions and crabs), in comparison with other 
jurisdictions (e.g., Northwest Atlantic), fisheries 
management appears to be effective in regulating 
the effects of fishing.  However, managers do not 
want surprises that might arise from productivity 
changes in the ecosystem.  In a sense, the impact 
of the ecosystem on fisheries is the prime issue, 
not the other way around.  Two ecosystem-level 
changes were mentioned – regime shifts involving 
ecosystem oscillation between “warm” and “cool” 
states and changes due to the regional effects of 
global climate change.  Managers would like to 
know as much as possible about future ecosystem 
changes for planning.  For instance, if the 
ecosystem was shifting from a primarily demersal-
dominated to pelagic-dominated ecosystem, 
managers could initiate a review of pelagic 
fisheries management plans. 
 
The state of the Bering Sea was felt to be quite 
different from that of the North Atlantic, where 
harvesting impacts on ecosystems have been, and 
continue to be, a concern.  From this perspective, 
there is more utility in developing a suite of 
indicators that monitor broader ecosystem change 
than focusing on improvements to the current suite 
of fisheries performance indicators. 
 
Objectives and indicators 
 
The group considered that it would be useful to 
include a non-fisheries management objective in 
the determination of ecosystem state and the 
following objective was suggested: 
 
“Determine the current state of the Bering Sea 
ecosystem to inform management decisions” 
 
To achieve this objective, a suite of “contextual” 
indicators and reference points/directions would 
be needed to inform managers about the current 
state of the ecosystem and its probable future 
states.  The contextual indicators typically require 
no immediate management action but they provide 
a context for the performance of indicators used in 
fisheries management.  
 
The group considered this could be done through 
first developing conceptual model(s) of the Bering 
Sea ecosystem to summarize current 
understanding and hypotheses about the driving 
processes.  Then, a suite of indicators would be 
chosen based upon this model(s) and would be 
used as an “ecosystem watch” by resource 
managers.  It was considered essential to have an 
associated guidebook for PICES and NPFMC that 
would describe the background on the selection of 
the suite of indicators, describe the formulation of 
each indicator, and outline how the suite of them 
should be interpreted. 
 
88 
Regarding reporting, the group thought that 
formally separating the contextual and 
performance indicators in the Ecosystem 
Considerations appendix would facilitate 
demonstrating how each is used in management. 
 
The group discussed how to improve the 
operational objectives, particularly focusing on the 
linkage between the contextual and performance 
indicators.  This could be done by considering the 
influence of contextual indicators on the reference 
points/directions of particular operational 
objectives.  Management decisions would then 
take this linkage into consideration. 
 
The group ended by emphasizing the need for 
models that would be used in developing scenarios 
for managers which would describe potential 
ecosystem changes and modifications to 
management. A probabilistic-based, risk 
assessment approach will be a key element of this 
approach.
 
 
 
GROUP 2:  Anne Hollowed (facilitator), Nicholas Bond, Clarence Pautzke, Bernard Megrey, Sarah 
Kruse, Gordon Kruse, Glen Jamieson, and Lisa Eisner 
 
The group discussion began with a review of the 
objectives for monitoring ecosystem indicators.  
The group recommended adding an objective and 
modifying one objective: 
 
• “Assess ocean conditions and anthropogenic 
activities in an annual report on anomalies and 
their potential ecosystem impacts.” 
• Modify the statement on “avoid seabird and 
marine mammal impacts” to “protect sensitive 
species”.   
 
The first objective would link outcomes to 
indicators of the state of ocean conditions.  The 
modification to the seabird and marine mammal 
objective would allow consideration of corals, and 
other species as well as assessment of status of 
sensitive species for reasons other than fishing 
impacts. 
 
Objectives 
 
The group identified the need to assess the overall 
goals and objectives for ecosystem management 
within national fisheries management authorities.  
In the United States, this would involve vetting the 
recommendations through the regional fisheries 
management councils.  The group also pointed out 
that scientists are responsible for identifying 
unacceptable ecosystem properties.  The group 
noted that, while defining “acceptable use” of the 
ecosystem is a social issue, the process would 
benefit from a description of the range of 
acceptable effects on the ecosystem.  The group 
acknowledged that this step will be challenging for 
natural scientists because it will necessitate an 
examination of the accuracy of ecosystem 
forecasts.  The accuracy of predictions will allow 
scientists to judge whether they are ready for use 
in defining acceptable levels of ecosystem impact.  
If ecosystem forecasts are reliable, social scientists 
would be able to present a better description of the 
expected societal outcomes.  The group noted that 
defining acceptable social characteristics is 
difficult as well. 
 
Recommendations for new research or 
monitoring 
 
New funds are needed to collect and interpret 
ecosystem indicators.  Funds should be used to 
focus on specific unfunded needs/activities and to 
take advantage of existing platforms of 
opportunity whenever possible.  There is a 
compelling need to establish new process-oriented 
research focused on the processes influencing the 
frequency and intensity of species interactions.  
Standard census-type surveys are not designed to 
collect this type of information.  One technique for 
establishing new process-oriented sampling would 
be to select locations for intense monitoring at 
meso-scales, both temporal (weeks) and spatial 
(kilometers).  The sites could be visited frequently 
to capture the seasonal time scale of change.  
Moorings could be deployed to capture the very 
fine temporal scale of change in oceanography.  
Site selection should focus on one or more of the 
following criteria: 
89 
• regions of aggregation for several key species;  
• habitats that are utilized by a large number of 
key species; 
• regions that directly influence the fitness 
consequences for species utilizing the habitat 
(e.g., nursery grounds); 
• unique habitats that protect rare species that are 
directly tied to a specific habitat type.   
 
Selection of locations could be based on outcomes 
of three dimensional bio-physical models coupled 
with ground-truthing by observation.  The group 
noted that one key area might be the southern 
Bering Sea shelf where flow into the eastern 
Bering Sea is an important variable to monitor (see 
below). 
 
Selection of regions based on the fitness 
consequences of ecosystem change could consider 
the location of fronts or spawning and nursery 
grounds.  These features can control the degree of 
spatial overlap of predators, prey and the 
concentration of prey (fronts) or the dispersal of 
reproductive products across the Bering Sea 
(spawning and nursery grounds). 
The following areas were recommended, based on 
their unique characteristics and their role in the 
production of living marine resources in the 
Bering Sea: Pribilof seal colonies, cod alley, and 
submarine canyons as regions of cross-shelf 
exchange. 
 
The group noted the following to place-based 
regional research: 
Advantages: 
• Is cost effective; 
• Solves the untenable problem of needing to 
sample everything everywhere. 
Issue: 
• Modeling is needed to translate observations at 
pulse points to an overall status of the 
ecosystem. 
 
Review of indicators for objectives 
 
Limit ecosystem impacts   
 
We dismissed this topic because we felt that it was 
comparatively easy to select indicators of 
ecosystem impacts on fish, seabirds and marine 
mammals given existing monitoring programs for 
these species groups.  Before managers decide to 
limit impacts they must first identify what are 
acceptable levels of impact.  This is a difficult and 
complex scientific issue.  We did note that our 
ability to assess the abundance of plankton and 
infauna and benthic epifauna is currently limited. 
 
Indicators of food webs   
 
The group felt that there should be some 
acknowledgement of the difficulty of managing 
food webs.  It might be more appropriate to 
establish limits to ecosystem stress and then 
request input from society on the goals for 
management within the acceptable limits.  For 
example, one might be able to establish a goal to 
avoid an ecosystem shift from a gadid-dominated 
system to one dominated by elasmobranchs. 
 
Maintain trophic structure   
 
The group noted that the approach of using 
trophic-level ratios and identification of 
appropriate reference points for this might be 
difficult to interpret.  These indicators would be 
improved if efforts focused on data quality and 
monitoring of functional groups.  The group also 
recommended a focus on:  
• indicators of seasonal shifts,  
• benthic infauna,  
• cephalopods,  
• benthic habitat-forming epifauna,  
• habitat mapping,  
• zooplankton abundance,  
• pelagic fish species.  
There is a need for more detailed information on 
species interactions. 
 
The group discussed several analytical techniques 
for evaluating ecosystem properties.  Among 
these, they noted that network analyses could be 
used to identify regions where a disproportionate 
ratio of energy concentrates at one of the key 
nodes.  The group also recommended that analysts 
should conduct sensitivity analyses on food webs 
to inform of overfishing definitions. 
    
90 
Spatial management  
 
Several recommendations for this element were 
discussed above.  The group identified the 
following steps:  
• Identify bio-regions; 
• Review existing management areas to assess 
whether they match bio-regions; 
• Use multi-beam and other technologies to 
assess habitat types (sand, mud, etc.); 
• Determine corridors used by migratory species 
and evaluate migration pathways relative to the 
long-term norms; 
• Determine the locations of spawning grounds. 
 
Uncertainty  
 
The use of ecosystem indicators in management is 
an effort to assess natural and anthropogenic 
impacts on ecosystems.  Thus, the state of science 
is uncertain and thus, the advice to managers 
should include a clear description of the 
uncertainty associated with the indicators.  The 
group recommended the following considerations 
when evaluating uncertainty:  
• Develop scenarios to assess the implications of 
climate variability; 
• Develop techniques to assess structural 
changes. 
Key research issues lie in the identification of 
mechanisms linking growth, productivity, and 
vulnerability to survey species composition. 
 
Governance   
 
There is a need to distinguish between human and 
non-human impacts:  
• Acknowledge that thresholds to human impacts 
can be controlled.  Acknowledge that non-
human changes require adaptation of control 
rules given the state of nature; 
• Metrics exist, e.g., average age of the fishers 
within a fleet, economic status, and education 
level.  However, issues associated with a 
definition of acceptable societal attributes are 
almost as difficult as defining what is an 
acceptable ecosystem; 
• Decision criteria must be defensible. 
 
 
GROUP 3:  Nathan Mantua (facilitator), Jake Rice, Suam Kim, Francis Wiese, Jason Link, Diana 
Evans, and Jennifer Boldt 
 
Are there unique characteristics of the Bering Sea 
that would lead to a certain path or is it more 
appropriate to talk about general indicators for 
many ecosystems?  There are indices that can be 
used for all ecosystems, but there are also 
ecosystem-specific indices.  For example, North 
Atlantic fishing pressure outweighs climate signals 
whereas, in the Bering Sea, climate is more 
important than fishing.  In the North Pacific, 
changes in carrying capacity are so large that 
strategic, long-term views and planning must 
consider the unstable nature of carrying capacity.  
There is a need, therefore, to have leading 
environmental indicators for the Bering Sea.  
Objectives must consider a temporal scale.  If the 
concern is focused only on next year’s fishery, 
climate indices may not be necessary, but if the 
concern is the status of the fishery over the longer 
term, then climate rises in importance. 
The Bering Sea is unique because a large fishery 
has built up around a particular ecosystem state, 
which may present challenges for ecosystem 
indicators and objectives.  There must be a 
framework to organize indicators and objectives, 
and indicators need to have clear functions.  The 
Ecosystem Assessment (first section of the 
Ecosystem Considerations appendix) contains a 
framework that organizes indicators under three 
main objectives (maintain predator–prey 
relationships, diversity, and energy flow and 
balance), each with several sub-objectives.  There 
are indices in the second and third sections of the 
Ecosystem Considerations appendix that are used 
to address these objectives.  There are also indices 
in these two sections of the report that are not 
necessarily used to address these objectives.   
 
91 
It was suggested that indicators should be 
considered within a risk assessment framework.  
For example, the probability of various levels of 
stock productivity could be plotted as a function of 
the Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO), perhaps 
with a third axis that includes some measure of 
fishing (likelihood of an indicator as a function of 
environmental indicators).  Despite the lack of an 
explanatory mechanism to support this correlation, 
it still may be useful to have a risk-based 
framework that encompasses what is known.  The 
main concern is about an increasing risk of an 
undesirable change.  When it occurs, it is 
necessary to understand whether the source was 
anthropogenic or whether the environment 
changed such that the likelihood of a good year-
class decreased.  A framework of this nature 
would help to identify key drivers for the 
processes of interest and allow us to choose a few 
appropriate indices.  The framework could also 
provide NPFMC with advice such as “there is a 30 
to 40% chance that there will be poor recruitment 
for the next 3 to 4 years.”  Knowledge of an 
ecosystem may not be sufficient to provide an 
accurate forecast, but information about the risk of 
these events may be valuable in meeting 
conservation goals.   
 
With regard to thresholds, there is a need to focus 
on inflection points in the relationship between 
probability of a process (like production) and, for 
example, climate indicators.  Predictions, in risk 
framework, can be used in developing and 
assessing future scenarios.  Managers cannot 
influence environmental variables, but their 
strategy could look at the probability of 
productivity being high or low.  Models can then 
incorporate a parameter to identify the current 
state.  The less a system is understood, the more 
cautious we must be in perturbing it.   
 
Concerning assessments of vulnerability, it will be 
important to build into the management process a 
means to avoid undesirable ecosystem states. 
 
Process studies are important to improve 
management decisions, but how empirical and 
process studies can be linked to management is a 
difficult subject. 
 
Recommendations 
 
1. Driving ecosystem processes need to be 
identified and appropriate indicators selected. 
2. Take an inventory of the status of indicators 
(e.g., size, production, diversity, “canary” 
species, energy flow trophodynamics, habitat, 
physio-chemical regime) and map them to 
objectives. 
3. Link selected indicators to see how they 
interact (correlative, mechanistic, etc.).  
Identify drivers versus responses and create 
relational type models. 
4. Once relationships are established, identify key 
thresholds and appropriate levels. 
5. Develop scenarios for risk assessment that 
assess the risks and benefits of different 
actions, given uncertainty. 
 
What do you do when you are in a poor-
productivity regime?  How does it translate into a 
real suggestion to management?   The advice for 
the first year might not result in a management 
action, but brings the subject to their attention and 
may provide a way of identifying important 
monitoring that needs to be done.  This can also 
help provide an advanced “heads-up” to 
management and the public, if presented to the 
Council before there is a problem; it gives people 
a chance to get caught up on research, and have a 
dialogue. 
 
 
92 
GROUP 4:  George Hunt (facilitator), Patricia Livingston (rapporteur), Villy Christensen, Elizabeth 
Fulton, James Ianelli, Vladimir Radchenko, and Akihiko Yatsu  
 
Objectives 
 
What do you want to indicate? 
 
The group initially focused its discussion on 
objectives by talking about the state of the North 
Pacific and how its health might be measured.  It 
soon became evident that there needed to be a 
clear, quantifiable definition of “ecosystem 
health”.  Only then could indicators of this 
ecosystem quality be identified.  Likewise, the 
objective of maintaining the structure and function 
of marine ecosystems was described as difficult to 
quantitatively defend because the natural degree of 
variation in ecosystem properties is so poorly 
known that the significance of observed change is 
hard to interpret.  The difficulties in defining 
“acceptable state” were also discussed.  In some 
cases, it was recognized that it might be easier to 
define what states might need to be avoided, as 
opposed to defining an optimum or acceptable 
ecosystem state.  Thus, it would be desirable to 
avoid reducing the abundance of a species, 
significantly reducing a species’ range, or causing 
unacceptable levels of eutrophication such that the 
risk of its extinction is increased substantially.  In 
some cases, there are strategic processes in place 
that alter management for habitat and protected 
species such as Essential Fish Habitat (EFH) 
protection measures and Endangered Species Act 
(ESA) consultations.   
 
The group agreed that it is difficult to have a 
scientific definition of what is acceptable and/or 
what is not because the issue of acceptability is 
one of human values.  For example, the Bering 
Sea was once home to an ecosystem that had many 
great whales, many Pacific ocean perch (Sebastes 
alutus) and few walleye pollock (Theragra 
chalcogramma).  An unanswered question is 
whether the current state, with fewer great whales 
and Pacific ocean perch and many walleye 
pollock, is due to natural or human effects.  If the 
current state (which some will consider desirable) 
is due to top-down effects of fishing on the Bering 
Sea ecosystem, then perhaps it would return to the 
old system if these top-down controls were 
reduced.  The return of a large biomass of whales 
will likely change the Bering Sea.  It is entirely 
possible that the two potential objectives, restoring 
great whales and maintaining the existing 
ecosystem, are incompatible.  Tradeoffs between 
diametrically opposed goals might need to be 
made. 
 
Short-term versus long-term objectives 
 
How to use the indicator 
 
The group discussed the differences between 
strategic and tactical indicators.  Tactical 
indicators are for measuring immediate, short-term 
management responses, such as estimated stock 
biomass.  Tactical objectives from other regions 
include those that support age structure of key 
species.  For example, indicators measuring 
rockfish abundance and catch in space and time 
could be used to guide management decisions.  
Strategic indicators might be those that are context 
setting, such as changes in the productivity or 
biomass of lower trophic-level organisms, or 
trends in the Steller sea lion population or salmon 
bycatch.  Management action does not follow 
immediately upon changes in these, but 
information on their trajectories might provide 
context for future management actions.    
 
Strategic indicators of future ecosystem response 
(“sentinels of climate change”) depend on the past 
being a good predictor of the future.  If climate 
variability, at a variety of temporal scales, causes 
the rules by which ecosystems function to change, 
then the use of these longer-term predictors 
becomes problematic.  A possible avenue of 
approach is to identify and understand the 
responses of key processes to climate variability.  
Indicators based on these processes could 
potentially have greater predictive power than 
those just based on species distributions or 
abundances.  If species are to be useful as sentinels 
of change, e.g., northern fur seals and winter-
spawning flatfish, then there is a need to calibrate 
their responses to changes in ecosystem function. 
 
Some measures of ecosystem-level effects of 
fishing could include changes in the trophic levels 
93 
of the catch, size structure changes, piscivore-to- 
planktivore ratios, habitat changes or changes in 
productivity.  Some objectives might be related to 
optimizing yield, in which case the 2 million 
metric ton yield cap in the eastern Bering Sea is an 
important threshold.  It was recognized that there 
are tradeoffs in achieving multispecies maximum 
sustainable yield (MSY) because single species 
MSY cannot be achieved simultaneously due to 
predator–prey interactions between managed 
species.  Species value might be one of the criteria 
used to determine which species catches should be 
optimized.  The group considered economic–
ecosystem indicators as a topic of potential 
interest.  Would it be useful to learn about the 
mean profit level of the total catch?  A shift from 
more to less valuable species could indicate 
ecosystem change. 
 
Overall, there is a general lack of science-based 
advice about limits and thresholds at higher 
organizational levels.  Thus, it is important to 
focus on development of objectives and measures 
relating to higher level changes, such as food web 
changes, ecosystem-level productivity, or 
multispecies MSY considerations.  Ultimately, it 
should be management objectives and explicit 
societal goals that drive the indicators and 
determine how they are to be used. 
 
Spatial scale 
 
The group discussed the appropriate spatial scale 
for the system to be monitored.  The broad  
 
 
 
classifications used to define large marine 
ecosystems were seen to be too coarse for some of 
the purposes under consideration in the 
southeastern Bering Sea, but there was recognition 
that a reef by reef scale is too fine. There was thus 
considerable interest in identifying practical eco-
regions or bio-regions at intermediate spatial 
scales.  For example, Australian bioregions have 
been defined based on multivariate biological/ 
physical/geological properties.  The Australian 
objective is to maintain spatial diversity, and the 
policy has been to close off 15% of the habitat in 
each bioregion.  It was recognized that 
stakeholders may need to be involved in these 
decisions.   
 
Overview 
 
There was some agreement that existing 
structures/processes are in place to protect species.  
The outstanding scientific issues include the need 
to focus on indicators that identify food web 
changes, ecosystem productivity, and multi-
species MSY versus single species.  Strategic 
indicators of future response to climate shifts will 
require a better understanding of ecosystem 
processes and how these are affected by climate 
variability.  Food web constraints limit achieving 
certain societal goals for an ecosystem.  
Considering stakeholder input, tradeoffs will need 
to be made in designing objectives that meet 
human needs without impacting ecosystem 
function.
 
 
 
95 
Matching objectives with indicators  
 
Ian Perry (facilitator), Jake Rice, Glen Jamison, Francis Weise, Anne Hollowed (rapporteur), Suam 
Kim, and Akihiko Yatsu 
 
Objectives 
 
The group began by reviewing the high-level 
objectives for ecosystem-based management in the 
eastern Bering Sea (and North Pacific) as defined 
by several management agencies for these regions, 
and summarized by Belgrano et al. (this report): 
• Protect ecosystem structure, functioning, and 
key processes (including diversity and 
habitats);  
• Account for food web interactions; 
• Manage regionally;  
• Incorporate precaution into decisions;  
• Integrate broad societal goals; and  
• Acknowledge multiple, external influences, 
including climate.  
 
The group noted that most of the objectives were 
not true objectives (many are “directions” to 
improve management), and that all could be folded 
under objectives 1 and 5 as overarching (but very 
general) objectives.  The group decided that to 
spend time discussing these high-level goals was 
not useful for the following reasons:  
• These objectives will be established by 
governmental agencies with broader input than 
the members of this group; 
• Most governmental institutions have already 
established high-level objectives; and 
• The goals are so broad and general that 
scientists cannot offer meaningful scientific 
advice on them.   
 
It was also noted that objective 5 in its current 
form is inappropriate for the activity of this 
workshop because integration of societal goals is 
not necessarily important to conservation.  For 
example, it was pointed out that governments 
(generally) cannot be sued for failing to maintain 
high levels of walleye pollock, however, they can 
be sued for failing to prevent the pollock stock 
from falling into an overfished state.  A key point 
for the group was that the integration of societal 
goals comes once the boundaries of conservation 
have been identified – it is the role of scientists to 
determine and articulate these conservation 
boundaries. Identifying conservation objectives is 
the core of science and, although not “easy”, 
methods are being developed to achieve this task.  
Socio-economic objectives need to be better 
defined, and by a larger constituency than 
scientists; once this has been done then scientists 
can identify ecological means to move towards 
these socio-economic objectives.  Therefore, a 3-
step procedure was envisaged: 
1. scientific identification of conservation limits;  
2. articulation of socio-economic objectives; and 
then 
3. scientific identification of means to move 
towards socio-economic goals. 
The North Pacific Fishery Management Council 
(NPFMC) should play a central role in identifying 
socio-economic objectives for the ecosystems 
discussed here. 
 
Legislative language typically sets objectives to 
“avoid a certain state”.  With ecosystems, 
however, this type of language should be 
broadened to include terminology such as 
“maintain the ability for ecosystems to recover 
from perturbation”.  Such an objective could then 
be dissected into the knowledge, e.g., biodiversity 
and a natural mix of species and age groups that 
maintain resilience, and the actions required to 
achieve this objective.  
 
Indicators 
 
The group discussed the difference between 
contextual and management indicators.  
Contextual (or “audit”) indicators provide 
background context, and may index conditions 
over which humans have no direct control. 
Management (or “control”) indicators report on 
conditions over which humans have some direct 
control; they could be used to monitor the results 
of management actions.  Several issues were noted 
for indicators: 
 
96 
• Most tend to index current conditions rather 
than predict a future state;  
• There are unresolved issues of how well 
indicators might perform between different 
“regimes”, or whether they may exist at all, 
e.g., whether sea ice will be an important 
indicator in a future (warm) Bering Sea. 
 
The existence of vague objectives makes 
identification of effective indicators particularly 
difficult, if not impossible.  It would be useful for 
stakeholders to clearly define their goals to 
evaluate how conservation and stake holder goals 
match, and to enable scientists to define 
management actions to increase the likelihood of 
achieving these goals.  However, in the Bering Sea 
where fishing mortality is tightly controlled, the 
ability for managers to engineer an ecosystem to 
achieve a societal goal may be limited due to 
uncertainties of ecosystem productivity. 
 
Characteristics of good indicators include (e.g., 
Rice and Rochet, 2005): 
• Forecast: Indicators should be able to 
consistently predict a particular phenomenon. 
• Sensitivity analysis:  Given an objective and a 
list of potential indicators and the processes 
that may impede or accelerate progress towards 
achieving the objective, evaluate which 
indicators are most sensitive to threats. 
• Is it measurable? What is the cost of collection? 
• What is the ease with which you can 
communicate the criterion? 
• Can you link the indicator to a management 
action? 
• The indicators must be able to withstand 
scrutiny when it is used for decision making, 
particularly when the decision may result in 
reduced access to resources. 
 
The group noted that there are a few cases in 
which an ecosystem indicator has been used by 
management to limit fisheries activities, e.g.,  
• Kittiwake fledging success has been used to 
control sand eel fisheries in the North Sea. 
• Harvest control rules for Pacific sardine 
fisheries are conditional on temperature at 
Scripps Pier.  However, the temperature has 
never dropped to a level at which reductions in 
fishing mortality have been implemented. 
Lessons could be learned by examining societal 
responses to the use of such indicators in a 
management context. 
 
DPSIR approach 
 
The Driver-Pressure-State-Impact-Response 
(DPSIR) framework has become increasingly 
useful for determining ultimate drivers, indicators, 
and responses of environmental systems to 
stressors. The ICES community has been 
exploring this framework in an assessment of the 
key pressures of human activities on marine 
ecosystems (e.g., Table 7).  A schematic flowchart 
of how such a DPSIR approach might be 
integrated into issues of indicators and objectives 
has been developed (Fig. 19).  At present, 
scientists in the Bering Sea–North Pacific regions 
have good sets of indicators for Pressures and 
State, but poor indicators for their Impacts.  In 
addition, the Response to these Drivers, Pressures 
and Impacts need to depend on the desired (and 
stated) objectives for the ecosystem. 
 
Risk assessment  
 
There are often multiple pathways leading from 
objectives to indicators; risk assessment is a 
formal tool which can help to choose among these 
various pathways (i.e., given the knowledge 
available and uncertainties, which pathway might 
be expected to achieve the desired result).  The 
group recognized that it may not be practical at 
present to do risk assessments on whole 
ecosystems.  At present, a more practical question 
is to ask, “Will activity A do harm to specific key 
parts of the ecosystem?”  
 
The group noted that there are techniques for 
assessing the risk of specific management 
decisions.  Regional fisheries management 
councils should evaluate what level of risk is 
acceptable.  To do this, scientists must provide an 
evaluation of the risk to ecosystem function by a 
particular activity.  This requires assessment of the 
cumulative effects of past and present activities.  
While this can be done qualitatively, developing a 
probabilistic representation of this surface is likely 
to be difficult.  Too broad a surface may give 
clients and fisheries managers a sense of security 
that the system is more resilient (less responsive) 
to management actions than may be true.  
 
 
Table 7  The relationship between activities in the North Sea and the mechanisms through which they exert pressure on the marine ecosystem.  From ICES 
Working Group Report 2006, WGECO, Table 4.4.3.1. 
 
 Activity Aquaculture Climate 
change 
Dredging Oil 
& 
Gas 
Renewable 
energy 
Aggregate 
extraction 
Fisheries Recreation Military Research Shipping Land-based 
discharges 
& 
emissions 
             
Pressure              
Physical Substratum loss             
 Smothering             
 Change in suspended 
sediment 
            
 Change in water flow rate              
 Change in temperature    ?       ?Ballast  
 Change in turbidity             
 Change in sound field  ?           
 Change in light regime             
 Visual presence             
 Abrasion/ physical 
disturbance 
            
Chemical Synthetic compound 
contamination 
     ?   ?    
 Heavy metal 
contamination 
            
 Hydrocarbon 
contamination 
            
 Radionuclide 
contamination 
            
 Changes in nutrient levels             
 Changes in salinity             
 Changes in oxygenation             
Biological Introduction of microbial 
pathogens/ parasites 
            
 Introduction of non-native 
species & GMOs 
            
 Selective extraction of 
species 
            
Shading indicates an existing mechanism for a particular activity, while ‘?’ indicates a potential mechanism.
 
98 
 
Fig. 19   Schematic that matches indicators to objectives using a DPSIR approach. 
 
 
Recommendations 
 
1. The integration of societal goals should occur 
once the boundaries of conservation have been 
identified – it is the role of scientists to 
determine and articulate these conservation 
boundaries. A 3-step procedure is 
recommended to develop objectives for 
ecosystem-based management of particular 
systems: 
• scientific identification of conservation 
limits;  
• articulation of socio-economic objectives 
(not exclusively by scientists); and then 
• scientific identification of means to move 
towards socio-economic goals. 
Regional fisheries management councils, such 
as NPFMC, should play a central role in 
identifying socio-economic objectives for the 
ecosystems considered in this workshop.  
 
2. Selection of indicators is a signal detection 
exercise.  Scientists in the PICES region 
should develop formal evaluation criteria and 
perform the evaluation (see Rice and Rochet, 
2005).  Scientific standards must be high but 
this should not deter forecasting as failures in 
prediction are often informative. 
 
3. Consider the Driver-Pressure-State-Impact-
Response (DPSIR) framework as a tool to 
evaluate human and climate drivers of 
changes in marine ecosystems, how these 
might be adequately indexed (e.g., 
considering “contextual” and “control” 
indicators), and how they relate to 
management actions and decisions. 
 
4. Risk assessment techniques must be 
developed and included in evaluating 
appropriate response pathways from 
indicators to action and in how they relate to 
objectives.  
 
References 
 
Belgrano, A., Boldt, J., Livingston, P. and Napp, J. 
2006. Toward ecosystem-based management for the 
oceans:  A perspective for the fisheries in the Bering 
Sea. (This report) 
ICES. 2006. Working Group on Ecosystems (WGECO) 
report. 
Rice, J.A. and Rochet, M.-J. 2005. A framework for 
selecting a suite of indicators for fisheries 
management. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 62: 516–527. 
 
99 
Methodologies to monitor ecosystem-wide structural change  
 
Franz Mueter (facilitator, rapporteur) and Kerim Aydin (facilitator), Andrea Belgrano, Jennifer Boldt, 
Villy Christensen, Lisa Eisner, George Hunt, James Ianelli, Jason Link, Bernard Megrey, Jeffrey Napp, 
Robert O’Boyle, James Overland, William Peterson, and Vladimir Radchenko 
 
 
Recognizing that the protection of ecosystem 
structure and functioning (including diversity and 
habitat) is an integral part of ecosystem-based 
fisheries management (EBFM), methodologies to 
monitor structural changes are a key component of 
any approach to EBFM.  We defined structural 
changes as: 
• changes in relative species composition of any 
faunal assemblage (based on abundances of 
individual species, functional groups, or trophic 
groups); 
• changes in species richness, evenness, and/or 
diversity of faunal assemblages; 
• changes in size composition (within or across 
species); 
• changes in habitat type and/or quantity; 
• changes in spatial distribution of individual 
species or species groups. 
 
Methodologies for monitoring structural changes 
require (1) suitable indicators that can be 
measured at different points in time, typically on 
an annual basis, and (2) graphical or statistical 
methods to examine whether the resulting time 
series display patterns that may indicate a 
structural change.  
 
The group’s assessment of some of the most 
promising and useful indicators included 
indicators from four broad classes. 
 
1. Abundance or biomass of “key” taxa. 
Commercial fish species and many seabirds and 
marine mammals are already being monitored 
closely and status and trend information is 
published annually.  There are, however, clear 
gaps in our ability to monitor lower trophic-level 
species that could serve as early indicators of 
changes in bottom-up forcing and prey availability 
such as phytoplankton abundance (Chl a) and 
productivity, zooplankton abundance and 
productivity, abundance of lower trophic level 
benthos, and abundance of forage fish. 
2. Trophodynamic indicators include simple 
ratios such as pelagic versus benthic biomass that 
were felt to be most useful, easy to interpret, and 
readily obtained from existing data.  Other existing 
indicators such as the trophic level of the catch 
and the “Fishing in Balance (FiB)” indicator are 
currently being computed on an annual basis, but 
lack clearly defined reference points.  Other 
promising indicators that could be monitored 
include the community condition factor, the 
trophic level of the community (based on survey 
data) relative to the trophic level of the catch, and 
diet-based indicators of the relative abundance of 
forage fishes. 
 
3. Size-based indicators have proven useful in 
many systems and include the mean length (or 
weight) in the community, slope and intercept of 
length (or weight) spectra, and the proportion of 
“large” fish in the community.   
 
4.  Diversity indicators were not considered to 
be particularly useful without further examination 
of the diversity–productivity relationship. 
However, the related methodology of constructing 
abundance/biomass curves was felt to offer a more 
promising approach as an indicator of “stressed” 
communities. 
 
The above indicators are largely measures of states 
rather than rates.  Rate indicators are likely to be 
more sensitive to changes, but are more difficult to 
measure.  Most of the indicators are univariate or 
aggregate measures derived from survey data. 
Many other indicators could be derived from 
multivariate analyses of existing time series or 
from ecosystem models.  However, such indicators 
are often more difficult to interpret and may be 
more suitable as a research tool rather than a 
routine monitoring tool.  
 
To detect structural changes in any indicator time 
series requires methods to distinguish “normal” 
 
100 
fluctuations of a stationary time series from 
“anomalies” such as one-time events, long-term 
trends, and gradual or abrupt changes in the mean 
or variance of a series.  Statistical methods for 
detecting specific deviations from stationarity are 
available and need to be applied to existing 
indictor series. 
 
 
 
 
101 
Communicating results 
 
Sarah Kruse (facilitator, rapporteur), Diana Evans, David Fluharty, Gordon Kruse, Patricia Livingston, 
and Skip McKinnell 
 
 
Who is the intended audience and who will use 
the information? 
 
The intended audience currently includes 
stakeholders, scientists and managers.  Is there a 
need to expand this list?  The first PICES report 
was published only in English.  This means there 
is little or no public communication with 
organizations in Asian member countries.  Should 
this situation be changed and if so, by whom?   
 
For the reports to be more directly linked to 
management in Alaska, they need to include 
recommendations.  Should the report consider 
trends and drivers in different regions of the North 
Pacific? What can be learned from trends in other 
regions – synthesis or comparison?  What is the 
best way to prioritize information and put forward 
key information to NPFMC?  Perhaps what is 
required is an attractive executive summary that is 
broadly distributed to the general public.   
 
How do we communicate with the public (i.e., 
products and tools)? 
 
Is TV the only medium?  Although the executive 
summary is intended for NPFMC, it may translate 
more easily into an interview, news article, or 
report.  It may be possible to use current 
communications groups (e.g., Alaska Sea Grant) 
to translate the summary into a newsworthy report.  
Other considerations include the expansion of the 
NMFS website or finding other places where an 
ecosystem management section might be 
interesting (e.g., teachers and high school 
students).   
 
The Ecosystem Considerations appendix includes 
an Ecosystem Assessment section (the take-home 
message) but it is not clear how to communicate 
this.  Could the bulk of the existing report be 
reduced by including the details on the website?  
The hard copy version is currently not working.   
 
It might be useful to consider having two versions 
of Ecosystem Considerations: a full version for 
stock assessment and a shorter one for NPFMC. 
The annual Marine Science in Alaska Symposium 
is very useful as a way to work with and 
communicate with others.  There might be an 
opportunity to have a routine PICES oral 
presentation as a part of the symposium.   
 
How do we create a user guide to indicators? 
 
There are two issues – the need to define 
indicators generically and then to define specific 
indicators.  Describe the resonance of the indicator 
to get a sense of its value.  Resonant indicators 
reflect properties of systems other than their own 
internal variation. 
 
How do we learn from and work with others?  
 
Cooperating with organizations that share 
common interests may be important to understand 
their experience in communicating indicators.  It 
may also be important to understand what trends 
are shared commonly among the regions.  The 
group recommended a symposium be convened 
for countries and groups working with ecosystem 
approaches to management which could be both 
domestic and international. 
 
What is the process of utilizing the document or 
information?  
 
Reporting frequency was discussed, as was the 
need to reach a stage where NPFMC uses the 
report and its information.  One suggestion was to 
maintain the information on the web, updating as 
new data become available, similar to a living 
ecosystem status report.  Could there be a 
checklist that each stock assessment must address?  
The actively updated reports could provide 
information such as “what is the risk that a regime 
shift is coming?”  It will be important to 
understand what proportion of variability (be it 
biomass or recruitment) comes from regime shift 
and from inter-annual variability. This will 
provide guidance on which temporal scales to 
focus attention. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WORKSHOP OBJECTIVES AND OUTCOMES
 
 
 
105 
Develop a set of operational objectives for the southeastern Bering Sea 
ecosystem 
 
In 2004, the U.S. National Marine Fisheries 
Service (NMFS) completed a comprehensive 
assessment of the overarching conservation and 
management policies and objectives of the Alaska 
groundfish fishery management plans.  As a 
consequence of that review, the North Pacific 
Fishery Management Council (NPFMC) adopted a 
high-level policy statement with broad objectives 
for the fishery, including 45 specific objectives 
classified under nine priority issues.  Four of the 
nine issues address social and economic concerns, 
whereas the remaining five address conservation 
of species, communities and ecosystems.  
Conservation objectives, indicators, and reference 
points are well-defined for commercially exploited 
groundfish and invertebrates, as well as some 
other taxa, such as marine mammals and seabirds 
that are listed under the U.S. Endangered Species 
Act. 
 
The annual NMFS Ecosystem Considerations 
appendix includes hundreds of ecosystem and 
management indicators.  Some of these are 
composite indicators that monitor ecosystem-level 
objectives related to maintaining predator–prey 
relationships, diversity, and energy flow and 
balance.  The report establishes linkages between 
many indicators and the conservation objectives 
adopted by NPFMC.  Although specific limit 
reference points are not yet formally defined for 
ecosystems/communities, these indicators are used 
to evaluate sources and amounts of change in 
Alaska marine ecosystems that might warrant 
further research or possible change in 
management.  When indicators suggest a potential 
conservation problem, the modus operandi of 
NPFMC is to develop a problem statement and to 
consider a detailed analysis of the situation, along 
with management alternatives and their ecological, 
social, and economic impacts.  Then, NPFMC 
selects an alternative in which specific 
conservation limits and management actions are 
adopted.  This process involves high levels of 
stakeholder input, along with review, comment, 
and recommendations by a Scientific and 
Statistical Committee.  One of several examples of 
recent actions taken to address ecosystem 
conservation issues includes closure of 95% of the 
Aleutian Islands management area to bottom 
trawling to protect deep-sea corals based, on 
observed coral bycatch, distribution of fishing 
activity, habitat mapping, and recent discovery of 
25 species of corals endemic to the area. 
 
The objectives adopted by NPFMC and the 
Ecosystem Status Indicators and Ecosystem 
Assessment in the Ecosystem Considerations 
appendix formed the initial basis for reviewing 
Bering Sea objectives and indicators for the 
Indicators project.  Two open meetings were 
arranged to solicit feedback from the scientific and 
stakeholder communities on the completeness of 
this set of objectives and indicators.  These 
meetings attracted participants with interests in 
developing ecosystem-based approaches to 
management of the southeastern Bering Sea and 
Gulf of Alaska.  The first meeting occurred on 
January 25, 2006, in Anchorage, in association 
with the annual Marine Science in Alaska 
Symposium, and the second was held on February 
8, 2006, in Seattle, during a meeting of the North 
Pacific Fishery Management Council.  These 
meetings were preparatory to the PICES/NPRB 
Indicators workshop that was convened on June 1–
3, 2006, in Seattle. 
 
Operational objectives can be categorized under 
two broad dimensions:  (1) conservation of species 
and habitat;  and (2) socio-economics of marine 
ecosystems.  A logical sequence is to develop 
socio-economic operational objectives and 
indicators after the boundaries of conservation 
have been identified by scientists.  Scientists can 
then determine the means to move, within 
ecological limits, toward these socio-economic 
objectives.   
 
Although much progress has been made in 
defining conservation objectives for the Bering 
Sea, as already mentioned, there is a continuing 
need for greater specificity by developing 
operational objectives in an open public process 
with a high level of stakeholder involvement.  For 
instance, among the 45 specific objectives 
 
106 
developed by NPFMC, many are not sufficiently 
specific to allow a determination about whether 
they have been met.  
 
The use of ecosystem-scale indicators could be a 
way to identify conservation issues before they 
reach crisis points so that management does not 
need to routinely operate in a reactive mode.  
However, the science of ecosystem-based 
management has not yet developed sufficiently to 
allow the setting of scientifically defensible 
conservation limits at the fish community and 
ecosystem levels.  Best available science should be 
used to assess the ecosystem benefits to be derived 
from various management alternatives.  Indeed, 
some research in these areas is currently 
underway.  Also, research is needed on the 
application to the Bering Sea of ecosystem-level 
indicators that have proven useful in other 
jurisdictions, such as aggregate biomass, biomass 
groupings and biomass–ratio indicators.  Useful 
biomass groupings are: 
• gelatinous zooplankton,  
• cephalopods,  
• planktivores,  
• scavengers,  
• demersal fishes,  
• habitat-forming epifauna, 
• piscivores,  
• top predators. 
Biomass-ratio indicators might include 
piscivore/planktivore, pelagic/demersal, and 
infauna/epifauna ratios. 
 
Socio-economic objectives and indictors were 
explicitly omitted from this project owing to the 
scope of supported work, not because they are 
unimportant.  Whereas the Ecosystem 
Considerations appendix links indicators to 
NPFMC conservation objectives, there is a 
pressing need to develop operational objectives 
and associated indicators for the socio-economic 
dimension.  This might be best achieved by 
conducting a series of workshops involving 
economists, social scientists, and stakeholders, not 
unlike the workshop we have conducted with 
respect to ecosystem objectives and indicators.  It 
is recommended that the results of these 
workshops should be used to transform the 
existing NMFS Economic Status report into an 
annual Socio-economic Considerations report that 
relates social and economic status indicators to 
socio-economic objectives much in the same way 
that the Ecosystem Considerations report links 
indicators to conservation objectives.  In the 
United States, NPFMC should play a central role 
in shepherding the development of these socio-
economic objectives and indicators for the 
southeastern Bering Sea and Gulf of Alaska 
ecosystems. 
 
 
Evaluate the two ecosystem status reports  
 
Two ecosystem status reports were discussed 
during the Indicators workshop.  Ecosystem 
Considerations for 2006 is an appendix to the 
annual Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation 
(SAFE) report published by NPFMC.  Marine 
Ecosystems of the North Pacific is a compendium 
of overviews of regional marine ecosystems that 
was published for the first time, in 2004, by 
PICES.  Ecosystem Considerations demonstrates 
that considerable progress has been made to link a 
large suite of ecosystem status and management 
indicators to the broad objectives identified by 
NPFMC for managing groundfish fisheries in the 
Gulf of Alaska, Aleutian Islands and eastern 
Bering Sea.  Marine Ecosystems of the North 
Pacific provides a very useful region by region 
comparison of ecosystems in the entire North 
Pacific. 
 
Describing complexity is a challenge.  It is 
difficult, even for experts who understand the 
meaning of individual indicators and their 
interconnections, to identify the major patterns of 
ecosystem change in the hundreds of indicators 
contained in these two reports.  The most recent 
versions of Ecosystem Considerations partly 
address this issue by including an executive 
summary that shows recent important and/or 
interesting trends from a subset of indicators.   
 
 
107 
Identify steps to validate indicator performance, improve the monitoring 
network, and integrate into predictive models 
 
It was noted that although the Ecosystem 
Considerations appendix contains an assessment 
section where a subset of important indicators is 
presented, this subset has not been subjected to an 
objective evaluation and selection process.  
Different methodologies for indicator evaluation 
and selection were presented at the Indicators 
workshop.  The Rice–Rochet framework was 
recommended as a more structured process to 
evaluate and screen indicators.  This framework 
identifies eight steps for selecting a suite of 
indicators for fisheries management.  Steps that 
have not yet been done with Ecosystem 
Considerations are to score the indicators in the 
report against screening criteria and to use those 
scores and user input to select the suite of 
indicators on which to report.  
 
The Driver-Pressure-State-Impact-Response 
(DPSIR) framework was also thought to be useful 
in exploring the key pressures of human activities 
and climate on marine ecosystems and might be 
used to organize indicators by pressure points or 
threats.  Composite indicators can be derived from 
existing data, but there are many ecosystem 
components that could serve as “pulse points” but 
they are not well-monitored.  A number of gaps in 
the monitoring network were identified at the 
Indicators workshop.   
 
Predictive models of future change were not a 
central focus of the Indicators workshop.  
However, it was recognized that the use of risk 
assessment and scenario approaches, such as those 
employed in Australia, were worthwhile avenues 
for making progress.  It appears that a number of 
modeling approaches are being advanced and 
improved upon in Alaska.  In addition, future 
climate scenarios are being developed to drive 
some of the models. 
   
 
 
Investigate methodologies that monitor system-wide structural changes within 
the marine ecosystem 
 
The workshop was successful in establishing two 
benchmarks for the use of indicators in the Bering 
Sea. 
 
The first benchmark is that the use of indicators 
has utility as a communication technique between 
fisheries managers and supporting scientists.  
While scientists will point to the overall 
complexity of the ecosystem, and managers would 
like defensible environmental information to take 
actions that have potential economic 
consequences, semi-quantitative indicators 
provide, at present, a known and tested technique 
for reaching a common understanding in fisheries 
throughout the world. 
 
The second benchmark is that there are now 
management objectives in place for the Bering 
Sea, based on the work of NPFMC and the Alaska 
Fisheries Science Center (AFSC).  There is a 
concern in the literature that indicators should be 
matched to specific objectives.  This concern was 
a major consideration in planning the workshop.  
It was clear from the presentations and discussions 
that the Bering Sea is in good shape with regard to 
management objectives. For example, the 
management objective “to preserve the food web” 
could have an operational objective “to maintain 
the mean trophic level between 3.3 and 3.7” which 
is the trophic-level range of the catch in recent 
years after banning new fisheries on forage 
species. Other examples of management objectives 
in the eastern Bering Sea are to:  
• prevent overfishing,  
• manage bycatch,  
• avoid seabird and marine mammal impacts,  
• reduce impacts on habitat,  
each with appropriate operational objectives and 
indicators.  
 
 
108 
The situation for the Bering Sea was commented 
on by scientists from Australia, the Canadian and 
U.S. east coasts, and by the Co-chairman of the 
SCOR/IOC Working Group 119 on Quantitative 
ecosystem indicators for fisheries management, 
Dr. Villy Christensen, as well as by Bering Sea 
specialists.  They emphasized that unlike many 
other large marine ecosystems, management of the 
Bering Sea is not in “desperation mode”, as the 
Bering Sea is not generally overfished.  Factors 
they saw as missing or under-represented 
included:  
• a risk management framework,  
• a formal process of indicator selection;  
• a lack of reference points to determine when 
the value of an indicator should initiate action.   
 
In further discussion, however, it was noted that 
because the Bering Sea is not in desperation mode, 
the present method of adaptive management, 
where the system is monitored for change and 
issues are dealt with as they arise, was a better 
approach for the Bering Sea than setting formal 
reference points for a large number of indicators. 
 
The review team concluded that, unlike many 
other regions that deal primarily with the 
consequences of overfishing, the Bering Sea needs 
both management objectives and ecosystem status 
objectives.  Because the Bering Sea lies between 
the North Pacific and the Arctic, its ecosystem and 
commercial fisheries are subject to climate 
variability and climate change, as has been seen in 
both historical records and in climate projections.  
Thus, it is important to develop and include 
indicators that link climate to ecosystem changes. 
 
While the workshop was successful in reviewing 
objectives and management indicators, it leaves 
for the future the task of selecting an appropriate 
set of ecological indicators.  Any synthesis of 
information should discuss both the interpretation 
of what is meant by ecosystem status and the 
methodology for reducing the number of potential 
indicators.  It was suggested that selection criteria 
should be:  relevant, integrative, sensitive, correct, 
defensible, vetted and economical. 
 
The methodologies used to develop indicators 
cannot be separated from the process of how the 
information will be used.  So their communication 
to managers must be sufficiently convincing to 
allow them to take and defend their actions. 
 
 
109 
Recommendations 
 
 
Ecosystem Objectives and Indicators 
1. Ecosystem-level and community-level conservation thresholds are relatively new ideas in marine 
conservation.  Since they will require new kinds of indicators, research is needed for their 
development and application to the Bering Sea. 
2. New research is needed to understand how to synthesize the large set of Bering Sea data records into 
a reasonable number of ecosystem status indicators. 
3. A formal process of evaluating and selecting ecosystem indicators is a general requirement.  The 
Alaska Fisheries Science Center should consider developing and applying such a process to the 
indicators in its Ecosystem Considerations appendix. 
4. Enhancements to the ocean/ecosystem monitoring network are needed to fill data gaps at ecological 
pulse points (plankton, benthic infauna and epifauna, seasonal species interactions and movements, 
small pelagics, and cephalopods) to improve predictive models and the development of ecosystem 
indicators. 
5. More collaboration between modelers at the Alaska Fisheries Science Center and the Pacific Marine 
Environmental Laboratory, and elsewhere is encouraged to link various climate/ecosystem and 
conservation/assessment models, and to use these models to evaluate management strategies. 
 
Socio-economics 
While the workshop did not address socio-economic operational objectives for the Bering Sea and North 
Pacific, linkages between the well-being of people and healthy marine ecosystems require a level of 
attention comparable to those for ecosystem conservation objectives: 
6. Socio-economic objectives related with the marine environment should be developed for the region, 
along with their indicators and reference points.  
7. The North Pacific Fishery Management Council should play a central role in shepherding the 
development of these socio-economic objectives and indicators for the southeastern Bering Sea and 
Gulf of Alaska ecosystems; 
8. There is a need to conduct scientific and policy analyses of pathways to achieve socio-economic 
objectives while remaining within ecosystem-level conservation limits. 
 
Communication 
9. Plans should be developed at an early stage on how the information from indicators can best be 
communicated to scientists, policy and decision makers, and the general public.  The plans should 
include publishing concise, attractive executive summaries of major ecosystem status reports that 
will describe important trends and patterns in marine ecosystems for non-scientists.   
10. To reach policy makers and the public in Asian countries, future iterations of the Synthesis chapter 
in the PICES North Pacific Ecosystem Status report should be published in multiple languages. 
11. The development by the National Marine Fisheries Service of an Ecosystem Considerations website 
greatly increased access to time series of ecosystem indicators for the Alaska region, and should be 
maintained and enhanced.  
12. An overview of the status of the Bering Sea ecosystem(s) should be presented at the annual Marine 
Science in Alaska Symposium to foster broader communication among the diversity of regional 
scientists, managers and the public. 
 
Specific recommendations from individuals/groups can be found under Discussion Group Results in this 
report. 
