PICES SCIENTIFIC REPORT No. 45,  2013
NORTH   PACIFIC   MARINE   SCIENCE   ORGANIZATION
PICES SCIENTIFIC REPORT  
No. 45, 2013
Report of the PICES/ICES Working Group 
on Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on 
Fish and Shellfish 
ISBN 978-1-927797-03-7
ISSN 1198-273X
 
 
 
PICES PUBLICATIONS 
 
 
The North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES) was established by an international convention 
in 1992 to promote international cooperative research efforts to solve key scientific problems in the North 
Pacific Ocean. 
 
PICES regularly publishes various types of general, scientific, and technical information in the following 
publications: 
 
 
PICES ANNUAL REPORTS – are major 
products of PICES Annual Meetings which 
document the administrative and scientific activities 
of the Organization, and its formal decisions, by 
calendar year.   
 
PICES SCIENTIFIC REPORTS – include 
proceedings of PICES workshops, final reports of 
PICES expert groups, data reports and planning 
reports. 
 
PICES TECHNICAL REPORTS – are on-line 
reports published on data/monitoring activities that 
require frequent updates. 
 
SPECIAL PUBLICATIONS – are products that 
are destined for general or specific audiences. 
 
JOURNAL SPECIAL ISSUES – are peer-
reviewed publications resulting from symposia 
and Annual Meeting scientific sessions and 
workshops that are published in conjunction with 
commercial scientific journals.   
 
BOOKS – are peer-reviewed, journal-quality 
publications of broad interest. 
 
PICES PRESS – is a semi-annual newsletter 
providing timely updates on the state of the 
ocean/climate in the North Pacific, with highlights of 
current research and associated activities of PICES. 
 
ABSTRACT BOOKS – are prepared for PICES 
Annual Meetings and symposia (co-)organized by 
PICES. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For further information on our publications, visit the PICES website at www.pices.int. 
 
Front cover figure 
 
Image reproduced from the cover of the Program and Abstracts Book for the PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium 
on “Climate change effects on fish and fisheries:  Forecasting impacts, assessing ecosystem responses, and 
evaluating management strategies” held April 26–29, 2010, in Sendai, Japan (image courtesy of 
alkemicreative.com).      
Continued on inside back page 
PICES Scientific Reports 
 
 
Hargreaves, N.B., Hunter, J.R., Sugimoto, T. and Wada, T. 
(Eds.) 1993.  Coastal Pelagic Fishes (Report of 
Working Group 3); Subarctic Gyre (Report of Working 
Group 6).  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 1, 130 pp. 
Talley, L.D. and Nagata, Y. (Eds.) 1995.  The Okhotsk Sea 
and Oyashio Region (Report of Working Group 1).  
PICES Sci. Rep. No. 2, 227 pp. 
Anonymous. 1995.  Report of the PICES-STA Workshop 
on Monitoring Subarctic North Pacific Variability.  
PICES Sci. Rep. No. 3, 94 pp. 
Hargreaves, N.B. (Ed.) 1996. Science Plan, Implementation 
Plan (Report of the PICES-GLOBEC International 
Program on Climate Change and Carrying Capacity).  
PICES Sci. Rep. No. 4, 64 pp. 
LeBlond, P.H. and Endoh, M. (Eds.) 1996.  Modelling of 
the Subarctic North Pacific Circulation (Report of 
Working Group 7).  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 5, 91 pp. 
Anonymous. 1996. Proceedings of the Workshop on the 
Okhotsk Sea and Adjacent Areas.  PICES Sci. Rep. 
No. 6, 426 pp. 
Beamish, R.J., Hollowed, A.B., Perry, R.I., Radchenko, 
V.I., Yoo, S. and Terazaki, M. (Eds.) 1997.  Summary 
of the Workshop on Conceptual/Theoretical Studies and 
Model Development and the 1996 MODEL, BASS and 
REX Task Team Reports.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 7,  
93 pp. 
Nagata, Y. and Lobanov, V.B. (Eds.) 1998.  Multilingual 
Nomenclature of Place and Oceanographic Names in 
the Region of the Okhotsk Sea.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 
8, 57 pp. (Reprint from MIRC Science Report, No. 1, 
1998) 
Hollowed, A.B., Ikeda, T., Radchenko, V.I. and Wada, T. 
(Organizers) 1998.  PICES Climate Change and 
Carrying Capacity Workshop on the Development of 
Cooperative Research in Coastal Regions of the North 
Pacific.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 9, 59 pp. 
Freeland, H.J., Peterson, W.T. and Tyler, A. (Eds.) 1999.  
Proceedings of the 1998 Science Board Symposium on 
The Impacts of the 1997/98 El Niño Event on the North 
Pacific Ocean and Its Marginal Seas.  PICES Sci. Rep. 
No. 10, 110 pp. 
Dugdale, R.C., Hay, D.E., McFarlane, G.A., Taft, B.A. and 
Yoo, S. (Eds.) 1999.  PICES-GLOBEC International 
Program on Climate Change and Carrying Capacity:  
Summary of the 1998 MODEL, MONITOR and REX 
Workshops, and Task Team Reports.  PICES Sci. Rep. 
No. 11, 88 pp. 
Lobanov, V.B., Nagata, Y. and Riser, S.C. (Eds.) 1999.  
Proceedings of the Second PICES Workshop on the 
Okhotsk Sea and Adjacent Areas.  PICES Sci. Rep. 
No. 12, 203 pp. 
Danchenkov, M.A., Aubrey, D.G. and Hong, G.H. 2000.  
Bibliography of the Oceanography of the Japan/East 
Sea.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 13, 99 pp. 
Hunt, G.L. Jr., Kato, H. and McKinnell, S.M. (Eds.) 2000. 
Predation by Marine Birds and Mammals in the 
Subarctic North Pacific Ocean.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 
14, 168 pp. 
Megrey, B.A., Taft, B.A. and Peterson, W.T. (Eds.) 2000.  
PICES-GLOBEC International Program on Climate Change 
and Carrying Capacity:  Report of the 1999 MONITOR and 
REX Workshops, and the 2000 MODEL Workshop on Lower 
Trophic Level Modelling.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 15, 148 pp. 
Stehr, C.M. and Horiguchi, T. (Eds.) 2001.  Environmental 
Assessment of Vancouver Harbour Data Report for the 
PICES MEQ Practical Workshop.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 
16, 213 pp. 
Megrey, B.A., Taft, B.A. and Peterson, W.T. (Eds.) 2001.  
PICES-GLOBEC International Program on Climate Change 
and Carrying Capacity:  Report of the 2000 BASS, MODEL, 
MONITOR and REX Workshops, and the 2001 
BASS/MODEL Workshop.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 17, 125 pp. 
Alexander, V., Bychkov, A.S., Livingston, P. and McKinnell, 
S.M. (Eds.) 2001.  Proceedings of the PICES/CoML/IPRC 
Workshop on “Impact of Climate Variability on 
Observation and Prediction of Ecosystem and Biodiversity 
Changes in the North Pacific”.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 18, 
210 pp. 
Otto, R.S. and Jamieson, G.S. (Eds.) 2001.  Commercially 
Important Crabs, Shrimps and Lobsters of the North Pacific 
Ocean.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 19, 79 pp. 
Batchelder, H.P., McFarlane, G.A., Megrey, B.A., Mackas, 
D.L. and Peterson, W.T. (Eds.) 2002.  PICES-GLOBEC 
International Program on Climate Change and Carrying 
Capacity: Report of the 2001 BASS/MODEL, MONITOR 
and REX Workshops, and the 2002 MODEL/REX 
Workshop.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 20, 176 pp. 
Miller, C.B. (Ed.) 2002.  PICES-GLOBEC International 
Program on Climate Change and Carrying Capacity:  
Report of the PICES 2002 Volunteer Observing Ship 
Workshop.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 21, 38 pp. 
Perry, R.I., Livingston, P. and Bychkov, A.S. (Eds.) 2002.  
PICES Science: The First Ten Years and a Look to the 
Future.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 22, 102 pp. 
Taylor, F.J.R. and Trainer, V.L. (Eds.) 2002.  Harmful Algal 
Blooms in the PICES Region of the North Pacific.  PICES 
Sci. Rep. No. 23, 152 pp. 
Feely, R.A. (Ed.) 2003.  CO
2
 in the North Pacific Ocean 
(Working Group 13 Final Report).  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 
24, 49 pp. 
Aydin, K.Y., McFarlane, G.A., King, J.R. and Megrey, B.A. 
(Eds.)  2003. PICES-GLOBEC International Program on 
Climate Change and Carrying Capacity:  The BASS/ 
MODEL Report on Trophic Models of the Subarctic Pacific 
Basin Ecosystems.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 25, 93 pp. 
McKinnell, S.M. (Ed.) 2004.  Proceedings of the Third 
Workshop on the Okhotsk Sea and Adjacent Areas.  PICES 
Sci. Rep. No. 26, 275 pp. 
Kishi, M.J. (Ed.) 2004.  Report of the MODEL Task Team 
Second Workshop to Develop a Marine Ecosystem Model 
of the North Pacific Ocean including Pelagic Fishes. 
PICES Sci. Rep. No. 27, 49 pp. 
King, J.R. (Ed.)  2005.  Report of the Study Group on the 
Fisheries and Ecosystem Responses to Recent Regime 
Shifts. PICES Sci. Rep. No. 28, 162 pp. 
 
 
PICES SCIENTIFIC REPORTS 
 
 
 
Published since 1993, the PICES Scientific Report series includes proceedings of PICES workshops, final 
reports of PICES expert groups, data reports and reports of planning activities.  Formal peer reviews of the 
scientific content of these publications are not generally conducted. 
 
Printed copies of Scientific Reports are available upon request from 
 
PICES Secretariat 
P.O. Box 6000 
Sidney, British Columbia 
Canada.  V8L 4B2 
E-mail:  secretariat@pices.int 
 
 
On-line versions of PICES Scientific Reports can be found at  
www.pices.int/publications/scientific_reports/default.aspx 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This report was developed under the guidance of the PICES Science Board and its Fishery Science and 
Physical Oceanography and Climate committees. The views expressed in this report are those of participating 
scientists under their responsibilities. 
 
 
 
This document should be cited as follows: 
 
Hollowed, A.B., Kim, S., Barange, M. and Loeng, H. (Eds.) 2013.  Report of the PICES/ICES Working Group on 
Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 45, 197 pp. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report of the PICES/ICES Working Group on 
Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Edited by 
Anne B. Hollowed, Suam Kim, Manuel Barange and Harald Loeng 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
December 2013 
Secretariat / Publisher 
North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES) 
P.O. Box 6000, Sidney, BC, V8L 4B2, Canada  
E-mail: secretariat@pices.int       
www.pices.int  
 
 
  
   
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  iii 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
 
Executive Summary ....................................................................................................................................................... v 
Introduction ................................................................................................................................................................... 1 
Report of the PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium on “Climate Change Effects on Fish and Fisheries:   
Forecasting Impacts, Assessing Ecosystem Responses, and Evaluating Management Strategies” ........................ 5 
Session P1-D1:  Forecasting impacts: From climate to fish .................................................................................. 8 
Session A1:  Downscaling variables from global climate models ........................................................................ 23 
Session A2:  Species-specific responses: Changes in growth, reproductive success, mortality, spatial 
distribution, and adaptation ...................................................................................................................... 25 
Session B1:  Assessing ecosystem responses: Impacts on community structure, biodiversity,  
energy flow and carrying capacity ............................................................................................................ 34 
Session B2:  Comparing responses to climate variability among nearshore, shelf and oceanic regions ............. 38 
Session C1:  Impacts on fisheries and coastal communities ................................................................................. 41 
Session C2:  Evaluating human responses, management strategies and economic implications ......................... 45 
Session D2:  Contemporary and next generation climate and oceanographic models, technical  
advances and new approaches .................................................................................................................. 47 
Session P3:  Sustainable strategies in a warming climate ................................................................................... 52 
Workshop W1:  Reducing global and national vulnerability to climate change in the fisheries sector:   
Policy perspectives post-Copenhagen ....................................................................................................... 54 
Workshop W2:  Potential impacts of ocean acidification on marine ecosystems and fisheries ........................... 58 
Workshop W3:  Coupled climate-to-fish-to-fishers models for understanding mechanisms underlying low 
frequency fluctuations in small pelagic fish and projecting its future ....................................................... 60 
Workshop W4:  Salmon workshop on climate change .......................................................................................... 62 
Workshop W5:  Networking across global marine “hotspots” ............................................................................ 65 
Workshop W6:  Examining the linkages between physics and fish:  How do zooplankton and krill  
data sets improve our understanding of the impacts  of climate change on fisheries? .............................. 68 
Peer-reviewed publications related to the Symposium presentations .................................................................. 70 
WG-FCCIFS Summary Relative to its Terms of Reference ........................................................................................ 73 
Appendix 1   WG-FCCIFS membership ...................................................................................................................... 75 
Appendix 2   WG-FCCIFS inter-sessional and annual meeting reports ..................................................................... 79 
Appendix 3   Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS activities ........................................................... 92 
Appendix 4   Proposal for a Section on Climate Change Effects on Marine Ecosystems  (S-CCME) ...................... 132 
               Science Plan for ICES/PICES Strategic Initiative (Section) on Climate Change Effects on  
           Marine Ecosystems ....................................................................................................................... 134 
               Implementation Plan for the ICES/PICES Strategic Initiative (Section) on Climate Change 
           Effects on Marine Ecosystems ...................................................................................................... 142 
Appendix 5   Meeting reports from past PICES Annual Meetings related to WG-FCCIFS activities ...................... 149 
Appendix 6   PICES Press articles related to WG-FCCIFS ...................................................................................... 163 
References ................................................................................................................................................................. 191 
 
  
  Executive Summary 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  v 
Executive Summary 
In 2008, the North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES) and the International Council for the 
Exploration of the Sea (ICES) approved the formation of an interdisciplinary Working Group on Forecasting 
Climate Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish (WG-FCCIFS).  This Working Group was designed to enagage 
the PICES and ICES scientific communities in an effort to discuss and assess our current understanding of the 
implications of climate change on marine fish and fisheries.  The group was quite active, and the products of 
WG-FCCIFS include one major scientific symposium, a symposium volume and several peer reviewed journal 
articles.  WG-FCCIFS’s primary accomplishments and research findings are described in this report.  The 
group promoted research on climate change impacts on marine ecosystems by scientists in PICES and ICES 
member countries through coordinated communication, exchange of methodology, and organization of 
meetings to discuss and publish results.  In collaboration with relevant expert groups in PICES and ICES,  
WG-FCCIFS developed frameworks and methodologies for projecting the impacts of climate change on 
marine ecosystems, with particular emphasis on shifts in the distribution, abundance and production of 
commercial fish and shellfish. WG-FCCIFS members met to review the results of designated case studies to 
test methods.  Given the limitations of our forecasts, they also explored techniques for estimating and 
communicating uncertainty in forecasts and strategies for research and management under climate change 
scenarios.  As the 3-year term for WG-FCCIFS approached, it was clear that PICES and ICES were well 
positioned to serve as world leaders in advancing science on assessments of climate change impacts on marine 
ecosystems.  This recognition led to the formaton of the ICES Strategic Initiative on Climate Change Effects 
on Marine Ecosystems (SICCME), referred to as the Section on Climate Change Effects on Marine Ecosystems 
(S-CCME) within PICES. 
 
 
 
 
  
  Introduction 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   1 
Introduction
In the fall of 2008, the North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES) and the International Council for 
the Exploration of the Sea (ICES) approved the formation of a PICES/ICES Working Group on Forecasting 
Climate Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish (WG-FCCIFS).  The rationale for establishing the joint group 
was to promote and coordinate research on the potential impacts of climate change on marine fish and shellfish 
around the world.  In ICES, the group initially reported to the Oceanography Committee and ICES Climate 
Change Steering Group (SGCC) and later, after ICES restructuring in 2009, changed to the Steering Group on 
Human Interactions on Ecosystems (SSGHIE), under the Science Committee (SCICOM).  In PICES,  
WG-FCCIFS reported to the Fishery Science Committee (FIS) and Physical Oceanography and Climate 
Committee (POC), and the activities of the group were designed to advance the Organization’s new integrative 
science program on Forecasting and Understanding Trends, Uncertainty, and Responses of North Pacific 
Marine Ecosystems (FUTURE).   
 
Drs. Anne B. Hollowed (PICES/USA), Manuel Barange (ICES/United Kingdom), Suam Kim (PICES/Korea), 
and Harald Loeng (ICES/Norway) were appointed as co-chairmen of WG-FCCIFS.  The full membership of 
the group is listed in Appendix 1. 
 
This report synthesizes the activities of the group to highlight the key findings.  As this is a PICES publication, 
some additional information from a PICES perspective has been added in the Introduction.  The ICES 
counterpart to the report can be found at http://www.ices.dk/publications/library/Pages/default.aspx#k=wgfccifs. 
In some cases documents have been re-printed here to provide a permanent record of decisions or key actions. 
 
 
Background 
 
Prior to the establishment of WG-FCCIFS, ICES and PICES scientists had conducted several studies on 
climate change effects on fish and fisheries, including: (a) guidance on methods for selection of IPCC 
scenarios for use in projections; (b) techniques for downscaling IPCC scenarios to local regions,  
(c) development of coupled ecosystem models for use in evaluating climate-induced shifts in environmental 
conditions, (d) synthesis of relationships between climate forcing and marine fish and shellfish distribution and 
production, and (e) stock assessment techniques for evaluating management strategies to mitigate the impacts 
of change.  A challenge facing ICES and PICES was the need to integrate all of this research to provide 
stakeholders with quantitative estimates of the potential impact of climate change on marine life throughout the 
world.  To meet this challenge, an interdisciplinary research team of experts was assembled to focus attention 
on the development of common and standardized frameworks for forecasting climate change impacts on 
marine life, with particular emphasis on commercially important fish and shellfish. The formation of the joint 
group enabled the research communities of both organizations to develop the capability to provide  
(1) quantitative contributions to the fifth set of Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
Assessment Reports and (2) guidance for management under climate change scenarios. 
   
Within PICES, the idea for such an expert group dated back to 2006–2007 when the following workshops were 
held: 
• workshop on “Linking climate to trends in productivity of key commercial species in the sub-arctic 
Pacific” in October 2006 in conjunction with the 2006 PICES Annual Meeting in Yokohama, Japan; 
Introduction 
2  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
• Phase 1 workshop on “Forecasting climate impacts on future production of commercially exploited fish 
and shellfish”, co-sponsored by the North Pacific Research Board (NPRB) in July 2007, in Seattle, USA;  
• Phase 2 PICES/NPRB workshop on “Forecasting climate impacts on future production of commercially 
exploited fish and shellfish” in October 2007, in conjunction with the PICES Annual Meeting in Victoria, 
Canada. 
The goal of this workshop series was to develop a coordinated international effort to provide quantitative 
estimates of the impacts of climate change on major fish populations.  Discussions revealed that there were 
several international programs which had goals similar to the PICES forecasting effort.  The proceedings of the 
two 2007 workshops were combined and published in 2008 (PICES Scientific Report No. 34). 
 
Similarly, ICES commissioned several study groups, working groups, workshops and strategic initiatives on 
the topic of climate change effects on fish and fisheries, including: 
• workshop on “Cod and future climate change” (WKCFCC) in June 2008, in Copenhagen, Denmark; 
• ICES/GLOBEC Working Group on Cod and Climate Change (WGCCC); 
• ICES/PICES/GLOBEC–SPACC workshop on “Changes in distribution and abundance of clupeiform 
small pelagic fish in relation to climate variability and global change” (WKSPCLIM) in November 2008, 
in Kiel, Germany; 
• ICES Strategic Initiative on Climate Change (Reid and Valdés, 2011). 
 
It was at the 2007 Annual Meeting in Victoria that a proposal was put forth to the FIS Committee of PICES to 
form a working group initially named “Implications of Climate Variability and Climate Change on Trends in 
Commercially Important Fish and Shellfish”.  FIS strongly supported this proposal, and felt the effort would be 
consistent with the activities envisioned under PICES’ second integrative science program, FUTURE, and 
PICES-sponsored work in this area would provide a good start to this line of research that would likely become 
an ongoing effort in FUTURE.  The proposal was deferred by PICES Science Board to the following year 
(2008) to more fully consider the interactions and synergies of the new group with POC’s Working Group on 
Evaluations of Climate Change Projections (WG 20).  The Working Group was renamed to Forecasting 
Climate Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish (WG-FCCIFS/PICES WG 25) upon its establishment in 2008.  
 
 
WG-FCCIFS objectives and activities   
 
WG-FCCIFS was tasked with providing guidance on the potential impacts of climate change on marine 
ecosystems and the response of commercial fish and shellfish resources to these changes.  Members of ICES 
and PICES recognized that both organizations had a long history of research on the links between climate 
variability and change on fish and fisheries.  They also recognized that a partnership between ICES and PICES 
scientists would better address the global scale of climate change impacts on marine ecosystems.  Through the 
formation of WG-FCCIFS, ICES and PICES sought to ensure that their research communities produced peer-
reviewed publications that quantitatively inform climate–marine resource interactions to be considered for 
future IPCC reports, and to provide insights on the effect on marine resource population responses to climate 
change.  
 
The Terms of Reference for WG-FCCIFS were to: 
 
1. Promote research on climate change impacts on marine ecosystems by scientists in ICES and PICES 
member nations through coordinated communication, exchange of methodology, and organization of 
meetings to discuss and publish results;  
2. In collaboration with relevant expert groups in PICES and ICES, develop frameworks and methodologies 
for forecasting the impacts of climate change on marine ecosystems, with particular emphasis on the 
distribution, abundance and production of commercial fish and shellfish; 
3. Review the results of designated case studies to test methods;  
4. Explore techniques for estimating and communicating uncertainty in forecasts;  
  Introduction 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   3 
5. Explore strategies for research and management under climate change scenarios, given the limitations of 
our forecasts; 
6. Plan for a science symposium in early 2010 to present, discuss and publish forecasts of climate change 
impacts on the world’s marine ecosystems, with particular emphasis on commercial fish and shellfish 
resources; 
7. Produce publications that are relevant to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change; 
8. Publish report(s) summarizing work. 
 
WG-FCCIFS was extremely productive during its 3-year term, organizing a major symposium, holding several  
inter-sessional and annual business meetings, and convening inter-sessional workshops and theme/topic 
sessions during ICES Annual Science Conferences (ASC) and PICES Annual Meetings.  A chronological list 
of these activities led by, or related to, the group is given below.  
 
June 2009  
Inter-sessional WG-FCCIFS meeting, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada   
 
September 2009  
WG-FCCIFS meeting and ICES/PICES Theme Session on “Climate impacts on marine fish: Discovering 
centennial patterns and disentangling current processes”, ICES Annual Science Conference, Berlin, Germany  
 
October/November 2009  
WG-FCCIFS meeting and POC/FUTURE Topic Session on “Outlooks and forecasts of marine ecosystems 
from an earth system science perspective: Challenges and opportunities”, PICES-2009, Jeju, Korea 
   
April 2010  
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium “Climate change effects on fish and fisheries: Forecasting impacts, assessing 
ecosystem responses, and evaluating management strategies”, Publication: Special volume ICES Journal of 
Marine Science 68(6), and inter-sessional WG-FCCIFS meeting, Sendai, Japan   
 
September 2010  
WG-FCCIFS meeting and ICES/PICES Theme Session on “Responses to climate variability: Comparison of 
Northern Hemisphere marine ecosystems”, ICES Annual Science Conference, Nantes, France 
 
October 2010  
WG-FCCIFS meeting and PICES/ICES Topic Session on “Impact of climate variability on marine ecosystems: 
understanding functional responses to facilitate forecasting”, PICES-2010, Portland, USA 
 
April 2011  
Presentation of a Science Plan for the Section (Strategic Initiative) on Climate Change Effects on Marine 
Ecosystems at the PICES inter-sessional Science Board meeting, Honolulu, USA 
 
May 2011  
ICES/PICES Workshop on “Reaction of Northern Hemisphere eosystems to climate events: A comparison” 
(WKNORCLIM), Hamburg, Germany  
ICES/PICES Workshop on “Biological consequences of a decrease in sea ice in Arctic and Sub-Arctic seas” 
(WKBCASAS), Publication: Hollowed et al., 2013, Fisheries Oceanography 22(5), and inter-sessional  
WG-FCCIFS meeting in conjunction with the ESSAS Open Science Meeting, Seattle, USA  
 
June 2011  
Workshop on “Basin-wide impact of Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation” (WKAMO), Publication: Edwards et 
al., 2013, PLoS ONE 8; Alheit et al.; Journal of Marine Systems, in press, in Woods Hole, USA.  
 
Introduction 
4  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
September 2011  
WG-FCCIFS meeting, ICES Theme Session on “Biophysical modeling tools and their potential use in marine 
spatial management: A strategic dialogue”, and ICES/PICES Theme Session on “Atmospheric forcing of the 
Northern Hemisphere ocean gyres, and subsequent impact on adjacent marine ecosystems”, ICES Annual 
Science Conference, Gdańsk, Poland 
 
October 2011  
WG-FCCIFS meeting and PICES/ICES Topic Session on “Mechanisms of physical-biological coupling 
forcing biological “hotspots”” and PICES/ICES Topic Session on “Linking migratory fish behavior to end-to-
end models”, PICES-2011, Khabarovsk, Russia 
 
A major milestone for the group was the organizing of a joint PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium on “Climate 
change effects on fish and fisheries: Forecasting impacts, assessing ecosystem responses, and evaluating 
management strategies” (April 2010, Sendai, Japan), and a summaries of all sessions and workshops convened 
at the symposium constitute the main body of this report.  A resulting publication of a special issue from the 
symposium in the ICES Journal of Marine Science (2011, Vol. 68(6)) provided a set of peer-reviewed papers 
assessing current knowledge of the effects of climate change on fish and fisheries suitable for consideration by 
the IPCC’s Fifth Assessment Report. 
 
The remainder of the report consists of Appendices 1 to 6 which list WG-FCCIFS membership (1), brief 
reports of inter-sessional and annual meetings (2), summaries from PICES/ICES sessions and workshops (3), 
proposal for a new expert group (4), relevant background reports from PICES Annual Meetings (5), PICES 
Press news articles related to WG-FCCIFS activities (6), and completes with references.  
 
 
Future directions in the formation of S-CCME 
 
Following the success of the Sendai symposium, WG-FCCIFS members met in the fall of 2010 at the ICES 
Annual Science Conference in Nantes, France and at the PICES Annual Meeting in Portland, USA, to discuss 
on-going activities and the need to develop a long-term strategic initiative on climate change effects on marine 
ecosystems.  PICES and ICES recognized that great strides in new sciences had emerged from collaborative 
work between two organizations and the importance of preparing a Science Plan that would outline a structure 
for continued collaboration focused on climate change.  A proposal for new expert group, generated from the 
merging of an ICES Strategic Initiative on Climate Change with WG-FCCIFS was presented at the PICES 
inter-sessional Science Board meeting (April 2011, Honolulu, USA).  Adjustments to the proposed expert 
group Terms of Reference to integrate the program into PICES’ FUTURE plans and activities were made, and 
at WG-FCCIFS’ inter-sessional meeting (Seattle, USA) one month later, members discussed the 
Implementation Plan. At the 2011 fall meetings of ICES (Gdańsk, Poland) and PICES (Khabarovsk, Russia), a 
joint ICES/PICES initiative termed Strategic Initiative on Climate Change Effects on Marine Ecosystems 
(SICCME) in ICES, termed Section on Climate Change Effects on Marine Ecosystems in PICES (S-CCME), 
was established. 
 
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   5 
Report of the PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium on “Climate Change 
Effects on Fish and Fisheries:  Forecasting Impacts, Assessing 
Ecosystem Responses, and Evaluating Management Strategies” 
WG-FCCIFS convened an international symposium to provide a venue for the exchange of scientific 
information and the discussion of the issues and challenges related to predicting the future impacts of climate 
change on the world’s marine ecosystems.  Working Group members played a key role in organizing and 
convening the PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium on “Climate change effects on fish and fisheries: Forecasting 
impacts, assessing ecosystem responses, and evaluating management strategies” in Sendai, Japan, on April 
26–30, 2010.  A total of 35 papers from the symposium were published as a special issue in the ICES Journal 
of Marine Science in 2011 (Hollowed et al., 2011).  A synthesis of the outcomes of this symposium was 
published in the ICES Journal of Marine Science (Hollowed et al., 2013).   
 
The symposium and the subsequent publications advanced understanding within the scientific community of 
the potential effects of climate change on fish and fisheries.  The symposium also provided the background 
information needed to address four of the WG-FCCIFS Terms of Reference: 
• Identify frameworks and methodologies for forecasting the impacts of climate change on the growth, 
distribution and abundance of marine life with particular emphasis on commercial fish and shellfish; 
• Assess the results of designated case studies to test methods; 
• Establish techniques for estimating and communicating uncertainty in forecasts; 
• Evaluate strategies for research and management under climate change scenarios, given the limitations of 
our forecasts. 
 
Key findings from the symposium were distributed using three approaches:  
1. Meeting summaries were published in PICES Press: http://pices.int/publications/pices_press/volume18/v1
8_n2/PICES_Press18_FULL.pdf. This vehicle provided immediate outreach to scientists in the PICES and 
ICES communities.  
2. Theme Session and Workshop co-convenors prepared more detailed summaries of key findings from their 
sessions that were published as an ICES CM report: 
 http://www.ices.dk/sites/pub/Publication%20Reports/Expert%20Group%20Report/SSGHIE/2010/WGFC
CIFS10.pdf (see also this report).  
3. Selected papers were published in a special issue of the ICES Journal of Marine Science with sufficient 
time for them to be considered by review panels responsible for the next Assessment Report (AR5) of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and other review bodies (e.g., the Millennium Report 
of the United Nations Development Program).    
 
The response to this symposium exceeded the expectations of the convenors, with more than 350 abstracts 
submitted by scientists from over 40 countries.  A total of 208 oral presentations and 105 posters were 
presented.  Scientists from around the world debated the issues stemming from climate change impacts on 
marine ecosystems during the 3½-day symposium.  The symposium provided a venue for the international 
research community to work together in an interdisciplinary setting to assess and evaluate the impacts of 
climate change on fish and fisheries.   
 
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
6  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
The symposium was arranged around ten theme sessions, with six workshops preceding the meeting. These 
sessions and workshops encompassed a broad range of topics that provided a global perspective on climate 
change and the future of the world’s fish and fisheries.  Day 1 started with presentations by four plenary 
speakers: Drs. Kevin Trenberth (USA), Akihiko Yatsu (Japan), Ussif Rashid Sumaila (Canada) and Edward 
Allison (Malaysia).  
 
The theme sessions for Day 1 included: 
• Session P1-D1: Forecasting impacts: from climate to fish (co-chaired by Kenneth Drinkwater, Harald 
Loeng, Franz Mueter, Carl O’Brien, Graham Philling and Yashuhiro Yamanaka), 
• Session P2: Forecasting impacts: from fish to markets (co-chaired by Manuel Barange, Jacquelynne King, 
Ian Perry and Adi Kellermann), 
• Session A2: Species-specific responses: changes in growth, reproductive success, mortality, spatial 
distribution and adaptation (co-chaired by Richard Beamish, Myron A. Peck and Motomitsu Takahashi). 
 
The themes for Day 2 included: 
• Session A1: Downscaling variables from global models (co-chaired by Michael Foreman and Jason Holt), 
• Session A2: Continuation: Species-specific responses: changes in growth, reproductive success, mortality, 
spatial distribution and adaptation (co-chaired by Richard Beamish, Myron A. Peck and Motomitsu 
Takahashi),  
• Session B1: Assessing ecosystem responses:  impacts on community structure, biodiversity, energy flow 
and carrying capacity (co-chaired by Thomas Okey and Akihiko Yatsu). 
 
The themes for Day 3 focused the following topics: 
• Session B2: Comparing responses of climate variability among nearshore, shelf and oceanic regions (co-
chaired by Jürgen Alheit,  Jae Bong Lee, and Vladimir Radchenko), 
• Session C1: Impacts on fisheries and coastal communities (co-chaired by Edward Allison, Keith Brander, 
and Suam Kim), 
• Session C2: Evaluating human responses, management strategies and economic implications (co-chaired 
by Tarub Bahri, Kevern Cochrane and Jake Rice), 
• Session D2: Contemporary and next generation climate and oceanographic models, technical advances 
and new approaches (co-chaired by Jonathan Hare and Shin-ichi Ito). 
 
The final ½-day session (Session P3, Day 4) was held in plenary. This session focused on sustainable strategies 
in a warming climate and it was co-chaired by Drs. Anne Hollowed and Michael Schirripa.  Dr. Steve Murawski 
provided a summary of first impressions from the meeting.  
 
The key outcomes from the symposium are: 
• Long-term ocean monitoring programs are needed to track and understand ecosystem and climate change 
as they occur. 
• Networks of shelf-seas ecosystem models have already been developed within several of the world’s 
Large Marine Ecoystems (LMEs).  These models provide a basis for examining structural uncertainty 
within shelf sea ecosystem models. 
• Three sources of uncertainty in Global Ocean Models (GOMs) are under investigation: (1) parameter 
uncertainty, (2) structural uncertainty, (3) scenario uncertainty.  Parameter uncertainty is being addressed 
to some degree with sensitivity tests, structural uncertainly is being explored via comparison of different 
coupled physical–biological models, and scenario uncertainty deals with greenhouse gas emissions and 
economics could be addressed via using ensemble model sets. 
• There are eight approaches to predicting the effects of climate change on fish and fisheries: (1) global or 
basin-scale static models, (2) global-scale dynamic models, (3) dynamic downscaling, (4) statistical 
downscaling, (5) deductive approach, (6) comparative approaches, (7) statistical/time series approach, and 
(8) field and laboratory studies.  Each has strengths and weaknesses. 
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   7 
• Fisheries oceanography and laboratory studies are critical to integrating biological and oceanographic 
models, evaluating species environmental tolerances and adaptation, and to tracking species responses to 
long-term ecosystem and climate change as it occurs.  
• Models that couple marine social and economic responses are needed to evaluate management strategies. 
However, few examples exist. 
• Issues of food security and marine conservation may require new approaches to satisfy the growing 
demand for marine resources. 
• Two-way communication is needed with scientists and stakeholders to develop meaningful scenarios on 
human responses to the impact of ecosystem and climate change. 
 
WG-FCCIFS tasked the convenors to summarize the outcomes of their respective sessions.  These reports are 
organized by Theme (A–D) or Plenary (P1–P3) sessions.  In an effort to focus the reports to address key tasks 
within the Working Group’s Terms of Reference, WG-FCCIFS requested that each session summary address 
the following set of questions:  
• What advances on frameworks and methodologies for forecasting climate change were presented/ 
discussed? 
• What results were presented from designated case studies (to test methods)?  
• What techniques were presented for estimating and communicating uncertainty in forecasts?  
• What strategies were evaluated regarding research and management under climate change scenarios? 
 
Several authors provided summaries of climate change impacts on ocean ecosystems and tools for modeling 
these changes (Brander, 2010; Ito et al., 2010; Overland et al., 2010; Stock and Dunne, 2010).  This report 
supplements those efforts by providing a global perspective on the problem. 
 
Much of the following text, including reports from workshops that preceded the meeting, was previously 
published in the ICES CM report http://ices.dk/sites/pub/Publication%20Reports/Expert%20Group%20Report/
SSGHIE/2010/WGFCCIFS10.pdf.  In this report, a number of references have been updated.  
 
  
  
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
8  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
 
 
 
Session P1-D1:  Forecasting impacts: From climate to fish  
Co-Convenors  
Ken Drinkwater (Institute of Marine Research, Norway)  
Harald Loeng (Institute of Marine Research, Norway)  
Yasuhiro Yamanaka (Hokkaido University, Japan)  
Franz Mueter (School of Fisheries and Ocean Sciences, University of Alaska Fairbanks, USA)   
Carl O’Brien (Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science, UK)  
Graham Pilling (Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science, UK) 
 
 
Introduction 
 
This session focused on the impacts of future climate change on the physical oceanography, biogeochemistry, 
and food webs of the world oceans, with an emphasis on changes in fish and shellfish populations.  Methods 
for projecting climate change impacts on marine ecosystems at both regional and global scales were presented, 
as well as methods for estimating and communicating the associated levels of uncertainty.  Presentations 
addressed downscaling from global models to produce regional future climate and physical oceanographic 
scenarios, scenarios of climate-induced changes in nutrient dynamics and other biogeochemical processes, and 
changes in ecosystem structure from phytoplankton and zooplankton through to fish populations, including 
changes in production and distribution and their influence upon biodiversity. 
 
The session consisted of 20 oral presentations and 19 posters, including invited presentations by Kevin 
Trenberth and Randall Peterman.  Dr. Trenberth provided an overview of the Earth’s climate system and 
presented unequivocal evidence that humans are warming the world’s atmosphere and oceans.  He emphasized 
the importance of changes in the extremes rather than in mean climate states.  Dr. Peterman discussed the 
major sources of uncertainty when forecasting climate effects, highlighting the importance of structural model 
uncertainty, which can only be addressed by considering multiple alternative models.  He emphasized that 
inadequate communication among scientists, decision makers, and stakeholders can be a potentially important 
and poorly understood source of uncertainty. 
 
 
Session P1-D1:  What advances on frameworks and methodologies for forecasting climate change 
impacts were presented/discussed? 
 
A variety of frameworks and methodologies were employed to forecast potential effects of climate warming on 
fish and shellfish populations at regional to global scales.  The majority of papers generated quantitative 
forecasts of future productivity or distribution of selected species based on the output of one or more global 
circulation models (GCMs).  Approaches based on GCMs were divided into (a) global-scale static models, 
(b) global-scale dynamic models, (c) dynamic downscaling techniques, and (d) statistical downscaling 
techniques. Other approaches did not produce quantitative forecasts but aimed at predicting the likely direction 
of future changes under global warming based on understanding the mechanisms that relate productivity of a 
key species to climate variability (e).  The comparative technique (f) was similarly employed to better 
understand the mechanisms that favor different species during warm and cold periods. Statistical time series 
analyses (g) were used to better understand past variability in climate and biological populations as an aid in 
understanding future variability, but forecasting future responses based on past patterns of variability is fraught 
with difficulties.  Finally, presentations on field and laboratory studies (h) highlighted the importance of such 
studies to help estimate vital rates for fishes, which are needed to elucidate and quantify important mechanisms 
and to support modeling efforts.  
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   9 
Frameworks (a):  Global- or basin-scale static models 
 
Jang and Yoo employed a basin-scale approach for the Pacific Ocean to predict possible consequences of 
global warming on patterns of production (Jang et al., 2011).  Gridded GCM model output was used to directly 
estimate changes in mixed-layer depth (MLD) and stratification and to predict changes in primary production 
based on changes in the entrainment of nutrients.  The authors employed a multi-model approach to compare 
predicted changes in MLD and primary production across 11 global models from the IPCC AR4 suite of 
models.  Spatial patterns of change differed substantially among models but some regions showed a consistent 
response. 
 
Models to predict changes in phytoplankton production have previously been used on a global scale 
(Sarmiento et al., 2004; Steinacher et al., 2009), but the formal comparison and classification of responses 
across multiple models employed by Jang et al. (2011 represented a new approach to address model 
uncertainty. Static models have been used similarly to estimate fish production at global scales, for example, 
on the basis of size-based models of production (Jennings et al., 2008), which served as a starting point for the 
dynamic size-based approach of Blanchard et al. (Blanchard et al., 2012) described below (b).  
 
 
Frameworks (b):  Global-scale dynamic models 
 
A dynamic model to estimate fish production on a global scale was presented by Cheung et al., who extended 
the bioclimate envelope model of Cheung et al. (2009) to include the effects of ocean chemistry on the 
physiology of fish species based on the theory of oxygen limitation of growth (Cheung et al., 2011).  
Blanchard et al. presented a dynamic size-based model that was used on a near-global scale to estimate 
changes in production by size class in coastal large marine ecosystems (LMEs) from around the world.  Their 
model is a component of the QUEST fish project, which dynamically links a shelf ecosystem model adapted to 
each LME to a global circulation model (see Barange et al. (session P3); Barange et al., 2011
1
; and Allen, 
Holmes et al., and Holt et al. (session A1)).  The QUEST-Fish project links a lower trophic level shelf 
ecosystem model to a size-based model of fish production that has good theoretical and empirical support 
(Jennings and Brander, 2010) and this dynamic version of the size-based approach represents an important 
advance. Details on the QUEST modeling approach through lower trophic levels were presented in session A1. 
This effort also includes a ‘Global Scale Impacts’ project that was used to assess the vulnerability of nations to 
climate change (Scutt-Phillips et al. (session P1-D1)).  A similar size-based model with potential applicability 
on a global scale has also been developed by Maury (2010). 
 
Other basin-scale and global-scale models that aim to predict the effects of climate change on primary 
producers and higher trophic levels are at various stages of development (see, for example, Blackford et al., 
2010), typically consisting of biogeochemical models based on plankton functional types (Allen et al., 2010). 
Outputs from these models are directly relevant to understanding biological consequences of climate change 
but require further validation and research before reliable predictions can be made. 
 
Evaluation 
 
The global approaches described in Frameworks (a) and (b) above are appealing because they offer a 
consistent method applied across multiple ecosystems that allows for an evaluation of global-scale impacts.  
Mapping projected changes across marine ecosystems provides an effective tool for directly communicating 
the global nature of these challenges.  Moreover, identifying regions where changes are projected to be 
particularly pronounced can highlight areas that need more detailed studies.  
 
                                                           
1
 Citation in italics following the presenter’s name indicates a paper that was published arising from the symposium (see 
the list of publications after the session and workshop summaries). 
 
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
10  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
An important limitation of the global modeling approach is the current inability of global circulation models to 
capture the spatial dynamics in coastal and shelf areas, such as tides, upwelling and freshwater influences. 
Therefore, results that are directly derived from GCM output without downscaling to regional seas are most 
useful in open ocean regions.  This is particularly problematic when such models are extended to fish 
production because most of the world’s fish production occurs along the ocean margins.  An important 
advance in this regard is the linking of multiple versions of a regional model (ERSEM – European Regional 
Seas Ecosystem Model) to global circulation models as implemented in QUEST-Fish.  
 
Conclusion 
 
Models of fish production on a global scale need to be based on well supported theory and may need further 
evaluation.  For example, extensions of the bioclimate approach to include eco-physiological effects hold 
promise, but have not been tested against available data. 
 
 
Frameworks (c):  Dynamic downscaling 
 
This approach links GCM models dynamically to regional coupled biophysical models which may extend from 
climate to fish and beyond (end-to-end models, Steele et al., 2007).  For predicting the response of upper 
trophic levels, we distinguish models that focus on individual species from multi-species approaches. 
 
Single-species focus 
Several scientists presented results from models that coupled climate models to regional bio-physical models 
of lower trophic dynamics to single species population models. Ito et al. extended the lower trophic level 
NEMURO (North Pacific Ecosystem Model for Understanding Regional Oceanograhy) model to include a 
bioenergetics model for Pacific saury (NEMURO.FISH, Ito et al., 2013), while Hufnagel et al. provided an 
example of an individual-based model (IBM) linked to a regional circulation model (Hufnagel and Peck, 
2011).  Similar IBMs have been constructed for fish and shellfish species in both the Pacific (e.g., Rose, 2008) 
and in the Atlantic (Kristiansen et al., 2009). 
 
Multi-species focus  
Similarly to the above single-species models, regional biophysical models have been linked to multiple fish 
populations using a bioenergetics approach that may include age and size structure and that may, in turn, be 
linked to the dynamics of fishing fleets and socio-economic models.  Aydin et al. (presented by Ortiz) are 
developing such a model (FEAST – Forage and Euphausiid Abundance in Space and Time) for the data-rich 
eastern Bering Sea.  Fulton (session B1; Fulton, 2011), and others have developed end-to-end models based on 
a much coarser representation of the underlying physics, but including the behaviour of fishing fleets and other 
socio-economic considerations.  Regional biophysical models may also be linked to multi-species IBMs.  For 
example, Shin and Cury (2001, 2004) developed the Object-oriented Simulator of Marine ecOSystems 
Exploitation (OSMOSE) that modeled multi-species interactions using IBMs on a coarse physical domain.  
Rose et al. presented preliminary model runs only of a similar model during the symposium.  The size-based 
model by Blanchard et al. (see Frameworks (b) above) reflects another example of this approach but uses size-
based dynamics rather than the dynamics of individual species, which may span several orders of magnitude in 
size.  
 
Evaluation 
 
Dynamic downscaling approaches generally focus on a specific region and one or more species of interest, 
which may be selected for their ecological as well as their commercial importance.  Among all of the modeling 
approaches, these regional and species-specific schemes incorporate the greatest degree of realism at the upper 
trophic levels, taking advantage of species-specific parameters estimated from field and laboratory studies.  
 
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   11 
Among the modeling approaches considered during the symposium, the dynamic downscaling method may be 
the most directly relevant for providing advice to fisheries managers, given that they are stock-specific and that 
the model region typically corresponds to an existing management area.  These models were particularly useful 
when fishing is included as a driver, allowing the use of the models in management strategy evaluations.  IBM 
models do not model fish dynamics in terms of total abundance or biomass and generally do not include 
fishing as a source of mortality; therefore, some these models may not be directly useful for providing 
management advice.  However, IBMs can be very useful as hypothesis-testing tools (Neuheimer et al., 2010). 
 
Important limitations arise from the limited number of species and the regional scale of these models.  The 
selection of one or a few key species necessarily ignores interactions with other species that are not included in 
the model.  Hence evaluating possible responses of the selected fish populations to climate change can be 
problematic if the species composition changes as a consequence of warming.  For example, one or more of 
the selected species may become a minor component of the fish community in the future and community 
dynamics may become dominated by other, formerly less abundant species.  A second limitation arises from 
the regional nature of the models, which requires that the modeled species complete their life cycle within the 
model region.  This assumption may no longer be valid if shifts in distribution occur as a result of future 
warming. 
 
A number of end-to-end models are currently being used or developed to explore the consequences of both 
bottom-up and top-down processes, including fishing and other human activities, on marine ecosystems (e.g., 
Fulton, 2010; Ito et al., 2010). 
 
A major challenge in modeling the responses of fish populations to future climate change will be the 
appropriate treatment of the adaptive capacity of fishes.  Many marine fish populations are adapted to their 
local environment (Conover and Munch, 2002) but their ability to adapt to a changing environment through 
genetic or phenotypic adaptations has been documented (Pörtner, 2002), but to our knowledge has not been 
incorporated in modeling the future dynamics of fish populations. 
 
 
Frameworks (d):  Statistical downscaling 
 
The statistical downscaling approach uses a mechanistically-based understanding of climate effects on 
recruitment, growth, mortality, or spatial distribution to develop functional relationships between key 
environmental drivers and biological responses.  Future trajectories for these key drivers are obtained from 
GCM output and are used together with the identified functional relationships to project the future dynamics of 
the fish population of interest under various climate change scenarios. 
 
Depending on the goals of the study, future projections may be based on a population dynamics model that 
includes climate effects on recruitment or on a habitat model that includes climate effects on habitat suitability. 
The former approach was used to project future recruitment and abundance of walleye pollock in the Bering 
Sea (Mueter et al.; Mueter et al., 2011), Bond et al., and Ianelli (session P3; Ianelli et al., 2011), rock sole in 
the Bering Sea (Wilderbuer et al., presented by Bond; Wilderbuer et al., 2013) and Pacific mackerel in Korean 
waters (Kang et al.).  The same process was used by Hare et al. (Hare et al., 2010) to forecast changes in the 
gray snapper population along the east coast of the United States.  Other case studies used habitat models to 
project future distributions of gray snapper off the eastern U.S. (Hare et al., 2012), seaweed around Japan 
(Komatsu et al.), corals around Japan (Yara et al.) and tuna in the South Pacific (Hobday et al.; Hobday et al., 
2011).  The approach of Hare et al. provided a general relationship for estimating northern range boundaries 
based on known temperature limits. 
 
Evaluation 
 
Statistical downscaling provides a useful approach to forecasting the expected response of individual species to 
future climate variability.  We consider this an interim process that can provide immediate management advice 
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
12  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
when used in combination with Management Strategy Evaluations (MSEs, e.g., Mueter et al. and Ianelli 
(session P3)).  This technique is likely to be merged with and superseded by dynamic downscaling approaches 
that are being developed from first principles to provide projections for individual species or multiple species 
of interest.  A blending of these approaches may be required in cases where the population models used for 
dynamic downscaling cannot be fully parameterized and may, for example, require predictions of survival 
rates at poorly understood life stages based on empirical relationships. 
 
The key to statistical downscaling is the reliability of the functional relationship between climate variables 
(e.g., temperature) and the modeled biological responses.  Moreover, the relationship between ecosystem 
indicators and biological responses is assumed to be stationary to provide reliable forecasts under 
environmental conditions that may not have been observed in the past.  The possibility that the functional 
relationships governing biological dynamics may fundamentally change introduces an additional source of 
uncertainty that has generally not been considered.  
 
Quantifying this uncertainty will be a challenge as existing time series are typically too short to fully evaluate 
stationarity or to estimate the probability of phase shifts in important functional relationships.  Process oriented 
field programs often provide the foundation for the functional relationships used in these models.  Given some 
understanding of the underlying mechanisms, statistical downscaling is likely to provide reasonable forecasts 
of the direction of change in a population, if not the magnitude.  
 
Statistical downscaling approaches typically occur on a scale that is directly applicable to management by 
focusing on a single commercial stock.  Projections are therefore amenable to MSEs.  The challenge is to 
appropriately quantify and communicate uncertainty, as discussed below. 
 
Because it typically focuses on a single species and on tractable statistical relationships between climate 
forcing and a specific biological response, this approach may offer the best opportunity for exploring adaptive 
responses of fish to changing climate conditions.  However, this requires a better understanding of the adaptive 
capacity of fishes in response to changes in temperature, pH, O
2
 levels, and other stressors. 
 
 
Frameworks (e):  Deductive approach 
 
The deductive approach relies on process studies to identify the mechanisms (including climate impacts on 
prey availability and predation) that affect survival or growth of fish and shellfish.  Results from process 
studies are typically compared along a gradient of environmental conditions, e.g., by comparing responses 
between warm and cold years.  If a good mechanistic understanding can be gained from such studies, this 
understanding can be used to predict directional changes in the population of interest under continued 
warming, e.g., Hunt et al. (Hunt et al., 2011) for eastern Bering Sea pollock; Frusher et al. (Frusher et al., 
2010) for Tasmanian rock lobster; Ono et al. (session B1) for the response of zooplankton to changes in bloom 
timing in the Oyashio region). 
 
Evaluation 
 
In the context of predicting effects of climate changes, a better mechanistic understanding of the response of 
fish and shellfish to different environmental conditions is crucial to informing and validating models and to 
providing credibility to empirical relationships that are used for statistical downscaling.  The BEST/BSIERP 
effort in the eastern Bering Sea offers an excellent case study that illustrates the strength of integrating detailed 
process studies with an end-to-end modeling effort (Aydin et al.) and with a statistical downscaling approach 
(Mueter et al., Bond et al.). 
 
As with the other approaches, predicting future responses based on a mechanistic understanding requires that 
the same mechanisms continue to operate in the future.  Although functional relationships based on a 
mechanistic understanding are more likely to continue operating in the future than simple empirical 
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   13 
relationships without such understanding, there is no reason to believe that the same mechanisms will continue 
to govern multi-species interactions when temperatures increase beyond their historical range.  
 
 
Frameworks (f):  Comparative approaches 
 
Fréon et al. (presented by Checkley) reviewed comparative analyses of the response of small pelagic fishes to 
climate variability across a number of coastal upwelling systems.  One of the goals of such studies is to 
identify common patterns across systems that help identify the mechanisms that determine fluctuations in the 
productivity and abundance of different species or functional groups.  Understanding these patterns will 
improve our ability to forecast such fluctuations.  The value of comparative analyses for understanding the 
linkages between biological responses and climate changes is increasingly recognized and has led to a number 
of international efforts to compare ecosystems within and between ocean basins (e.g., PICES’ Climate Change 
and Carrying Capacity (CCCC), ICES’ and GLOBEC’s Cod and Climate Change (CCC), Small Pelagics and 
Climate Change (SPACC), and Northeast Pacific (NEP) programs; IMBER’s Ecosystem Comparisons of 
Subarctic Seas (ESSAS); the U.S. partnership between NOAA and NSF Comparative Assessment of Marine 
Ecosystem Organization (CAMEO) program, and many others).  
 
Evaluation 
 
To date, comparative studies have been largely descriptive and have identified general patterns of variability 
by retrospectively comparing trends in selected species or species groups across different ecosystems.  Using 
these studies to provide better forecasts of future variability remains a challenge.  Comparisons across large 
marine ecosystems require international cooperation and a commitment by numerous institutions to maintain 
relevant data series and contribute datasets for comparative analyses.  It is particularly challenging to 
standardize data series across systems and maintain consistent data series. 
 
 
Frameworks (g):  Statistical/time series approach to identify basin-scale patterns of variability 
 
Several papers discussed statistical time series approaches to identify major patterns of climate and biological 
variability over time (e.g., Overland et al., 2011; Mendelssohn, 2011; Yasuda et al., 2009; and Hsu et al.). 
These studies aim to link climate variability to biological variability on a regional to basin-wide scale. In 
principle, these statistical relationships can then be applied to climate projections to predict future biological 
responses. 
 
Evaluation  
 
Statistical time series approaches have largely been used as a tool for the analysis of historical patterns of 
variability and it is not clear if they can be successfully used in forecasting long-term ecological trends. 
Overland et al. (presented by Bond; Overland et al., 2011) emphasized that forecasting biological responses is 
complicated by the large variety of possible responses that have been documented in biological systems (phase 
shifts, directional trends, lagged effects, non-linearities, hysteresis, etc.).  Hence it is far from clear if statistical 
relationships can provide reliable forecasts without an adequate understanding of mechanisms and projections 
outside the range of historical conditions will always be problematic. 
 
 
Frameworks (h):  Field and lab studies 
 
The review by Peck et al. and a number of case studies in other sessions highlighted the importance of field 
and laboratory studies that estimate vital rates of fishes.  Such studies are crucial to informing existing models, 
to quantifying changes in vital rates relative to changes in temperature and other variables, and to determine 
the adaptive capacity of fishes. 
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
14  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Session P1-D1:  What results were presented from methodologies applied in designated case studies 
(to test methods)? 
 
The focus of many papers in this session was on cutting-edge modeling approaches and methodologies to 
forecast the effects of climate change.  Many of these approaches have only been developed in recent years and 
only preliminary results were reported in many cases.  We briefly summarize some of the key findings: 
• Jang and Yoo found that output from most of the GCMs, coupled with a simple production model, imply 
increased stratification and therefore decreased production in the Kuroshio extension area, while 
production may be expected to increase in the western subpolar region of the North Pacific.  These results 
agree with predictions by Merryfield and Kwon (2007). Projections for high latitude regions were 
inconsistent across GCMs, similar to the recent results of Steinacher et al. (2009).  
• Preliminary results from an analysis of growth potential in the NW Atlantic (Cheung et al.) and implied 
changes in distribution suggest northward shifts in distribution across numerous species with range 
expansions into more northern waters and possible local extinctions at the southern extent of their ranges. 
This has implications for the estimated catch potential.  While a simple bioclimate envelope model 
predicts increases in production in high latitude regions, accounting for effects of O
2
 limitation and 
changes in pH suggests a loss in maximum catch potential for many of the same regions. 
• The local disappearance of a number of seaweed species (Sargassum spp.) and replacement of these 
species by subtropical species in southern Japan was reported by Komatsu et al.  Modeling the changes in 
distribution for a selected species (S. horneri) based on its inferred temperature range and projected 
changes in average temperature (A2 model of CCSR/NIES/FRCGC (MIROC)) suggests a substantial 
range contraction under predicted warming.  This is expected to have negative consequences for a number 
of fish species that use seaweed as nursery areas for larvae and juveniles. 
• A northward expansion of gray snapper (Lutjanus griseus) in the western boundary current off the U.S. 
east coast was predicted by Hare et al. based on the fact that juveniles are carried poleward by the 
prevailing currents, combined with strong evidence that juvenile overwinter survival in estuaries limits the 
northern range of the species.  The authors developed a general relationship between minimum predicted 
winter temperature and latitude that can be used to predict range extensions for similar species. 
• Large projected changes in temperatures around Australia due to intensification of the East Australian 
Current is expected to reduce the productivity of rock lobster in the region due to decreases in recruitment 
and settlement success (Frusher et al.).  In contrast, a temperature threshold for successful development of 
larval urchins (Centrostephanus rodgersii) and decreased predation by lobsters suggests that urchins will 
benefit from increasing temperatures, implying an increased risk of further “urchin barrens”. 
• Walleye pollock (Theragra chalcogramma) in the eastern Bering Sea were previously believed to benefit 
from warmer temperatures.  Recent field studies comparing spring bloom dynamics during warm and cold 
years suggest that the large zooplankton which are critical prey for juvenile pollock during late summer 
were replaced by small zooplankton during a series of warm years, resulting in the failure of several 
walleye pollock year classes (Hunt et al.).  Therefore, projected warming trends in the Bering Sea under 
most climate scenarios (Bond et al.) imply a substantial reduction in average recruitment and decreased 
abundances of walleye pollock under a variety of harvest scenarios (Mueter et al.). 
• Ito et al. based on a coupled physical-bioenergetics model of Pacific saury off Japan predict a decrease in the 
size of Pacific saury due to decreased prey abundances but an increase in egg production.  However, using an 
ensemble modeling approach suggests considerable uncertainty in the response of Pacific saury due to the 
complex interplay between changes in temperature, distribution, and prey availability. Similar levels of 
uncertainty are to be expected in many other studies that relied on output from a single climate model. 
• A biological ensemble modeling approach was also employed by Gårdmark et al. (presented by 
Lindegren; Lindegren et al., 2011) to show that fishing had a stronger impact on future cod trajectories in 
the Baltic Sea than climate change and that reducing fishing pressure is expected to rebuild cod stocks 
under most scenarios. 
• Preliminary estimates of fish production from 20 large marine ecosystems based on size-based models 
linked to regional circulation models (ERSEM) driven by a global circulation model suggest large 
variability among these systems in their response to future climate warming with no clear geographical 
patterns (Blanchard et al.). 
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   15 
Session P1-D1:  What techniques were presented for estimating and communicating uncertainty 
in forecasts? 
 
Most of the forecasts presented in this session were based on output from one or more global circulation 
models.  Inferences about biological responses to climate change based on GCM output must deal with 
structural uncertainty in the GCM models, as well as uncertainty in modeling the biological responses.  Jang 
and Yoo illustrated that even quantities computed directly from GCM output (e.g., mixed layer depth) can vary 
widely among models if they are based on parameters that are poorly estimated by GCMs.  
 
A variety of methods were proposed, or were used in specific case studies, to (1) quantify uncertainty in 
important parameters needed for projections, (2) quantify uncertainty in the projected responses and future 
population trajectories, and (3) communicate uncertainties to managers and the public: 
• Hierarchical models (Peterman), using a fully Bayesian or empirical Bayes approach, are a powerful tool 
for quantifying uncertainty in the estimated responses of fish populations to climate change across 
multiple stocks, regions, or other “replicate” units (see, e.g., Mueter et al., 2002).  Because of the 
computational demands, such hierarchical models are only beginning to be applied to coupled bio-physical 
models (e.g., Fiechter et al., 2009).  
• Ensemble modeling is commonly used to characterize uncertainty in climate projections across multiple 
models (Wang et al. (session A1); Wang et al., 2010; Hollowed et al., 2009; Moss et al., 2010) and has 
recently also been used in coupled models to examine uncertainty in both climate trajectories and in the 
biological responses.  Examples from this session include (a) Ito et al., who used an ensemble of climate 
models with a single species bio-energetic model for Pacific saury, (b) Bond et al. and Mueter et al., who 
used an ensemble of climate models to drive a stock projection model under various climate and fishing 
scenarios, and (c) Gårdmark et al. who used multiple biological models (single, multispecies, food web) 
that incorporated statistical uncertainty and were driven by two alternative climate models (with and 
without climate change), as well as alternative fishing scenarios.  Biological models in these ensemble 
approaches may be driven by dynamically (Ito et al.) or statistically downscaled climate scenarios 
(Gårdmark et al., Bond et al.).  We are not aware of any modeling efforts that use an ensemble of climate 
models together with an ensemble of biological models.  The ensemble modeling approach typically uses 
simulations to account for various sources of uncertainty, including structural uncertainty.  One of the 
unresolved issues in ensemble modeling is the appropriate selection of and/or weighting of alternative 
models when combining results across models.  Results from multiple model runs may be presented 
separately for each model or combined across models (see ‘communicating uncertainty’ below). 
• An alternative to using multiple climate models and ensembles of possible trajectories to separately drive 
one or more biological models is to combine the forecasts of important parameters from alternative climate 
models into a single trajectory with an estimate of uncertainty in each future year (Hollowed et al., 2009). 
Beltrán et al. provided an example of using a hierarchical Bayesian model to combine SST projections 
from multiple climate models (Beltrán et al., 2012). 
• Whether or not the impacts of multiple models are investigated, a simulation (Monte Carlo) approach can 
generally be used when making projections to account for known uncertainty in climate (random draws 
from a suite of likely climate trajectories and/or scenarios), population dynamics (random draws of 
important population parameters from multiple univariate or, better, a single multivariate distribution), and 
environment-biology relationships (random draws of parameter values for estimated or assumed functional 
relationships from a suitable probability distribution or from historical values).  For case studies, see 
Mueter et al. (session P1-D1), Brodziak et al. (this session), Ianelli (session P3), and Planque et al. 
(session A2; Planque et al., 2011).  A simulation approach is also utilized in the context of Management 
Strategy Evaluations, which allows the robustness of management strategies to be tested in the face of that 
system uncertainty, but at the expense of considerable time and processing power. 
• Sensitivity analyses on important parameters are the primary means for identifying particularly influential 
parameters.  If models are particularly sensitive to a given parameter, uncertainty about the true parameter 
value is an important source of uncertainty.  Sensitivity analyses are typically used to prioritize field and 
laboratory studies, but can be used to quantify uncertainty in projections by repeatedly running models 
across different values of the important parameters to bracket possible responses.  However, this requires 
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
16  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
some knowledge of the likely distribution of parameter values and can be challenging with complex 
models that have multiple important parameters, which may require a large number of model runs.  Gibson 
et al. (session D2) provides an example of exploring the effects of parameter uncertainty in an NPZD 
model on estimates of phytoplankton biomass in the eastern Bering Sea. 
• The most basic approach to characterizing, if not quantifying, uncertainty about potential future responses 
to climate change consists of presenting results and implications from the analysis of different models and 
to compare and contrast the resulting patterns across models.  For example, Jang and Yoo (this session) 
compare estimates of changes in mixed layer depth and implied changes in primary production across a 
large number of global circulation models to identify robust spatial patterns in these changes that are seen 
across a large number of models. 
• The majority of presentations in this session did not explicitly include uncertainty in the presentation of 
results, but several authors stressed the need for considering alternative biological processes or 
relationships when predicting the effects of warming (Frusher et al.; Peck et al.). 
 
With respect to communicating uncertainty to managers and the public, several approaches were recommended 
or used in specific case studies. 
• Peterman recommended the use of more easily understood concepts when communicating uncertainty to 
user groups.  For example, cognitive psychologists have found that most people relate more readily to 
cumulative probability distributions (rather than probability density functions) and to frequencies (e.g., “2 
out of 10”) rather than probabilities (0.2).  
• For ensemble approaches or for other multi-model approaches, results from each model can be displayed 
to graphically illustrate the variability in the responses (e.g., Gårdmark et al.; Hare et al.; Jang and Yoo; 
see Figure 1). 
 
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   17 
                
 
Fig. 1  Examples of model predictions for (top left) future trajectories of cod biomass from different population 
dynamics models (Gårdmark et al.), (top right) changes in minimum winter temperatures under different climate scenarios 
(Hare et al.), and (bottom) changes in mixed layer depth from 19 global circulation models (Jang and Yoo). 
 
 
• Results from multiple models can be combined into a single figure to illustrate the uncertainty in model 
predictions. For example “simulation envelopes” illustrate the full range of results (Gårdmark et al.) or 
specified upper and lower percentiles (Mueter et al.) (Fig. 2).  It is important to note that these envelopes 
do not represent statistical confidence intervals and may not illustrate the full range of uncertainty if they 
are based on a subjective choice of climate models and/or biological models.  However, they illustrate the 
possible range of responses that may be expected, conditional on the models included in the analysis. 
1980 2100 2040
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Model 4
Model 5
Model 7
1980 2100 2040
Relative Cod SSB
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
18  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
 
Fig. 2  Examples of predictions of (left) biomass trajectories based on multiple climate and fishing scenarios (Mueter et 
al. with 80% simulation envelope) or (right) based on multiple biological models (full range of ensemble predictions, 
Gårdmark et al.). 
 
 
• Where possible, it is preferable to use a combination of the previous two approaches that shows the 
variability in individual predictions to illustrate the variety of possible responses, as well as an envelope 
across all predictions to illustrate the range of responses.  Illustrating individual responses can be 
important to clearly communicate the common observation that the expected response may vary greatly in 
space or over time (e.g., Fig. 1, Fig. 3). 
 
Fig. 3  Example showing simulation envelope along with individual trajectories based on a given model, model 
parameters, and inputs (based on Mueter et al.).  
 
 
• The output from spatially explicit global models is typically displayed in the form of maps showing point 
estimates for a single variable one model at a time (e.g., Jang and Yoo, Fig. 1) without indicating the level 
of uncertainty even when it is known.  It will be important to use appropriate methodologies for formally 
assessing and illustration uncertainty in spatial surfaces.  A commonly used approach is to show the 
magnitude of change in a variable of interest for only those locations (e.g., grid cells) where the change 
has been determined to be significant based on appropriate statistical tests or other criteria.  
• A novel approach to addressing uncertainty across multiple models was illustrated by Jang and Yoo who 
used a hierarchical cluster analysis to identify models that show a similar spatial response and then 
averaged responses across similar models to obtain more robust spatial patterns of change.  However, 
these patterns are not associated with any measure of uncertainty. 
2010 2020 2030 2040 2050
1000 3000 5000
Biomass (1000 t)
No fishing W ith fishing
1980
2040
2100
5
4
3
2
1
0
With climate change 
(+3.5 ºC, -0.8 psu)
2010 2020 2030 2040 2050
2000 3000 4000 5000
Spawning Stock Bioma
Biomass (1000 t)
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   19 
Session P1-D1:  What strategies were evaluated regarding research and management under climate 
change scenarios? 
 
While this session did not directly focus on strategies for research or management, several such strategies were 
evaluated or employed in the context of making forecasts of future population trajectories of commercial fish 
or shellfish species. 
• Many of the case studies examined in this session clearly illustrate the need for bringing together different 
fields of science (e.g., climatology, oceanography, biology, economics and social science) when 
examining and responding to climate change impacts.  This requires the development of a common 
language and a cohesive response to the problem.  A good example that illustrates the interdisciplinary 
approach to address research challenges is the BEST/BSIERP program in the Bering Sea (Aydin et al., 
presented by Ortiz), which links multi-disciplinary field and laboratory studies with a vertically integrated 
modeling approach that includes modelers with expertise in climate science, plankton biology, fish 
population dynamics, economics, the social sciences, and other fields. 
• A’mar et al. (A’mar et al., 2009) introduced a technique for incorporating climate impacts in management 
strategy evaluations (MSEs).  Several examples of this type of climate driven MSE were presented in 
Sendai.  Management strategies ranging from no fishing to fishing under status-quo control rules were 
evaluated by Gårdmark et al., Mueter et al. and Ianelli (session P3) to evaluate the performance of status-
quo management for individual stocks under climate change scenarios.  The results from such MSEs, 
which simulate future population dynamics based on robust climate–recruitment relationships, critically 
depend on the functional form and uncertainty in these relationships to obtain plausible results.  This 
requires, at a minimum, a good mechanistic understanding of the dynamics of the population of interest. 
 
 
Session P1-D1 Conclusions and recommendations 
 
• Scientists are increasingly being asked to provide forecasts of the biological impacts of anticipated climate 
changes.  Therefore, it is critical to develop approaches that produce credible forecasts and appropriately 
deal with uncertainty.  The IPCC AR4 experience has highlighted the importance of acknowledging and 
examining the uncertainty in our knowledge of how ecosystems operate and in communicating this 
uncertainty to stakeholders.  As the marine science community moves forward in providing relevant input 
to the next IPCC Assessment Report, this session offered some lessons for improving the quality of the 
science that will be instrumental in providing relevant advice to policy makers. Specifically, we offer the 
following recommendations:  
• Whenever possible, inferences about potential biological impacts based on downscaled global circulation 
models should be based on multiple future scenarios and multiple climate models.  For example, a variety 
of climate models should be used to drive regional models in the dynamic downscaling approach. 
Bayesian model averaging can also be used to carry uncertainty forward for dynamic downscaling case 
studies. Both approaches characterize the range of variability in responses across models and for assessing 
how robust the results are to the underlying assumptions about climate change.  
• Forecasts of climate change impacts will be needed at both the regional and global scale.  However, we 
note that global-scale comparisons based on GCM output or earth system models linked to GCMs are 
unlikely to provide reliable predictions of changes in coastal marine ecosystems where the majority of fish 
production occurs.  Therefore, regional models linked to GCMs are critical in coastal regions. However, 
regional ecosystems are not closed systems and the responses in a given ecosystem are not independent of 
changes in adjacent systems.  The dynamic downscaling approach accounts for connectivity across regions 
by providing appropriate boundary conditions, but the biological system is typically assumed to be closed 
within the study region.  This can be particularly problematic in highly advective systems. Hence we 
encourage the development of methods to account for the dynamics of stocks that extend beyond the 
region being modeled, for example by linking regional models among adjacent ecosystems. 
• We encourage the consideration of a range of existing models of different complexity to forecast the 
response of a given fish or shellfish species to climate change.  Model diversity is important for covering 
the likely range of possible responses. Biological ensemble modeling offers a straightforward approach to 
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
20  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
deal with a disparate set of models, but requires agreement on a common set of output parameters for 
comparisons. 
• For any model-based forecast, a careful evaluation of the degree of complexity that is needed to estimate 
quantities of interest should be undertaken.  There is a clear trade-off between model complexity and the 
ability to fully deal with uncertainty.  In order to meaningfully assess uncertainty, repeated model runs 
using different inputs and parameter values are required.  While this is feasible for single-species models 
and simple ecosystem models, it may be computationally too demanding for more complex models (Stock 
et al., 2011).  
• The range of uncertainty across scenarios, models, and model runs must be acknowledged when 
forecasting biological responses from climate models.  Uncertainty should generally be illustrated when 
presenting results, including an indication of the range of possible outcomes and some illustration of the 
variability among individual trajectories (e.g., Figure 3).  To the extent possible, ICES and PICES should 
consider developing a consistent approach for presenting results to policy makers and informing the next 
IPCC report. 
• When downscaling from global circulation models some standardization in the choice of emissions 
scenarios would be desirable, while the choice of climate models is specific to the problem and to the 
region of interest.  Downscaling approaches in this session typically considered three alternative scenarios 
to cover the range of expected emissions scenarios, most commonly A2 (high range), A1B (middle), and 
B1 (low) or “commit” (status quo emissions).  While the “commit” scenario may be useful for 
comparisons with current conditions, it provides an unlikely lower bound for projections, hence we 
suggest using A2, A1B, and B1 to capture a likely range of emissions scenarios.  The choice of which 
models to consider is partly guided by the performance of different models with respect to the variable of 
interest as well as the region of interest.  Some guidance on the selection of appropriate models was 
provided by Wang et al. (session A1). 
• When using models to forecast impacts of climate change on fish and shellfish it is important to assess the 
utility of a given model with respect to providing useful and relevant advice to fisheries managers.  For 
example, several case studies in this and other sessions used Individual Based Models to illustrate 
potential consequences of climate change.  At this stage, IBMs are more appropriately used as research 
tools for hypothesis testing than for providing relevant management advice.  To maximize the utility of 
end-to-end models or coupled biophysical models that include fishing as a source of mortality they should 
be used in combination with management strategy evaluations.  
• The development of models for forecasting requires a careful evaluation of the ability of these models to 
hindcast historical data, as well as up-to-date observations for verification and as boundary conditions for 
projections.  Therefore maintaining consistent data series is a high priority, as is making these data more 
widely available to facilitate model development and verification by teams of dispersed researchers from 
multiple disciplines. 
• The use of empirical relationships without some understanding of the underlying mechanisms should be 
avoided, particularly for predictions on decadal scales or longer.  
• We recommend a prioritization of specific field and laboratory studies needed to support modeling the 
impacts of climate changes on fish.  This may best be accomplished by regional workshops to identify 
species for which critical information on important vital rates is missing or incomplete.  
• Finally, we need to consider the capacity of fishes to adapt to a changing climate when making long-term 
predictions (discussed further under session A2). 
  
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   21 
 
 
 
Session P2:  Forecasting impacts:  From fish to markets 
Co-Convenors  
Manuel Barange (GLOBEC International Project Office)  
Jacquelynne King (Pacific Biological Station, DFO, Canada) 
Ian Perry (Pacific Biological Station, DFO, Canada) 
Adolf Kellermann (ICES) 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Direct impacts of climate change on marine populations will alter the provision of food from oceans to 
markets.  At the same time, the on-going process of economic globalization will modify or exacerbate the 
vulnerability of fish production systems to climate change at global, regional and local level.  Policy and 
management agencies will require scientific advice on the potential impacts that climate change (and its 
associated economic developments) will have on the availability of fish populations to fisheries, markets and 
consumers.  This session focused on: (1) forecasting changes in marine population dynamics as they relate to 
fisheries (e.g., impacts on catchability or maximum sustainable yield), to processing and market demands (e.g., 
changes in size-at-age), to market forces (e.g., changes in price and trade) and to food security (e.g., collective 
vulnerability analysis); (2) quantifying the uncertainty of these forecasts in risk assessment frameworks useful 
to resource managers; and (3) exploring the interactivity between the ecosystem and market dynamics. 
 
 
Session P2:  What advances on frameworks and methodologies for forecasting climate change 
impacts were presented/discussed? 
 
Climate–fish–people models are beginning to be constructed, but are still in their early stages. Simpler 
(statistical) models which identify present fishing habitats and use these to project future fishing locations with 
future climate conditions are more common.  These latter models were used as the bases for most of the 
presentations in this session.  These types of models often use simple parameters such as sea surface 
temperature; future developments need to use at least O
2
 and temperatures at depth.  These types of models 
also have many uncertainties, including how information moves among participants, and human behaviour 
generally.  An example of the former is the extent to which knowledge (of where and when to fish, etc.) gained 
from past experience can be applied to future conditions (e.g., Haynie and Pfeiffer; Haynie and Pfeiffer, 2012). 
An example of the latter is the presentation by Sumaila et al. (presented by Lam) for climate change impacts in 
West Africa (Sumaila et al., 2011) – this is an already highly disturbed (from fishing) system.  If this system is 
not able to respond adequately to current intensive fishing, how can it be expected to respond to the “new” 
concerns of climate change? 
 
 
Session P2:  What results were presented from designated case studies (to test methods)? 
 
The importance of institutions was noted in several studies. Fishing enterprises were often described as being 
very “flexible” and likely to be able to adapt to future climate change quite easily.  Issues of concern are the 
adequacy of information flows and the value of past knowledge applied to future conditions.  Regulatory 
“institutions” and arrangements were described as potentially adaptable (e.g., the presentation by Ishimura et 
al. (Ishimura et al., 2013), although “free-riders” (countries that gain from remaining outside of an 
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
22  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
international agreement for the sharing of migratory fish populations) can be a problem.  Ways to mitigate 
these issues, such as side payments, can be developed to overcome these problems.  
 
 
Session P2:  What techniques were presented for estimating and communicating uncertainty in 
forecasts? 
 
The presentation by Badjeck and Mendo (Badjeck et al., 2010) on the use of scenarios to engage experts and to 
elicit their local knowledge, and to incorporate uncertainty, shows how important such scenario approaches 
will become in the future.  Their study found that perceptions of what the major drivers of change will be in 
the future were different from their perceptions of past drivers of change. 
 
 
Session P2:  What strategies were evaluated regarding research and management under climate 
change scenarios? 
 
Further research on governance issues involved in climate change impacts on migratory stocks and issues of 
multi-species responses to climate change and how fishing enterprises may respond are needed.  
  
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   23 
 
 
 
Session A1:  Downscaling variables from global climate models 
Co-Convenors  
Michael Foreman (Institute of Ocean Sciences, DFO, Canada)  
Jason Holt (Proudman Oceanographic Laboratory, UK) 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Analyses and summaries recently presented in the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC) indicate that many of the dramatic changes observed in the circulation and physical 
characteristics of the oceans over the past century will continue in the future.  One of the major limitations of 
the global climate models used to estimate these future projections is their relatively coarse resolution.  
Statistical or dynamical downscaling is often needed to provide sufficient spatial detail in the variables of 
interest.  Presentations in this session generally fell into one of three categories:  (1) downscaling of global 
climate model variables relevant to marine ecosystems; (2) downscaling techniques and/or their application to 
particular regions or variables; and (3) analyses of global climate models projections or results from higher-
resolution regional ocean, or coupled atmosphere-ocean, models that were forced by, and take their boundary 
conditions from, global climate models. 
 
 
Session A1:  What advances on frameworks and methodologies for forecasting climate change 
impacts were presented/discussed? 
 
Several key methodological advances were presented in this session. Wang et al. discussed multiple selection 
criteria for narrowing the number of global climate models (GCMs) to be used for statistically downscaling 
future projections.  The technique was illustrated in the Bering Sea where she and colleagues examined GCM 
accuracy in capturing sea ice extent and seasonal variability over recent decades.  This double screening 
quickly narrowed the number of credible GCMs from 23 to 6, and provided an ensemble projection of more 
quickly disappearing ice than was predicted by all 23 models, a feature that has been borne out in recent years. 
Several examples of dynamical downscaling were also presented (Kurogi et al.; Kurogi et al., 2013) in the 
waters off eastern Japan, Holt et al. (Holt et al., 2010) and Holmes et al. for various continental shelves around 
the world, Curchitser et al. for the Northeast Pacific, Kuroda et al. for the Northwest Pacific and waters around 
Japan, Foreman et al. for the British Columbia shelf; Hermann et al. for the Bering Sea), and in each case the 
need for better resolution of physical processes relevant to their particular regional marine ecosystems was 
made. In two instances (Kurogi et al.  and Curchitser et al.) there was two-way communication between the 
nested regional climate model (RCM) and the more coarsely resolved GCM or basin scale model, with 
Curchitser et al. showing that the “upscaling” feedback associated with a more accurate representation of 
upwelling in the California Current system had significant effects well outside the downscaled region. 
However, in this case the ocean models were also coupled to an atmospheric model so some of these far-field 
feedbacks may have arisen through atmospheric teleconnections.  A natural extension of this would be to 
include a high resolution downscaled atmospheric model.  Allen (invited) also discussed the development of 
generic software that would allow easy coupling between lower trophic level planktonic 
ecosystem/biogeochemistry models and higher trophic level models. 
 
Holt et al. presented the Global Coastal Ocean Modeling System (GCOMS) as a means of easily porting the 
POLCOMS (Proudman Oceanographic Laboratory Coastal Ocean Modelling System) model that was 
originally developed for the NW European shelf to other continental shelf regions of the world (specifically 
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
24  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
those with important fisheries).  Hermann et al. presented multi-variate EOF analyses of combined physical 
and biological variables as a means of better understanding linkages. 
 
Allen proposed that ecosystems models should move beyond a “chemical factory” approach to include intra-
cellular processes and cell-cell interactions explicitly, hence better capturing plankton physiology. 
 
 
Session A1:  What results were presented from designated case studies (to test methods)? 
 
Virtually all presentations included case studies to illustrate their methodology.  Wang et al. mainly focused on 
Arctic seas like the Bering, Chukchi, Barents, and Okhotsk, but also illustrated her approach with a GCM 
accuracy assessment of the Pacific Decadal Oscillation in the North Pacific. Kurogi et al. examined the effects 
of slightly different scalings of wind stress on variations in the path of the Kuroshio Current near Japan while 
Holmes et al. presented ROC (Receiver Operator Characteristic; a binary discriminator test to assess success in 
decision making based on variable thresholds) and wavelet (a spatial scale dependent skill assessment) based 
evaluation schemes.  These were used for assessing the skill of chlorophyll simulations in the QUEST-Fish 
model through comparison with SeaWiFs data. Through a set of GCOMS simulations, Holt et al. demonstrated 
that apart from SST, there were no simple correlations between primary productivity and other basic oceanic or 
atmospheric variables, thereby justifying the need for dynamical, as opposed to statistical, downscaling in 
continental shelf regions.  Kilmatov’s (co-authored with Dmitrieva) theoretical analysis suggested that the 
warming of ocean waters could weaken density gradients and weaken the jet-like nature of the Kuroshio 
Current. Hermann et al. evaluated 1995–2005 model temperatures and salinities against analogous values from 
the M2 mooring on the Bering shelf, and Foreman et al. assessed the accuracy of GCM and RCM winds 
against observations from buoys off the British Columbia coast.  Yu et al. examined the importance of directly 
including tides in global model simulations (as opposed to parameterizing their effects) while Ustinova 
examined potential limitations on statistical downscaling in the Western Pacific and its marginal seas, largely 
due to a decline in the Russian terrestrial observational network.  Finally, Temnykh et al. presented results on 
phytoplankton studies in the Black Sea, and the potential impact of climatic changes to the prevailing winds. 
 
 
Session A1:  What techniques were presented for estimating and communicating uncertainty in 
forecasts? 
 
Allen devoted a substantial portion of his presentation to ways of estimating model uncertainties, suggesting an 
approach analogous to that developed by Hawkins and Sutton (2009) for global mean temperature that could 
be appropriate to marine ecosystem applications.  He decomposed uncertainty into three contributions: 
parameter uncertainty, structural uncertainty, and scenario uncertainty.  The first one can be addressed by a 
series of sensitivity tests that alter parameter values through a reasonable range. The second refers the specific 
nature of the model, particularly the biogeochemical component.  It could be explored, for example, by 
coupling biological models with differing complexity to the same physical model and examining the range and 
accuracy of the results.  In the context of climate projections, the third refers to uncertainties in greenhouse gas 
emissions and can only be addressed by computing ensembles that cover a range of plausible states.  
 
 
Session A1:  What strategies were evaluated regarding research and management under climate 
change scenarios? 
 
Management strategies were not discussed in this session.  However, each of the preceding three topics had 
components that are relevant to research strategies.  Though not a primary focus of discussion, important 
issues are model complexity and resolution.  Underlying both is an ongoing need to enhance computing 
resources so that both higher resolution and larger ensemble runs are feasible. 
  
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   25 
 
 
 
Session A2:  Species-specific responses:  Changes in growth, reproductive 
success, mortality, spatial distribution, and adaptation 
Co-Convenors  
Richard Beamish (Pacific Biological Station, DFO, Canada)  
Myron A. Peck (Center for Marine and Climate Research, University of Hamburg, Germany)  
Motomitsu Takahashi (Seikai National Fisheries Research Institute, FRA, Japan) 
 
 
Introduction 
 
This theme session focused on climate-driven community-, species- and/or population-level changes in 
commercially and ecologically important marine fish and invertebrates.  Presentations documented climate-
driven changes in vital rates (e.g., changes in growth, reproductive success and mortality) as well as 
expansions, contractions and/or shifts in the distribution of fish stocks resulting from changes in suitable 
habitats (habitats allowing life cycle closure and successful recruitment).  The session also attempted to attract 
presentations on the capacity for individual species (or populations) to adapt to changes in important abiotic 
and biotic factors either through changes in the phenology of important life history events (e.g., migration, 
spawning) and/or physiological changes (e.g., temperature tolerance or thermal reaction norms of key traits 
such as growth). 
 
 
Session A2 Summary 
 
This theme session provided a forum for 68 presentations, 28 oral presentations (2 invited) and 40 posters 
focusing on the response of key fish and fisheries species worldwide to climate change. Presentations 
documented historical, often long-term fluctuations in abundance and distribution, discussed processes 
underlying current changes, and/or projected future impacts in light of adaptive capacity using a variety of 
approaches.  The research utilized a variety of methodological approaches.  Most studies included topics such 
as observed and/or projected changes in the distribution and/or productivity.  A rough estimate indicated that 
17 separate species were examined while another 8 presentations were inter-specific/community-level 
investigations.  One study examined sources of variability in models designed to project changes in the 
distribution of marine species. The session was well attended but discussion was limited since the full amount 
of time was often utilized by speakers. 
 
Presentations could be separated into a number of general categories including (1) correlative studies 
employing time series analysis, (2) mechanistic/physiological studies of the impacts of climate-driven abiotic 
and biotic factors on key life stages of key species, (3) community-level analyses exploring climate driven 
changes in species assemblages, particularly spatial distributions, (4) process-oriented research identifying 
climate impacts on critical life stages, and (5) various types of modeling studies, and (6) methodological 
examples. The latter category summarized a wide-array of different approaches.  The presentations are briefly 
summarized using those five categories.  
 
 
 
 
  
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
26  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
1. Correlative studies 
Time series of changes in productivity and/or distribution were presented for a wide range of species-types 
(small pelagics, large pelagics, demersals, anadromous/catadromous) within a large geographic region of the 
world’s marine habitats (essentially a global coverage when the 30+ posters were also considered including 
deep pelagic environments to shallow coastal areas) (Fig. 4).  For some species in some areas, relatively long 
time series (30+ years) exist from either catch or survey data (Fig. 5).  The importance of these time series to 
understanding potential climate impacts cannot be over-emphasized.  For a retrospective understanding 
climate-driven changes, particularly to disentangle the effects of climate from exploitation, longer time series 
(100s of years) reveal an increasing trend with decadal variation patterns.  Examples of long time series 
include yellowtail (Seriola quniqueradiata) in the Japan Sea
2
 from 1894 to 2000 and a 100-yr time series of 
changes in commercial landings of different species. Distributional changes in large pelagic species such as 
blue marlin (Makaira nigricans), yellowfin tuna (Thunnus albacares), bluefin tuna (Thunnus thynnus) were 
explored in relation to projected changes in SST derived from modeling activities. Demersal species examined 
included gadiforms such as saffron cod (Eleginus gracilis), Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) and flatfish species 
such as Pacific halibut (Hippoglossus stenolepis; Valero et al.).  In session A2, very few studies discussed 
climate-driven changes in coastal species.  An exception was research on black rockfish (Sebastes inermis) 
within seagrass beds throughout Japanese waters and two presentations on salmonids such as Hokkaido chum 
salmon (Oncorhyncus keta) and Fraser River sockeye salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka) (Martins et al.; Martins et 
al., 2011), and Seo et al.; Seo et al., 2011).  Naturally, salmonid presentations were made and thoroughly 
discussed in workshop W4. 
 
 
 
Fig. 4 Overview of species list and geographical areas covered by oral and poster presentations in session A2. 
 
                                                           
2
 Geographical names, as described by the authors in their presentations, are retained in their original form in the session 
and workshop summaries. 
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   27 
 
Fig. 5 Sole (Solea solea) catch per unit effort in the North Sea in each of nine time periods between 1920s and 2000s 
(from Pinnegar et al., session A2; Engelhard et al., 2011).  In the 1920s, the species had a very inshore distribution in 
southwest in 1930s–1960s and then shifted/expanded more offshore and more northeastward (especially the German 
Bight) while in the 1980s–2000s the species contracted away from the northeast and was, once again, more inshore but 
more limited to southwest. 
 
 
Traditionally, small pelagic species are excellent bio-indicators of climate change on regional and basin scales. 
Within this theme session, presentations examined a variety of different small pelagic species including 
common squid (Todarodes pacificus) in Japanese waters, sprat (Sprattus sprattus) and herring (Clupea 
harengus) in the Baltic Sea (Voss et al.; Voss et al., 2011) and Casini et al. (presented by Bartolino; Casini et 
al., 2010) and some interesting comparative analyses of responses of species of anchovy and sardine in the 
eastern and western Pacific (Takasuka et al.).  Efforts to estimate the environmental factors that impact the 
distribution of various species were presented.  This included work on Pacific hake (Merluccius productus) 
(Haltuch et al.) that employed statistical approaches to assess historical distributions using environmental 
covariates.  The ability to make robust projections of future distribution (e.g., using short-term ocean forecasts) 
would greatly improve survey designs as well as spatial management of stocks.  
 
2. Mechanistic/physiological impacts  
Quantitative evidence linking physiological responses to ecosystem change in various climate scenarios is 
scarce.  Patterns identified in long-term field data or via macrophysiology and meta-analyses using various 
statistical tools are not sufficient to understand climate effects because the fundamental, underlying physical 
mechanisms are lacking.  One of the keynote speakers (Pörtner; Pörtner, 2010) discussed the physiological 
underpinnings that define tolerable marine habitats in fish and invertebrates.  Cellular-level changes in 
metabolic scope via changes in oxygen and capacity-limited thermal tolerance are shown in Figure 6.  This 
presentation also highlighted changes in ocean pH and the need to examine interactive effects of multiple 
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
28  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
stressors on vital rates.  A second presentation (Kjesbu et al.) focused on the reproductive biology of cod 
(Gadus morhua) and potential impacts of changes in water temperature on maturation in small versus large 
cod, their spawning windows and the potential match–mismatch dynamics (consequences) for early larvae 
assuming consistent phenology of zooplankton production.  Another presentation (Kawaguchi et al.) discussed 
first results of laboratory studies exploring the effects of increased pCO
2
 on early life stages of Antarctic krill, 
a species that normally experiences high, sub-surface levels of pCO
2
 as they perform ontogenetic vertical 
migration.  Naturally, a number of presentations included information on climate-driven changes in growth 
physiology of key life stages of species such as plaice (Pleuronectes platessa) in the North Sea (Rijnsdorp et 
al. (presented by van Hal; Englehard et al., 2011).  A variety of poster presentations examined thermal 
physiology of specific species from the effects of acclimation to different temperatures on growth in coral reef 
fish (Donelson et al.; Donelson et al., 2011) and swimming performance in 24 species of fish in coastal 
Japanese waters (Itoh et al.) to behavioural responses to increases in water temperature (Miura et al.).  
 
 
Fig. 6  Oxygen and capacity limited thermal tolerance (from Pörtner and Farrell, 2008) as presented by Pörtner.  The 
synergistic effects of multiple factors reduce the scope for aerobic performance and limit the tolerable range in 
temperatures.  Capacity limits occur at low temperatures while oxygen (aerobic) limits occur at high temperatures as 
indicated by the onset of anaerobiosis. 
 
 
One aspect of this session that was not adequately covered by presentations (or by many ongoing studies 
attempting to project climate impacts) was the adaptive capacity of species to environmental change.  A 
laboratory study examining the effects of ocean acidification (CO
2
 1000 ppm, pH 7.8) on Pacific oysters 
(Crassostrea gigas) indicated clear differences in the responses among three genetically distinct populations 
(Kurihara et al.).  One presentation (Martins et al.; Martins et al., 2011) revealed site-specific/sub-stock 
differences in thermal tolerance for adult Fraser River sockeye salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka) returning to 
spawning grounds.  However, adaptive capacity of sub-stocks was not discussed. Clearly, reviews of the 
adaptive capacity (heritability estimates and genetic correlations of traits) exist for various fish and shellfish 
species, particularly salmonids such as O. mykiss and Salmo salar (e.g., Carlson and Seamons, 2008; Waples 
and Hendry, 2008) due in part to intensive hatchery production efforts. Future (high priority) research needs 
include additional studies examining adaptive capacity. 
 
3. Community-level analyses  
Disentangling the effects of fishing and climate was a topic specifically addressed within a few presentations 
dealing with species assemblages.  In one case, estimates of stock sizes of Lusitanian and Boreal species were 
examined during contrasting periods of fishing pressure and mean temperature in the North Sea (Hofstede and 
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   29 
Rijinsdorp; Hofstede and Rijnsdorp, 2011).  An extremely thorough analysis was presented of the 
distributional changes along the east coast of the United States between the mid-Atlantic Bight and Georges 
Bank from onshore to offshore (to greater depths) among 36 fish stocks and 6 invertebrate species (Nye et al.; 
Nye et al., 2009, Fig. 7).  That presentation mirrors the findings in other shelf areas such as the North Sea and 
in many other Large Marine Ecosystems (LMEs) presented in other sessions at this conference.  In the case of 
the mid-Atlantic Bight, changes in distribution appear decoupled from fishing effects (Hare et al., 2010). 
 
 
 
Fig. 7  Changes in the distribution of silver hake along the Atlantic coast of the USA between 1968–1972 and 2003–
2008 along with the stock ID.  From Nye et al. (2009), presented by Nye. 
 
 
4. Process-oriented research  
There exists an impressive amount of process knowledge regarding historical recruitment dynamics in some 
well-studied fish stocks.  Temporal changes in recruitment dynamics of four herring grounds within the 
California Current and Gulf of Alaska were compared with regard to differences in the importance of 
trophodynamics (top-down and bottom-up) processes (Pinnegar et al., see Figure 9).  The importance of 
trophodynamic control with regard to recruitment dynamics was also highlighted in the Baltic Sea in 
bioeconomic scenarios of sprat recruitment depending upon strengths of the Baltic cod stock (Casini et al., 
presented by Bartolino).  One study highlighted density-dependent changes in growth, maturity and 
distribution in Pacific halibut (Valero et al.).  The interactive roles of hydrographic and trophodynamic (prey 
and predator) processes were described in a few presentations (Tian et al., Abecassis et al., Schweigert et al., 
Fig. 8).  Some “basic” research was presented within posters dealing with environmental factors and their 
influence on behaviour. 
 
5. Modeling studies  
Although modeling was the direct topic of other sessions, some presentations in session A2 included modeling 
activities. A bio-envelop modeling approach examined changes in endemic species in the Mediterranean Sea 
(Ben Rais Lasram et al.; Ben Rais Lasram et al., 2010).  This topic was re-visited by one of the keynote 
speakers, Pinnegar et al. (Fig. 9) discussing community-level changes in the North Sea and globally (Fig. 5). 
That presentation summarized the recent modeling exercise examining >200 marine fish species by Cheung et 
al. (2009). A number of studies also attempted to “disentangle” the effects of climate and fishing on specific 
stocks. This included one presentation exploring the influence of fishing-induced juvenescence using a Leslie 
matrix approach Hidalgo et al. (Hidalgo et al., 2012). Another study evaluated the bio-economic consequences 
of climate-driven changes and interactions among species in the Baltic Sea based upon stage-specific process 
knowledge on the impacts of temperature on survival and recruitment potential (Voss et al.).  An evaluation of 
the impacts of strong (90%) reductions in the population of European eel on genetic estimates of effective 
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
30  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
population size was provided along with scenarios of reproductive dynamics in the Sargasso Sea required to 
obtain the genetic patterns observed in nursery areas around European waters (Pujolar et al.).  Another talk 
showed model-based temporal changes in eight herring stocks due to changes in zooplankton dynamics 
predicted from the coupled NEMURO-FISH model between 1948–2002 (Megrey et al.). 
 
 
Fig. 8 Estimates of the biomass of Pacific herring consumed by 13 different piscivorous fish and marine mammals 
presented by Schweigert et al. (Schweigert et al., 2010).  The figure illustrates the intense, temporally variable predation 
pressure experienced by that species and is used as an example of the importance of examining multiple processes in light 
of climate driven changes in systems and impacts on key species. 
 
 
 
Fig. 9 Estimates of the current distribution (left) and projected, 50-year future distribution of Atlantic cod (Gadus 
morhua) in the North Sea and greater European shelf based upon bioclimate modeling.  This work was based on Cheung et 
al. (2009) and presented by Pinnegar et al. 
 
  
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   31 
6. Methodological-based studies  
 
A number of poster presentations discussed advances in methodologies that are particularly useful in 
identifying climate responses in fish.  Examples include morphological and chemical analyses of otoliths 
(Chang and Geffen; Wilson et al.) as tools to investigate historical changes in growth and/or distribution 
(Geffen et al., 2011).  A variety of different biochemical techniques were utilized, including DNA 
fingerprinting as part of an assessment of historical changes in 12 regional stocks of Chinook salmon 
(Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) (Tucker et al.).  Lipid and fatty acid analyses were used as part of a study 
examining seasonal energy partitioning in an Arctic stichaeid species (Murzina et al.; Murzina et al., 2012). In 
terms of analyses of the physical environment, a few presentations examined variability in hydrographic 
properties such as mesoscale features (e.g., as eddies or fronts (Attwood et al., Rodríguez-Sánchez et al.)) or 
water currents (Kim and Kim) and sub-surface thermal structure (Twata et al., Takano et al.).  Variability in 
these hydrographic features was then correlated with changes in the distribution, abundance or transport 
dynamics of key species.  
 
 
Session A2:  What advances on frameworks and methodologies for forecasting climate change 
impacts were presented/discussed? 
 
The summary presented above discusses a number of advances on frameworks and methodologies.  One 
highlight from this “retrospective” session was the renewed investigations into physiological concepts that 
challenge current researchers to seek mechanistic explanations and perform measurements to gain cause-and-
effect understanding of how climate change impacts the distribution and productivity of fisheries resources.  A 
renewed emphasis on physiology is based, in part, on efforts to project climate change impacts on key species 
(or groups of species) using first principles. 
 
 
Session A2:  What techniques were presented for estimating and communicating uncertainty in 
forecasts? 
 
One presentation examined the sources of error including the initial collection of data (from sampling bias due 
to design attributes of field surveys) to underlying assumptions and the parameterization of models providing 
projections (Planque et al.; Planque et al. 2011).  A schematic was used to highlight the various sources of 
uncertainty (Fig. 10) A total of 1137 articles were reviewed and 75 published studies were evaluated which 
developed models that are (or could be) used in a predictive fashion.  Of these studies, < 25% explicitly treated 
uncertainty within observations, most elements of their conceptual model and their choice of numerical model. 
Most (≥70%) included uncertainty in the environment and numerical model parameter estimates while none 
(0%) attempted to assess the role of adaptation.  
 
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
32  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
 
Fig. 10  Various sources of uncertainty within models used to project climate impacts on marine species as presented by 
Planque et al. (also see Planque et al., 2011). 
 
 
Session A2:  What strategies were evaluated regarding research and management under climate 
change scenarios?  
 
The vast majority of presentations in session A2 focused on retrospective analysis but many also contained 
projections (e.g., what if scenarios based upon changes in water temperature predicted by GCMs).  
Management was not a focus of the session. 
 
 
Session A2 Recommendations 
 
There are at least three, quite broad recommendations for advancing research that attempts to project climate 
impact on fish and fisheries.  Although these recommendations are based upon session A2 presentations, they 
likely echo research themes stressed in other sessions. Specific recommendations include the following. 
 
 
1. The need for physiological measurements and conceptual framework 
Physiological measurements of key life stages of all target marine fish species and laboratory experiments 
should examine the effects of multiple factors on growth bioenergetics (rates of energy losses and gains).  For 
example, there is an urgent need to explore interactive effects (temperature × salinity × O
2
) on survival and 
growth performance in a variety of fish and invertebrates and to gain more data on growth physiology (e.g., 
bioenergetics) of all life stages.  This will not only help in the short term for statistical downscaling, but also in 
the long-term to build physiologically-based models that can make use of dynamically downscaled forcing 
data. 
 
2. Continued research using relatively long time series data 
Time series measurements must be continued and knowledge gained on the key climate-driven processes 
explaining trends.  The continued development of longer time series (hundreds of years) from novel sources 
must be a high priority. Examples would include proxies for the abundance of species such as preserved scales 
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   33 
within sediments.  This will be particularly important to gauge the magnitude of natural variability (abundance, 
distribution) of marine fish and shellfish resources in light of their relatively recent responses to multiple 
anthropogenic stressors (climate, eutrophication, pollution, etc.). 
 
3. Using process studies to disentangle multiple anthropogenic and natural drivers 
Continued emphasis should be placed on identifying (and/or comparing) the drivers of recruitment variability 
between and within species.  Analyses within a species (among stocks) can reveal broad, climate-related 
patterns in productivity (e.g., Dutil and Brander, 2003) that would otherwise be elusive.  Furthermore, 
continued process-oriented investigations are necessary to reveal how various abiotic (temperature, pH) and 
biotic (trophodynamics) factors interact with fishing pressure to make populations most susceptible to climate-
driven changes.  In terms of understanding recruitment drivers, “non-stationarity” was repeatedly discussed as 
an important point to consider in understanding historical and current recruitment drivers.  Such information 
should help identify how various factors contribute to changes in the productivity and distribution of marine 
fish observed in the last two to three decades (e.g., Rose, 2005; Rijnsdorp et al., 2009) and to make more 
robust projections of future changes. 
  
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
34  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
 
 
 
Session B1:  Assessing ecosystem responses:  Impacts on community structure, 
biodiversity, energy flow and carrying capacity 
Co-Convenors  
Thomas A. Okey (University of Victoria/West Coast Aquatic/Pew Fellow in Marine Conservation, Canada)  
Akihiko Yatsu (Seikai National Fisheries Research Institute, FRA, Japan) 
 
 
Introduction 
 
This session called for retrospective analyses of changes in freshwater, coastal, and offshore ecosystems and 
communities, experimental studies on species interactions under climate-change-related conditions, and 
conceptual and numerical modeling of ecosystems relevant to climate change with an eye toward the 
development of forecasting approaches.  Convening of this session was viewed as needed because (1) future 
changes in physical forcing in the oceans (e.g., temperature, pH, dissolved oxygen) will exceed historically 
observed values, (2) biological responses or adaptations to these changes are highly uncertain, particularly over 
a long time period, and (3) changes in geographic ranges, vertical distributions, phenologies, population 
structures, and productivities will differ among individual species thereby altering the connectivities and 
functions of ecosystem components, including predator–prey relationships and competition, species assembly, 
community structure, biodiversity, energy flow, and carrying capacity.  These changes are expected to affect 
available food for humans, other ecosystem services, and ecosystem and earth system functioning.  
 
This session received the greatest number of submissions of the symposium (56) due to its scope relating to 
ecosystem responses.  Twenty-seven oral presentations, including two invited keynote addresses, were selected 
from this pool for this 9.5 hour-long session.  Fifteen poster presentations were also selected and presented 
under this session theme. Eight of the 27 oral presentations contributed advancements of frameworks or 
methodologies for assessing ecosystem responses; almost all contributions included results from case studies; 
five of the presentations presented techniques for estimating and communicating uncertainty in forecasts; and 
only one or very few suggested any strategies for research and management under climate change scenarios. 
 
 
Session B1:  What advances on frameworks and methodologies for forecasting climate change 
impacts were presented/discussed? 
 
Eight contributions in this session presented advances to frameworks and methodologies for assessing 
ecosystem responses.  Although these advances represent only a small subset of approaches available globally, 
they provide real progress toward forecasting capabilities. 
 
• As the first keynote address, Polovina et al. examined “Possible trends in North Pacific ecosystems over 
the 21st century based on output from a coupled climate, biogeochemical, and phytoplankton model in 
which they examined changes in “dynamic biomes” using NOAA’s GFDL model, which includes tracers 
of phytoplankton with allometric zooplankton (Polovina et al., 2011).   
• Sumata et al. presented “Effects of climate forcing on the North Pacific Ocean ecosystem simulated using 
an eddy permitting marine ecosystem model” in which iron limitation was included in the NEMURO 
model, and this provided reasonably good reproduction of chlorophyll spatial distributions (Sumata et al., 
2010).  
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   35 
• Hirata et al. showed their work on the “Global distribution of phytoplankton functional types estimated 
from satellite ocean colour” in which a new operational technique was developed to estimate PFT 
(phytoplankton functional types) from satellite ocean colour (chlorophyll data).  
• Fulton, for the session’s second keynote address, presented applications of end-to-end ecosystem models 
(e.g., Atlantis models) to multiple marine ecosystems around the world (Fulton, 2011).   
• Howell et al. introduced work on “Modeling the central North Pacific ecosystem response to predicted 
climate variations and fishery management scenarios” in which Ecopath with Ecosim simulations were 
forced with the output of the GFDL Earth System Model and fishing projections for 21st century (Howell 
et al., 2012).  This was a one-way model in which phytoplankton primary productivity affects higher 
trophic levels, but for which there is no effect of predation on phytoplankton. 
• Cheung et al. (presented by Okey) reviewed work on “Projecting future changes in pelagic nekton 
communities along the west coast of North America” for which they downscaled and applied his global 
bioclimatic envelope model for estimation of future distributions of Northeastern Pacific fishes according 
to biological traits and preferred habitat, driven by the GFDL Earth System Model and calibrated using 
existing trawl data from Northeast Pacific pelagic salmon trawl surveys (Cheung et al., 2011).    
• Munday et al. discussed the effects of ocean acidification on reef fish populations in which they conducted 
a variety of field experiments to evaluate acidification effects (Munday et al., 2010). 
• Graham et al. used a refined approach to estimating “Extinction vulnerability of coral reef fishes in 
response to climate change and fisheries exploitation” in which they plotted a suite of reef fishes based on 
climate vulnerability and extinction risk, as well as climate vulnerability versus fishing vulnerability.   
 
 
Session B1:  What results were presented from designated case studies (to test methods)?  
 
As mentioned previously, almost all of the 27 oral contributions included results from case studies, but 
discussion of results in the text below are limited to the eight that contributed advancements in frameworks or 
methodologies.  Results presented from the rest of the presentations are shown in Table 1. 
 
• Polovina et al. found that the subtropical biome (poorest production area) in the Pacific Ocean is 
expanding, and that examination of boundary areas between these and more productive areas provided 
important insights into how Pacific ecosystems are changing.    
• Sumata et al. provided reasonably good reproduction of spatial distribution of chlorophyll with their 
advanced methods.  
• Hirata et al. found that the production of large phytoplankton may have decreased (and small 
phytoplankton may have increased) over the period 1998–2007. 
• Fulton summarized that maximum sustainable yield (MSY) is projected to decrease considerably in a 
multi-species context. She also concluded that there will be a skewed response, i.e., small pelagic fishes, 
squids and jellies do well, while benthos, demersal fishes and top predators will be reduced. 
• Howell et al. forecasted that the biomass of Hawaiian commercial target species (e.g., tunas, billfishes) 
will decrease, while the biomass of currently incidental species (e.g., snake mackerel, mahi mahi, etc.) will 
increase.  The GFDL model scenarios indicated an ~18% drop in phytoplankton in HLFG (Hawaii 
Longline Fishing Grounds) during the 21st century, thus resulting in projected species declines due to 
bottom-up forcing.  The simulations indicated that climate effects could be compounded by top-down 
fishing pressure, and vice versa.  This results in lower projected target species biomass and lower ratios of 
target to incidental species.   
• Cheung et al. showed a downscaled global model for forecasting poleward shifts in Northeastern Pacific 
fish populations with implications for species invasions and re-assembly as estimated by species richness. 
• Munday et al. found that mortality of a pomacentrid fish increased after exposure to 750 ppm CO
2
, which 
was identified as a critical threshold, due to altered smell ability and behavior. 
• Graham et al. produced results indicating that both climate change and fishing affect fish communities by 
removing the most vulnerable species on the extremes such that a generalist subset of species would be 
somewhat resistant to both. 
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
36  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Table 1 Results from case studies presented from work that did not include conspicuous advancements of frameworks or 
methodologies for assessing ecosystem responses. 
Authors Title Results from designated case studies 
Napp et al. The response of eastern Bering Sea 
zooplankton communities to climate 
fluctuations: Community structure, 
biodiversity, and energy flow to higher 
trophic levels  
Zooplankton community (and pollock recruitment) changed 
concurrent with changes in sea ice and temperature; diversity 
increased from warm to cold period; Calanus and euphausiids 
favored in cold period; pteropods, larvacea, Eucalanus more 
abundant in warm period. 
Hsieh et al. (Hseih 
et al., 2011) 
Larval fish assemblages in the waters around 
Taiwan, western North Pacific: A 
comparison between, during and after the 
northeasterly monsoon  
The distribution patterns of larval fish assemblages were 
likely influenced by hydrographic conditions due to alternate 
intrusions of the China Coastal Current and Kuroshio Branch 
Current and availability of food. 
Aseeva and 
Figurkin 
 
Changes of bottom ichthyocenosis structure 
on the shelf of west Kamchatka under 
changing environments in the last two 
decades  
There were changes and shifts in species composition and 
distribution of mass fish species in the last 2 decades, 
possibly due to water temperature changes and their possible 
influence on the bottom communities. 
Asch and 
Checkley, Jr. 
Climate change leads to earlier seasonal 
occurrence of larval fishes in the southern 
California Current  
Approximately 40% of species are spawning earlier and 20% 
later;  species that use offshore habitats and spawn in spring 
and summer tend to display earlier phenology;  species with 
earlier phenology track SST, but not upwelling and 
zooplankton.  This could lead to mismatches. 
Sydeman et al. 
(Black et al., 
2010) 
Ocean climate change and phenology: 
Effects on trophic synchrony and 
consequences to fish and seabirds in the 
northern-central California Current  
Murres are coming earlier, upwelling is intensifying and 
happening later, and these are related.  Spatial mismatch is 
likely for birds and krill. 
Nishihara and 
Terada(Nishihara 
and Terada,2010) 
A preliminary study of the effects of a wave 
exposure gradient on the species richness of 
marine macrophytes along the eastern rim of 
the East China Sea  
Maximum species richness declines with wave exposure; 
increased storminess in the East China Sea Region may 
increase algal diversity in 50% of the regions. 
Jung et al. Climate-driven shifts in marine fish 
communities indicated by commercial catch 
statistics from Korean coastal waters  
Coincidence with the regime shifts and correlation analysis 
alone do not say so much about processes and mechanisms in 
climate-related studies. 
Saito et al. Understanding and forecasting of fish species 
alternation in the Kuroshio-Oyashio 
ecosystem: The SUPRFISH programme  
Fish species alternation has implications in social and 
economical science. 
Stephen 
 
Decline in mackerel fishery along west coast 
of India and its relation to the diminishing 
density of an abundant upwelling copepod:  
A multi-decadal study  
Mackerel have declined, possibly due to a lower abundance 
of copepods. 
Ahirrao 
 
Effect of climate change on fish and fisheries 
of Marathwada region of Maharashtra state 
(India)  
Global generalities were discussed. 
Simpson et al. 
(Simpson et al., 
2011) 
Long-term climate-driven changes in UK 
marine fish communities  
 
Water temperature increases and range shifts; there is 
increased species richness, and other community and 
phenological changes; there are winners and losers. 
Hofstede et al. 
(Hofstede et al., 
2010) 
Global warming changes the species richness 
of marine fish in the eastern North Atlantic 
Ocean  
Regional warming, with change in species richness related to 
biogeography – no relation to fisheries. 
Reygondeau et al. 
(Reygondeau et 
al., 2011) 
Changes in the environmental factors 
controlling the global biogeography of tuna 
and billfish communities  
 
Top predators match the provinces of Longhurst; global 
climate change affects the spatial change of the 
environmental structure of the ecoregion, the spatial shift of 
communities, the reorganisation of species composition and 
inter-specific relationships.           
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   37 
Authors Title Results from designated case studies 
Stock and Dunne 
(Stock and Dunne, 
2010) 
Modeling global patterns in the transfer of 
energy between primary producers and 
mesozooplankton in a global circulation 
model  
Mesozooplankton production is generally ~1–20% of primary 
production;  Z-ratio trends from 1–3% in center of sub-
tropical gyres to 10–20% in highly productive ecosystems.  
This trend implies that the mesozooplankton response to a 
change in primary production is “amplified”. 
Rykaczewski and 
Dunne 
(Rykaczewski and 
Dunne, 2010) 
Comparison of the ecosystem response to 
climate change in the mid-latitude North 
Pacific and California Current ecosystems  
Upwelling, nitrate, primary and secondary production in the 
California Current will increase in the 21st century according 
to a GCM model, while oxygen and pH will decrease.  The 
mechanism from climate to fishes would change. 
Wilson et al. Ecology of small neritic fishes in the western 
Gulf of Alaska: Top-down mechanisms can 
moderate bottom-up forcing  
An increase in abundance of small krill resulted in an increase 
in predator per capita consumption of krill (observation). 
Won et al. 
(Won et al., 2011) 
Comparison of benthic community structure 
in natural habitats of abalone Haliotis discus 
hannai affected by different current systems  
Abalone habitat was compared in two places. 
 
 
 
Session B1:  What techniques were presented for estimating and communicating uncertainty in 
forecasts? 
 
• Fulton and Howell et al. presented somewhat large ranges of uncertainty in projected changes for the 
various functional groups in the ecosystem modeling examples they presented (Fulton, 2011; Howell et 
al., 2012). Howell et al. presented ranges of uncertainty in his results associated with different 
assumptions.  
• Saito et al. indicated inconsistency in the northern limit migration range between their model and 
observations. 
• Stock and Dunne provided a statement of large unexplained variation from mesozooplankton patchiness 
(Stock and Dunne, 2010).  Historical ocean-ice simulations are underway and may improve model fidelity. 
 
 
Session B1:  What strategies were evaluated regarding research and management under climate 
change scenarios? 
 
• Howell et al. recommended a decrease in fishing effort in HLFG to preserve the Target/Incidental ratio 
and decrease biomass reduction of target species. 
• Graham et al. recommended that conservation be focused on the least vulnerable species that provide the 
most functional support and integrity. 
• Saito et al. recommended reducing the fleet and fishing pressure. 
  
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
38  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
 
 
 
Session B2:  Comparing responses to climate variability among nearshore, shelf 
and oceanic regions  
Co-Convenors  
Jürgen Alheit (Leibniz Institute for Baltic Sea Research, Germany)  
Jae Bong Lee (National Fisheries Research and Development Institute, Korea)  
Vladimir Radchenko (Sakhalin Research Institute of Fisheries and Oceanography, Russia) 
 
 
Introduction 
 
The goal of this session was to (1) discuss the interactions, ramifications, and potential connections between 
climate variability and marine ecosystems and (2) demonstrate the impact of climate variability with a view of 
future climate change.  A total of 15 oral presentations were given.  The session suffered from the absence of 
several key speakers.  Four replacement talks selected on short notice from the posters were included. Most 
presentations were about retrospective studies and did not deal with forecasting and uncertainty aspects.  This 
might have been due to the theme of the session which, first, was on climate variability (not climate change) 
and which, second, required a comparison of responses of different ecosystems.  Including forecasting and 
uncertainty aspects under such a situation added to the complexity. 
 
 
Session B2  Summary of invited talks 
 
The first invited speaker (Svein Sundby) was unable to attend.  The second invited speaker, Nicholas Dulvy, 
focused on climate impact on Caribbean coral reefs and North Sea fishes.  He demonstrated that Caribbean 
coral reef cover is at an all time low and that the associated collapse in architectural complexity has led to 
severe habitat loss for coral reef fishes and recent declines in fish abundance.  Warming of the North Sea has 
affected fish distribution and has led to range extensions of southern species and range contractions of northern 
species within the North Sea.  Also, coherent depth changes in 27 North Sea fish species were observed which 
are highly consistent with climate variability and change. 
 
 
Questions 
 
For the reasons mentioned above, most presentations did not deal with the four key questions.  Consequently, 
this section does not contribute a great deal. 
 
  
Session B2:  What advances on frameworks and methodologies for forecasting climate change 
impacts were presented/discussed? 
 
Lee and Megrey (presented by Megrey) talked about the use of visual tools to reduce the dimensionality of 
high dimensional data sets. 
 
Okey et al. (presented by Samhouri) used Ecopath with Ecosim models to project the impacts of climate 
change on various indicators of ecosystem structure and function in different North Pacific ecosystems up to 
2060 (Okey et al., 2012). 
 
Alheit discussed the utility of using forecasts of climate oscillations for short-term forecast of fish population 
dynamics. 
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   39 
Session B2:  What results were presented from designated case studies (to test methods)? 
 
Lucey and Nye showed that temporal and spatial changes in species assemblages within the Northeast U.S. 
Large Marine Ecosystem occur due to a combination of fishing effects and climate.  Whereas fishing affected 
relative biomass and was more important at the beginning of the time series in the early 1960s, climatic factors 
have gained importance as fishing pressure has decreased and has been responsible for spatial shifts. 
 
Rodríguez-Sánchez et al. noted that climatic regime shifts have caused changing population sizes and 
geographical variations in the position of the centre of distribution and bulk of sardine and anchovy biomass in 
the California Current system.  This explains the alternation of sardine/anchovy dynamics and temporal 
disappearance of both species from the northern California Current. 
 
Poloczanska et al. presented preliminary results from their construction of a marine impacts database with 
respect to key questions concerning vulnerability of marine systems to climate change.  
 
Sugimoto and Niki examined a highly relevant long-term time series of sergestid shrimp catches starting at 
1900. They showed that shrimp dynamics seem to be synchronous to anchovy dynamics and are impacted by 
the meandering of the Kuroshio path. 
 
Regime shifts observed in different ecosystems were compared by Niiranen et al. with the aim to quantify 
marine regime shifts on a global scale and noted that changes in ecosystem state (regime shifts) affect the 
success of different management options.  Understanding the general mechanisms and feed-back loops behind 
regime shifts detected across different ecosystems will increase predictability of future shifts and facilitate 
their mitigation. 
 
Eisner et al. demonstrated that zooplankton community composition and diet analysis and energy density of 
eastern Bering Sea forage fish are related to climate variations (2002–2009).  A warming climate may decrease 
the abundance of large zooplankton and so be detrimental for forage fish. 
 
Peterson et al. (Zonal gradients in copepod community structure in shelf, slope and oceanic waters off Oregon, 
USA) found that composition of copepod fauna is determined by strength of upwelling (only on the shelf) and, 
particularly, by PDO phase (Keister et al., 2011).  During cool PDO phases, boreal coastal copepods are 
transported from the Gulf of Alaska into the Oregon region. During warm PDO phases, subtropical copepods 
are transported from offshore into the Oregon region. 
 
Ñiquen (co-authored with Peña) determined that the neritic Peruvian anchovy (Engraulis ringens) and the 
mesopelagic oceanic lanternfish (Vinciguerria lucetia) react in opposite ways to the same climate signal. 
Warm conditions enhance the lanternfish, whereas cold conditions favour the anchovy. 
 
Rogachev showed that the Oyashio and the Bering Sea are warming much faster than the global ocean, partly 
due to advection of warm submesoscale filaments from deeper waters invading the coastal realm.  This will 
severely restrict the area of distribution and migration routes of chum salmon (Oncorhynchus keta). 
 
Kidokoro et al. noted that the Japanese common squid (Todarodes pacificus) population in the Kuroshio 
current decreased around 1970 and recovered again in the late 1980s, in synchrony with SST, whereas the 
squid population in the Sea of Japan decreased around the mid-1970s, but also increased in the late 1980s 
(Kidokoro et al., 2010). 
 
Rothschild stated the necessity of studying the coupling and decoupling among fish stock dynamics, fishing 
and ocean environment to better understand environmental effects and also potential, or lack of potential, for 
rebuilding stocks. 
 
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
40  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Lee and Megrey (presented by Megrey) used self-organizing maps (SOMs) and k-means clustering to provide 
a highly visual tool to easily identify patterns in the timing of high or low productivity years across both 
species and ecosystems by reducing the dimensionality of high dimension data sets.  Results suggest that 
productivity in the compared Atlantic and Pacific areas were synchronous within basins but alternating 
between basins indicating common, probably climatically induced, external factors. 
 
Alheit showed that population size of small pelagic fish species in waters surrounding Europe has swung in 
association with the dynamics of oscillating climate indices, in particular the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) 
and the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO) indices.  However, forecasting the dynamics of both 
oscillations is impossible at present.  Consequently, forecasting dynamics of small pelagic fish populations for 
the next 5–10 years based on NAO or AMO, as desired by fisheries managers, does not seem very feasible. 
 
Using Ecopath and Ecosim models, Okey et al. (presented by Samhouri) studied the impacts of climate change 
on various indicators of ecosystem structure and function in different North Pacific ecosystems up to 2060. 
They found that climate change impacts are not identical in different ecosystems and across species, but 
produce winners and losers, and species interactions play an important role in impacts.  Consequently, viewing 
climate change impacts in isolation might be misleading. 
 
 
Session B2:  What techniques were presented for estimating and communicating uncertainty in 
forecasts? 
 
No contributions. 
 
 
Session B2:  What strategies were evaluated regarding research and management under climate 
change scenarios? 
 
Niiranen et al. noted that changes in ecosystem state (regime shifts) affect the success of different management 
options.  Understanding the general mechanisms and feed-back loops behind regime shifts detected across 
different ecosystems will increase predictability of future shifts and facilitate their mitigation. 
 
Lee and Megrey used comparative analysis and macro-ecological approaches. 
 
 
Session B2 Recommendations 
 
Whereas many contributions of the symposium focused on forecasting dynamics of fish populations for the 
next several decades, relatively few presentations covered climate forecasts for the next 3, 5 or 10 years, the 
time-frame fisheries and ecosystem managers are most interested in.  According to the presentation by Alheit, 
it is impossible to make these kinds of forecasts, at least for the North Atlantic.  
  
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   41 
 
 
 
Session C1:  Impacts on fisheries and coastal communities 
Co-Convenors  
Edward Allison (Policy, Economics and Social Science, Worldfish Center, Malaysia)  
Keith Brander (Technical University of Denmark, National Institute of Aquatic Resources, Denmark)  
Suam Kim (Pukyong National University, Korea) 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Climate variability and change have had an impact on fisheries and coastal communities throughout history, 
due to environmentally driven fish stock fluctuations, changes in species distribution, extreme events and 
changes in sea-level.  The survival of coastal communities depended on being able to cope with such changes, 
by altering their fishing practices or switching to alternative livelihoods. In many cases communities did not 
survive or suffered economic hardship and emigration.  Although some adaptability can be expected in 
response to recent anthropogenic climate change, the new situation is different in a number of ways.  The 
expected rate of change is rapid and in one direction; most fisheries are now already under pressure from 
overfishing, habitat degradation and other sea and coastal uses and new pressures arise from ocean 
acidification.  This session focused on forecasts of expected impacts of climate change on the coastal fish 
stocks and the communities that depend on them as well as strategies for survival under a changing climate.  
 
Session C-1 consisted of 13 oral presentations and 11 poster presentations.  Keith Brander (National Institute 
of Aquatic Resources, Technical University of Denmark, Denmark) and Suam Kim (Pukyong National 
University, Korea) had served as co-convenors for developing the session theme, selecting oral/poster 
presentations, and identifying invited speakers as well as early career scientists to be invited.  Due to the 
absence of Dr. Brander at the Symposium, Edward Allison (The WorldFish Center, Penang, Malaysia) served 
as session co-chair with Dr. Kim for the session operation. 
 
 
Session C1:  What advances on frameworks and methodologies for forecasting climate change 
were presented/discussed? 
 
It is clear that the IPCC’s vulnerability analysis framework, articulated in the IPCC Third Assessment Report 
(2001), has become the dominant framework to analyse the vulnerability of fishery systems to climate change, 
and to link social and ecological components of such systems.  The framework accommodates the climate 
signal in the form of an “exposure” variable or composite indicator, and the potential for ecological, social and 
economic impact in the form of a sensitivity indicator.  Potential economic and social responses to projected 
change are captured in a measure of adaptive capacity.  While a few studies using this framework have 
emerged in fisheries in the last two years, and several on-going studies drawing on its ideas were presented in 
this session, many of the integrated systems and social studies remain at the conceptual or awareness-raising 
phase, and are not as well advanced empirically as the impressive body of work on the biophysical models and 
impacts relating to climate variability and change.  In session C-1, two invited speakers, Ian Perry (Perry et al., 
2010) and Tarub Bahri (presenting on behalf of Kevern Cochrane et al. (Cochrane et al., 2009), introduced the 
concept of coupled natural and social systems in fisheries in their papers on “Adapting marine social-
ecological systems to a world of change:  Lessons from the GLOBEC experience” and “Evolution in an 
instant: Adaptation and resilience to climate change in fisheries”, respectively.  Both presentations agreed that 
climate change is likely to be a powerful driver of change in fish stocks and communities.  
 
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
42  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Dr. Perry reviewed the components of coupled marine social–ecological systems, and identified major drivers 
of change with scale differences in natural and social systems.  Some examples on how environmental changes 
and the impacts of globalization in the past link to the marine social–ecological system were demonstrated. 
Due to the increased uncertainty in the future, however, the expected future climate changes might go beyond 
the ranges of past variability.  He emphasized that policy goals should be focused on sustaining healthy marine 
social–ecological systems that maintain desirable ecosystem services and the ability to support human 
livelihoods.  To establish the management and policy measures for adapting marine social–ecological systems 
to global change, holding trans-disciplinary workshops among relevant stakeholders in social science, industry, 
natural science, and management focus groups is necessary.  In order to achieve policy goals, he also 
suggested we develop and promote capabilities for observing, assessing, and adapting marine social–ecological 
systems to changes through strengthening of (1) observing systems, (2) coupled modeling, (3) indicators,  
(4) regional assessments, and (5) increased application of marine management tools such as Ecosystem-based 
Management, stock rebuilding strategies, and marine protected areas. 
 
Dr. Bahri divided her presentation into three parts: (1) some examples on climate change impacts in fisheries, 
(2) key features of the Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries (EAF), and (3) an assessment of how EAF could 
address climate change.  Climate change will add to vulnerabilities and hamper the sector’s ability to cope and 
contribute to social and economic development.  Resilience requires, above all, diversity (genetic and species), 
low stress from other factors, and healthy and productive populations.  Effective EAF (in ecological and 
human dimensions) should lead to resilient social–ecological systems because the EAF is a mechanism to 
attain sustainable development in fisheries/aquaculture – stressing holistic, integrated and participatory 
processes.  Its basic objectives are maintaining ecosystem integrity/ecological well-being, improving human 
well-being and equity, and promoting/enabling good governance using a precautionary approach, available 
knowledge, and adaptive management.  Some ways in which adaptation and mitigation options could be 
applied within an EAF context were suggested. 
 
  
Session C1:  What results were presented from designated case studies (to test methods)? 
 
Other oral presentations were mostly examples in fishery and marine ecosystem changes resulting from 
interannual environmental variability and some case studies in socio-ecological approaches to understand 
potential adaptive responses to these changes, from various geographical areas in the North Pacific, North 
Atlantic, and Indian Ocean: Saha (postlarval fishing in Bangladesh), Papaioannou et al. (GIS in the Baltic Sea; 
Papaioannou et al., 2012), M.A. Lee et al. (satellite observation on coldwater intrusion – Taiwan Strait; Chang 
et al., 2013), Geffen et al. (presented by Chang on fossil otoliths of Atlantic cod in Norway ), Krupnova et al. 
(macro-algae in Primorye, northwestern Pacific, Russia), Fauzi et al. (uncertainty issues in small-scale 
fisheries in Indonesia), J.H. Lee et al. (climate and ecological regime shift in Korean waters), Guzman et al. 
(sardines as climate proxy in Philippines), and Nguyen and Than (presented by Than on climate change 
impacts and adaptive capacity in Vietnam,). Andonegi et al. introduced the potential use of the Gadget model 
to predict stock response to climate change.  Due to the cancellation of the presentation by Coetzee et al., 
Lluch-Cota et al. (vulnerability and adaptation strategy in Baja California, Mexico) was a replacement. 
 
Papaioannou et al. examined past incidents in environmental changes in the Baltic Sea, and simulated the 
future state of the marine environment and fish distributions.  The landings, revenues, fishing areas of small-
scale coastal fisheries were changed by environmental variability such as a strong inflow event and regime 
shift.  Due to the lack of information, however, their economic projection on the cod fishery in 2050 did not 
provide a concrete conclusion on how the landings and revenues may change.  The spatial pattern of fishing 
vessels, movement of vessels, and mitigation measures of climate change impact on fisheries should be 
considered in policy and management formulation.  S. Kim et al. forecasted seawater temperature using the 
MPI model under climate change scenario SRES A1B, and anticipated the delay of peak fishing season from 
autumn to winter in the northwestern Pacific as ocean warming continues in the 21st century.  Also, the 
suitable spawning areas that were based on the optimal temperature range for larval survival will be expanded 
to the middle of the Japan/East Sea by 2050. 
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   43 
Several presentations demonstrated ecosystem responses to environmental variability.  M.-A. Lee et al. 
revealed that episodic intrusion of cold water into the southern Taiwan Strait damaged marine life forms and 
cage aquaculture in Taiwan.  Krupnova et al. also examined historic data on ocean environments and bottom 
macro-algae on the coast of Primorye (Japan/East Sea), and found a strong positive correlation between 
periods (in days) with optimum temperature range (8~15°C) in autumn and the number of Laminaria japonica 
in the next spring.  J.H. Lee et al. described the climate and ecological regime shifts in Korean waters, which 
showed shifts of fish species and ecosystem structures in 1976/1977, 1988/1989, and 1998/1999 in accordance 
with environmental variability in ocean surface waters.  In Philippines waters, the changes in sardine 
populations, which are very sensitive to climate change, were investigated.  There was an apparent asynchrony 
in seasonal sardine abundance in two bays, and Guzman et al. hypothesized this may be due to upwelling-
driven and river-driven variability, respectively.  
 
By examining the chemical composition in cod otoliths that were collected from archaeological sites in 
northern Norway, Geffen et al. could reconstruct the temperature regime experienced by fish.  Also, 
information on habitat environments, age and size, seasonality in life history, and stock separation for Atlantic 
cod that lived several hundred years ago could be achieved by otolith analysis. 
 
 
Session C1:  What techniques were presented for estimating and communicating uncertainty in 
forecasts? 
 
None of the presentations explicitly treated the techniques for estimating and communicating uncertainty in 
forecasts.  However, Fauzi et al. showed that fishing-dependent coastal communities on the north coast of Java 
(Indonesia) were challenged by uncertainties arising from climate variability and related socio-economic 
forces.  Fluctuations in fish catch have profound impacts on the livelihood of small-scale fishermen, leading to 
poverty and disruption of human well-being.  Therefore, coastal communities in Java have developed some 
adaptation strategies to cope with uncertainties, including fishing and non-fishing strategies.  This study shows 
that traditional fishers have ample knowledge and strategies to cope with negative impacts of climate change: 
temporal and seasonal migration, income diversification, developing work sharing, investing in social capital, 
and exploring non-fisheries resources. 
 
 
Session C1:  What strategies were evaluated regarding research and management under climate 
change scenarios? 
 
Saha showed that the indiscriminate fishing of prawn post-larvae in Bangladesh had serious impacts on 
biodiversity in coastal ecosystems.  Because climate change (i.e., salinity increase, temperature increase, 
habitat destruction, and storm surges) is closely related to fishing activity in this region, the impacts of climate 
change should be considered in fishery management.  He argued that community-based governance could 
allow for fishing activity without jeopardizing the marine ecosystem.  Government’s climate change adaptation 
policy would include the monitoring and supervision system, spatial and seasonal ban of fishing, providing 
alternative livelihoods, and plantation of mangrove trees to avoid negative consequences of climate change. 
 
Than (and co-author Nguyen) stated that the coastal communities in Vietnam were rarely considered in studies 
of climate variability and responses to climate change.  Despite the domination of centralized policies, many 
fisheries communities have established and exercised their own organizations and regulations to successfully 
manage coastal resources and cope with changes in the climate and political environment.  For example, the 
local community in Giao Xuan involved in aquaculture indicated a detailed list of activities in five resource 
areas (i.e., natural, physical, financial, social, and human resources) that were needed to build adaptive 
capacity to climate change.  Especially, they believed that local knowledge was useful for climate change 
adaptation and mitigation. 
 
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
44  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Lluch-Cota et al. informed that the fisheries on the west coast of Baja California, Mexico, can be regarded as a 
relatively well-managed ecosystem in terms of sustainability.  This area has shown high ecological 
productivity and persistence of key species.  Furthermore, other social and economic systems such as 
transparent decision making processes and high level of negotiation capacity assist in maintaining successful 
fisheries.  Coupled ecological and climate models, however, indicated that this ecosystem could be vulnerable 
to climate change in the future.  A menu of adaptation strategies organized as specific actions was proposed 
from catch to the market (productive chain). 
 
 
Session C1 Recommendations 
 
• To understand impacts of climate change on fisheries and coastal communities, it was suggested to have 
time series of environmental information, as well as biological collections such as otolith and scale 
deposition.  
• The potential use of a Gadget model was recommended to predict stock responses to climate change. 
Modeling practice may give us a clue to reduce uncertainty in forecasts. 
• As shown in Southeast Asian examples, examining adaptive strategies of fishing communities which have 
survived for a long period under changing environment may assist with future adaptation planning.  
• To target and implement adaptation and mitigation actions, vulnerabilities at household level need to be 
identified, livelihoods for income generation need to be diversified and environmentally friendly (e.g., low 
carbon) livelihood and development opportunities need to be selected. 
• Awareness of the “co-benefits” to both adaptation and mitigation that arise from biodiversity conservation 
and protection and restoration of mangroves and other coastal vegetation needs to be increased.  
• Coastal resources governance needs to be strengthened, to develop community-based disaster risk 
management needs to be developed, and climate change issues need to be integrated into local and national 
socio-economic development planning.  
 
These recommendations, with minor modification, can be applied to any fishery communities around the 
world. 
  
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   45 
 
 
 
Session C2:  Evaluating human responses, management strategies and economic 
implications 
Co-Convenors  
Tarub Bahri (Fishery Resources Division, FAO) 
Kevern Cochrane (Fishery Resources Division, FAO)  
Jake Rice (Ecosystem Science Directorate, DFO, Canada) 
 
 
This session focused on how society, at a range of scales from community to population, might adapt to the 
changes expected in the oceans, and in the goods and services on which they depend so that optimal benefits 
may be obtained and balance is attained between provision of food security and conservation of marine 
biodiversity.  There were 13 presentations and 7 posters. 
 
Two presentations gave an overview on the implications of climate change for food security, at global scale 
(Garcia et al. (presented by Rice); Rice and Garcia, 2011) and, at regional scale (Bell (invited); Bell et al., 
2013).  Human population growth appears to be a stronger driver than climate change when it comes to food 
security.  In this context, in historically overfished areas restoration of sustainable fisheries production is a 
priority.  However, it seems likely that production from capture fisheries will have to be augmented by 
aquaculture production to address food security needs at regional and global scales.  The impacts of climate 
change in terms of species diversity and of livelihoods of fishers were also described at local scale (Omitoyin 
et al.), recalling that climate change gives urgency to solve problems, as human nutritional requirements and 
community vulnerability are at stake. 
 
Three presentations illustrated the importance of taking into account local/traditional knowledge for the 
analysis of the impacts of climate change and thinking of possible solutions to adapt to it. Silvano et al. and 
Huntington et al., presenting work on Brazil and Alaska, documented that local/traditional knowledge of 
fishermen can be a source of long-term information on temporal occurrence and abundance of fish species, and 
that work to collect such information on climate change can also raise awareness among the fishermen 
themselves.  Pecl et al., presenting work done in Australia, showed that modern informatics technology can be 
used to collect this information. 
 
Four presentations showed how communities/fisheries have developed strategies to adapt (Shimizu et al. in 
Japan, Muhammad et al. in Indonesia, and Omitoyin et al. in Nigeria), for example, with a combination of 
economic strategies for regional industries and control of prices that were used by the salmon industry in Japan 
to adapt to changing resource productivity.  The importance of and how gender issues may be important in 
adaptation strategies was also addressed (Takahashi in Japan).  The adaptability of some fisheries was assessed 
(Tobin and Sutton, Australia) and an experience of a multidisciplinarity approach for adaptation was described 
(Holliday, Australia).  Holbrook et al. (presented by Pecl) discussed an Australian networks used to share 
positive experiences on adaptation research and knowledge.  
 
Three presentations described management or planning options that were adopted to address issues related to 
climate change (Orencio and Fujii in the Philippines,) or confronted different possible options, analyzing pros 
and cons (McCay (invited)).  It was recalled that diversity of fisheries is likely to be an asset for adaptation (in 
comparison with highly specialized fisheries).  Two studies presented focussed on the adaptiveability of 
management to climate change.  One concluded that positive benefits would be gained if catch rules could take 
into consideration environmental proxies (Hurtado-Ferro et al. on anchovy and sardine in Japan), whereas the 
other (Arias-Schreiber et al.) documented the opportunities for more sustainable harvest of large-scale anchovy 
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
46  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
fisheries in Peru when management reacted quickly with both changes in adapted catch controls and spatial 
fisheries measures in reaction to changes in environmental conditions.  Decision making or planning would be 
improved for aquaculture as well if impacts of climate change were taken into consideration to select suitable 
sites (Radiarta et al. on scallops in Japan).  A pair of talks on ecosystem planning in the Philippines (Pido et 
al., and Orencio and Fujii) to rationalise and harmonize different uses of the coast, rehabilitate and protect 
coastal habitats, and manage and develop the fisheries sector highlighted how important it is to use the 
knowledge of both communities and experts in the academic sector.  An important theme in many talks was 
underlined by McCay that, despite rhetoric, people have not been treated as truly part of marine ecosystems in 
much research and policy.  
 
Bastardie et al. analysed the mitigation potential of the fisheries sector through a modeling exercise of different 
scenarios of energy efficiency gained by targeting less valuable stocks closer to the ports and presented the 
tradeoffs in terms of stock dynamics and concentration of fishing pressure on certain areas. 
  
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   47 
 
 
 
Session D2:  Contemporary and next generation climate and oceanographic 
models, technical advances and new approaches 
Co-Convenors  
Jonathan Hare (National Marine Fisheries Service, USA)  
Shin-ichi Ito (Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute, FRA, Japan)  
 
 
Introduction 
 
The projection of marine ecosystem response to future climate scenarios is needed to assess and implement 
marine ecosystem management.  The marine ecosystem is part of the earth system and prediction of ecosystem 
responses requires integrated knowledge from physical, chemical, and biological perspectives as well as from 
marine, terrestrial and atmospheric perspectives.  The earth system is complex with nonlinear feedbacks 
(including biological to physical), regime shifts, and, in some cases, thresholds beyond which change is 
irreversible. Therefore, the uncertainties of climate and oceanographic models cause uncertainties in the 
projection of marine ecosystem response not only directly but also through complex feedback mechanisms.  To 
reduce the uncertainties of the marine ecosystem projection, we must understand the mechanisms controlling 
climate systems and the linkages to marine ecosystems.  Specific species responses to future ecosystem 
conditions are required by natural resource managers, and these require specific information (e.g., 
environments in coastal area during the short spawning period) as well as information regarding change of the 
ecosystem as a whole (e.g., total primary production, food-web dynamics).  These issues are not part of climate 
modeling, but mechanistic links between the biological, physical, and chemical systems must be identified and 
incorporated into coupled population-ecosystem-climate models.  Technical advances and new approaches are 
essential to achieve the goal of producing better projections of marine ecosystem response to future climate 
scenarios.  This session focused on climate and oceanographic models, including modeling of climate and 
ecosystem interaction, and technical advances and new approaches to project marine ecosystem response to 
future climate variability and change.  
 
 
Session D2 Summary 
 
Session D2 included the current state and future directions for a number of elements of the climate–ocean–
fisheries–socio-economics modeling system. Two invited talks, 11 contributed talks and 7 posters were 
presented.  Tremendous strides in climate modeling (coupled atmosphere–ocean general circulation models – 
AOGCMs) and ocean modeling (ocean general circulation models – OGCMs) have been made in the past two 
decades. Both AOGCMs and OGCMs have been extending to fisheries through the development of Earth 
System Models (ESMs) and Nutrient–Phytoplankton–Zooplankton Models (NPZs) and through the 
investigation of direct effects.  In recent years, the climate modeling and ocean modeling communities have 
been blending and further integration will be very important for the development of ecosystem-based 
approaches to fisheries management.  
 
A general outline of the IPCC AR5 (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change - Fifth Assessment Report) 
modeling plan was made by Kawamiya in an invited lecture.  While the centennial time-scale will be 
addressed with medium resolutions GCMs (~200 km scale), the decadal time-scale and extreme-events (e.g., 
typhoons, flooding) will be addressed with high-resolution GCMs (~50–100 km scale). New emission 
scenarios will also be developed.  Examples of these various activities were provided by Kawamiya and by 
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
48  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Sakamoto et al. for the MIROC4 (high resolution) and MIROC5 (medium resolution) models.  The plan for 
assessing decadal skill was described and involves developing a data assimilation and then initializing the 
model with a portion of the data assimilation.  The resulting prediction is then compared to the next 10 years of 
the data assimilation.  This procedure is repeated stepping through the hindcast.  Initial results with MIROC4 
indicate increased skill in PDO predictability and better representation of El Niño variability.  The dynamics of 
the Kuroshio current are also better represented.  Tatebe et al. examined in more detail the role of data 
assimilation in improving decadal forecasts.  Working with the MIROC model used in AR4, the use of data 
assimilation improved representation of interannual to decadal modulation of the high frequency eddy activity 
in the Kuroshio–Oyashio confluence zone.  These examples from the North Pacific suggest that the community 
of AR5 high resolution models will represent a significant improvement above the AR4 class models for use in 
marine ecosystem projection on both decadal and centennial time scales.  
 
Significant developments were also reported in ocean modeling.  Nonaka et al. presented results regarding 
Kuroshio variability (Nonaka et al., 2012).  The Kuroshio path affects sea surface temperature anomalies and 
mixed-layer depth in the region.  There may be predictability in the path related to Rossby wave propagation 
from east to west across the Pacific.  Increased predictability may contribute to understanding variation in 
sardine survival and recruitment.  Miyazawa et al. discussed the development of an operational model 
forecasting system for the Kuroshio and the concomitant development of a regional hindcast. Data assimilation 
with satellite observed data (sea surface temperature and height) and in situ hydrographic data was evaluated, 
and the in situ data greatly improved the assimilated fields.  These results provide strong support for the 
continuation of in situ data collection to support data assimilation for interannual-to-decadal predictions in 
support of fisheries assessments and marine ecosystem projections.  
 
Curchitser et al. presented exciting results from a two-way coupled AOGCM–OGCM.  The need for OGCMs 
that are coupled to larger-scale AOGCMs has long been recognized and there are now many examples of such 
one-way nested models.  There are also well known biases in AOGCMs that are thought to be caused by 
insufficient resolution of the regional ocean. Curchitser et al. described a fully two-way model linking a 
regional Northeast Pacific Ocean model with an AOGCM.  The inclusion of regional-scale dynamics in the 
AOGCM resulted in an improvement in model biases including improved spatial fields of precipitation and 
temperature.  The areas in the AOGCM impacted by inclusion of the regional model extended far beyond the 
regional domain showing the influence of regional dynamics on the global climate.  From climate to regional, 
the coupling provides an excellent tool for examining the effects of climate change and climate variability on 
regional fisheries issues.  A number of issues related with the two-way nested models were discussed including 
re-gridding between models, blending of model grids, and time-step coupling.  The presentation clearly shows 
the value of coupling OGCMs and AOGCMs and lays the framework for similar efforts across the world 
oceans.  
 
An important focus of the session was Earth Systems Models (ESMs) that are linked to AOGCMs.  These 
models include nutrients, phytoplankton, and zooplankton and are clearly staged to serve an important role in 
assessing the effects of climate change on fisheries and marine ecosystems in the coming decade.  An excellent 
overview was given by Gnanadesikan (invited; Gnanadesikan et al., 2011).  This talk addressed the potential 
role of ESMs in forecasting fishery impacts through bottom-up effects.  The importance of planktonic size 
structure, salinity, phenology, and boundary areas was illustrated – factors that have been given much less 
attention than temperature and habitat/gyre volume.  The need to better bridge between phytoplankton (P) and 
zooplankton (Z) was also stressed as this is the conduit for energy moving to higher trophic levels. Kawamiya 
also discussed ESM developments associated with MIROC.  Kishi et al. presented the results of an NPZ model 
(NEMURO: North Pacific Ecosystem Model for Understanding Regional Oceanography) linked to an 
AOGCM model and provided examples of potential climate change effects on fish (Kishi et al., 2011).  This 
and similar work show the value of coupling regionally developed NPZ models with AOGCMs. Hashioka et 
al. also used a version of the NEMURO model with a projected environment from an AOGCM and found a 
relatively large effect of climate change on the timing of the spring bloom, with less effect on the magnitude of 
the bloom.  Based on the group of contributions working with ESMs, there is a clear need for the ESM 
community to conduct comparisons among models, to work more closely with regional ocean models that 
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   49 
more explicitly treat the P to Z link, and for researchers to move toward an ensemble-based approach regarding 
ESM models – similar to the approach promoted by the AOGCM community. 
 
A large focus of the session was biogeochemical and NPZ models that are linked to OGCMs.  Komatsu et al. 
presented developments of the NEMURO framework: coupling the NPZ to an eddy-resolving OGCM and 
using data assimilation.  The model captured large-scale patterns in macronutrients, phytoplankton, and 
zooplankton and results indicate the importance of capturing eddy variability in coupled OGCM–NPZ models. 
Gibson et al. presented work linking a NPZ model to an ice–biology model and a benthic model.  This work 
indicates the importance of capturing sea ice and benthic processes in coupled OGCM–NPZ models in the 
Arctic and sub-Arctic seas (Gibson et al., 2013).  A number of posters presented developments with the 
NEMURO model. Watanabe et al. found that a 1-D NEMURO model coupled with an OGCM yielded realistic 
vertical and seasonal distributions of nutrients, phytoplankton, and zooplankton.  Yoshie et al., also using 
NEMURO, showed the capability to reproduce the distribution and variability of nutrients and plankton across 
a range of time and space scales in the western North Pacific (Ito et al., 2010a).  Using a different 
biogeochemical–NPZ model, Wang et al. demonstrated the potential influence of climate change on 
phytoplankton in the South China Sea.  The boundaries between traditional NPZ and ESM models continue to 
blur and the lessons learned from the regional NPZs are moving into ESMs, which will further improve the 
ability of ESMs to project changes in the biogeochemical and lower trophic levels in the ocean. The major 
future step is the more explicit addition of fisheries in these models. Okunishi et al. provided one example of 
linking ocean models to fish.  They coupled physical, biochemical–plankton and fish models in an individual-
based modeling framework and their results provide support for the hypothesis of density-dependent habitat 
selection. Kishi et al. also provided examples linking ocean models to fish.  There are numerous approaches to 
linking ocean models to fish and fisheries including production-based approaches, more detailed food web 
approaches, and habitat-centric approaches.  Following the example of the two-way coupled OGCM and 
AOGCM (Curchitser et al.), a similar coupling of ESM and NPZ/ecosystem models can be envisioned.  
 
Despite the improvements in modeling, continued observational and process-oriented studies are needed.  The 
past 20 years have focused on regional oceanography (e.g., GLOBEC: Global Ocean Ecosystem Dynamics). 
Most of these programs revealed that boundary forcing is an important aspect of regional dynamics, which 
started many efforts to link basin-scale and global models.  Future efforts similar to the QUEST-Fish 
(Quantifying and Understanding the Earth System) approach and full ESMs will need improved understanding 
of regional and basin-scale dynamics.  Peterson et al. showed that patterns in zooplankton in the northwest 
U.S. are related to larger-scale PDO variability – stressing the point that understanding basin- and global-scale 
processes are needed to forecast regional changes in marine ecosystems.  Kishi et al. and other talks in the 
session described links between basin-scale processes and fish abundance and distributions. To link among the 
regional, basin, and global scales, Werner et al. presented an overview of the BASIN (Basin-scale Analysis, 
Synthesis, and INtegration) program.  The aim of BASIN is to understand and simulate the impact of climate 
variability and change on key species of plankton and fish, as well as community structure as a whole, of the 
North Atlantic and to examine the consequences for the cycling of carbon and nutrients in the ocean, and 
thereby contribute to ocean management.  PICES has a similar program in the North Pacific: FUTURE 
(Forecasting and Understanding Trends, Uncertainty and Responses of North Pacific Marine Ecosystems). 
The goal of FUTURE is to understand how marine ecosystems in the North Pacific respond to climate change 
and human activities, to forecast ecosystem status based on a contemporary understanding of how nature 
functions, and to communicate new insights to its members, governments, stakeholders and the public. These 
programs and others are necessary to parameterize the models, to test and develop process oriented 
understanding, and to continue the observations needed to support hindcasts and forecasts.  These efforts will 
also support the development of Observing System Simulation Experiments (OSSEs) with the goal of 
providing a quantitative assessment of the impact of observing systems on earth system science, data 
assimilation, and numerical prediction. 
 
Another issue that was covered in the session was the development of broadly available visualization tools. 
The connectivity tool presented by Condie et al. allows particle tracks to be explored in terms of sources and 
sinks. The tool has a web-interface, making the application very broad.  This one tool can serve as an example 
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
50  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
for various visualization approaches that make model results available to a much broader community.  The last 
issue covered in the session was an ethno-oceanographic framework presented by Gasalla et al.  Fishers’ 
oceanological knowledge was surveyed by questionaries to them and the results were used to identify ocean 
changes.  This kind of approach seems important to communicate fishery and science in future. 
 
 
Session D2:  What advances on frameworks and methodologies for forecasting climate change 
impacts were presented/discussed? 
 
• General Circulation Models 
• Ocean Circulation Models 
• Earth System Models 
• Nutrient-Phytoplankton-Zooplankton Models 
• Living Marine Resource Models 
• Need for Basin-scale Observations-Modeling-Process studies 
• General visualization tools 
 
 
Session D2:  What results were presented from designated case studies (to test methods)? 
 
• AOGCMs – MIROC4 and 5 – high-resolution decadal forecasts, 
• OGCMs – Kuroshio studies – improvement in capturing circulation; in-situ data assimilation makes 
significant contributions, 
• ESMs – GFDL, MIROC – tremendous improvement; focus on temperature and primary productivity too 
narrow; need to add salinity, dissolved oxygen, carbon cycle, iron from a fisheries perspective; ESMs 
address the issue of bottom-up control of fisheries, 
• NPZs – NEMURO – many different improvements (eddy variability, vertical and seasonal distributions, 
sea-ice/benthic coupling, coupling to fish), 
• LMRs – various approaches to coupling modeling to LMRs; food web specific, general primary 
productivity, and habitat selectivity/Lagrangian approaches, 
• Two-way coupling between AOGCMs and OGCMs. 
 
 
Session D2:  What techniques were presented for estimating and communicating uncertainty in 
forecasts? 
 
• Not explicitly covered (but was covered in other sessions); 
• Uncertainty caused by initial condition: data assimilation approaches may be able to reduce uncertainty of 
the prediction which is based on the initial conditions. 
 
 
Session D2:  What strategies were evaluated regarding research and management under climate 
change scenarios? 
 
• A combination of AOGCM–OGCM and ESM–NPZ/vision fully coupled AOGCM–OGCM–ESM–NPZ 
models; 
• The importance of model tools around which the community can work (e.g., NEMURO); 
• The need for continued observation/modeling/process studies at the basin scale; 
• Continued observation which provides a “tool” for assessing stationarity through time; this will be an 
important issue and continued observation can inform us when a system has “changed”; 
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   51 
• The need to use models for OSSEs (Observing System Simulation Experiments) to improve observing 
networks; 
• Visualization that is model/approach independent; 
• The importance of data assimilation is producing hindcasts and initializing decadal AOGCMs; 
• The continuation of building the ensemble approach from AOGCMs to OGCMs/ESMs/NPZs; 
• The use QUEST-Fish as an example from climate-to-markets; 
• A general tension between standardizing model output or providing translators to work with specific 
formats; 
• High resolution ESMs take a long time to run: ½ day for 1 year – 100 years = 50 days; still unrealistic to 
run multiple scenarios and ensembles. 
 
 
Session D2 Recommendations  
 
• Continue to support blending of AOGCM/OGCM/ESM/NPZ; 
• More models should be developed as community models (NEMURO); 
• Continue observations and evaluation of observing systems; 
• Research efforts to link regional studies to basin- and global-scale issues; 
• Model diversity should be kept to allocate multi-view analysis (if we tend to focus on realistic model 
with high resolution, it will reduce capability of ensemble projection); 
• Research efforts to enable projections of unprecedented phenomena.  
  
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
52  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
 
 
 
Session P3:  Sustainable strategies in a warming climate  
 
Co-Convenors  
Anne B. Hollowed (Alaska Fisheries Science Center, NMFS, NOAA, USA) 
Michael J. Schirripa (Southeast Fisheries Science Center, NMFS, NOAA, USA)  
 
 
Introduction 
 
Many nations have adopted a goal of building sustainable fisheries.  Traditionally, this goal has been pursued 
through the adoption of precautionary harvest policies that are based on the expected productivity of the stock 
in a relatively constant environmental state.  These harvest policies seldom explicitly consider how possible 
future climate change may modify critical aspects of the productivity of the stock. At the single species level, 
climate change could significantly influence the carrying capacity, the reproductive potential as well as the 
spatial distribution of the stock.  At the multispecies level, climate change may change the abundance of 
competitors and predators of species targeted for fishing.  Societal changes in the consumption of fish and 
policies regarding marine ranching and aquaculture may also change the economic factors governing fisheries. 
This session emphasized novel approaches to build sustainable management strategies under a changing 
climate.  
 
Session P3 consisted of 9 oral presentations and 1 poster.  Drs. Éva Plagányi (Plagányi et al., 2011) and Chang 
Ik Zhang (Zhang et al., 2011) were the invited speakers for this session.  Presentations in this session focused 
on examples of management strategies that could be applied to sustain fisheries under a changing climate and 
techniques for assessing and forecasting the performance of harvest policies under changing climate.  A key 
outcome of this session was the need for two-way communication between scientists and stakeholders to 
develop meaningful scenarios on human responses to the impact of ecosystem and climate change. 
 
 
Session P3:  What advances on frameworks and methodologies for forecasting climate change 
impacts were presented/discussed? 
 
Zhang and Lee proposed a new assessment framework to evaluate how strategies for marine resource 
management would perform under different scenarios regarding bottom-up responses to changing climate 
conditions.  This approach maps how climate change induced changes in bottom-up forcing would flow 
through the food web using NEMURO, and Ecopath with Ecosim.  The innovation of their approach was to 
assess the performance of management strategies using an Integrated Fisheries Risk Analysis Method for 
Ecosystems (IFRAME) framework.  The IFRAME approach provides a system for assessing ecosystem 
conditions relative to the ecosystem standards and objectives.  This coupled model projection approach extends 
Management Strategy Evaluation (MSE) type evaluations to provide an Integrated Ecosystem Assessment. 
 
Plagányi et al. presented a framework for two-way communication between scientists and stakeholders to 
develop strategic approaches to complement tactical fisheries assessment measures under a changing climate.  
They reviewed the effectiveness of single-species assessment methods, management strategy evaluation 
approaches and multi-species assessment models as tools for evaluating the likely impacts of climate change.  
 
  
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   53 
Session P3:  What results were presented from designated case studies (to test methods)? 
 
Presentations by Hollowed et al. and Ianelli (Ianelli et al., 2011) provided insight on the need for stakeholder 
input in the selection of scenarios for use in single species MSEs with climate change scenarios.  These two 
presentations demonstrated a process for selecting management scenarios and a method for communicating the 
tradeoffs to stakeholders and managers. 
 
Nielsen et al. (Nielsen et al., 2012) presented a case study on the implications of climate change on salmon in 
the Arctic.  They highlighted the need to consider the implications of climate change at different life stages 
(particularly the freshwater phase). 
 
Pecl et al. made a strong case for using the comparative approach to identify the commonalities in responses of 
hotspot regions to climate change.  The concept of a hotspot network holds great promise for enhancing shared 
experiences and learning on sensible adaptation pathways for other global regions. 
 
 
Session P3:  What techniques were presented for estimating and communicating uncertainty in 
forecasts? 
 
Ianelli (single species) and Zhang  (and co-author Lee)(ecosystem) presented frameworks for communicating 
the implications of management strategies to stakeholders in a readily understandable manner.  As expected, 
capturing the uncertainty in stock projections is much easier than capturing the uncertainty in coupled models. 
The IFRAME coupled model system proposed by Zhang is one way to generate multiple climate scenarios for 
use in describing uncertainty in ecosystem assessments. 
 
 
Session P3:  What strategies were evaluated regarding research and management under climate 
change scenarios? 
 
As noted above, the focus of this session was on strategic planning for fisheries management under a changing 
climate. The presentations by Hollowed et al., Plagányi et al. and Zhang and Lee all showed the importance of 
including socio-economic factors when developing scenarios for the future of fish and fisheries.  Zhang and 
Lee presented a method to evaluate the performance of management strategies within an ecosystem context. 
Schirripa et al. presented plans for the development of an Integrated Ecosystem Assessment for the 
southeastern region of the United States.  Kaeriyama et al. (Kaeriyama et al., 2012) illustrated the need for 
more holistic models that extend MSE assessment frameworks to include economic performance measures 
(Kaeriyama et al., 2012).  Barange et al. presented the QUEST-Fish framework which utilizes a multi-
disciplinary approach to assessing risks and vulnerabilities to climate change (Barange et al., 2011).  A 
common theme for most speakers in this session was the need to extend our forecasts to include assessments of 
the status of marine ecosystems, food security, and the human condition under a changing climate.  Another 
common theme was the need to seek stakeholder input when developing scenarios for long-term strategies for 
fisheries management. 
  
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
54  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
 
 
 
Workshop W1:  Reducing global and national vulnerability to climate change in 
the fisheries sector:  Policy perspectives post-Copenhagen 
Co-Convenors  
Cassandra de Young (Food and Agriculture Organization) 
Eddie Allison (Worldfish Center, Malaysia, on behalf of the Global Partnership on Climate, Fisheries and 
Aquaculture (PaCFA))  
Tarub Bahri (Food and Agriculture Organization)  
Marie-Caroline Badjeck (Worldfish Center, Malaysia, on behalf of the Global Partnership on Climate, 
Fisheries and Aquaculture (PaCFA)) 
 
 
Introduction 
 
A ½-day workshop was convened by Dr. Cassandra de Young (Food and Agriculture Organization and Dr. 
Eddie Allison (WorldFish Center) on behalf of the Global Partnership on Climate, Fisheries and Aquaculture 
(PaCFA; see Figure 11 for membership of PaCFA) and was attended by 22 people.  The general goals of the 
workshop were to: (1) discuss the responses of individual PaCFA agencies and other institutions attending the 
UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) meeting in Copenhagen in December 2009 
(COP15), (2) identify the critical gaps in the science underpinning climate impacts on fish production systems 
and marine and coastal ecosystems and on potential adaptation responses and mitigation options, and 
(3) develop the basis of a strategy to ensure that the next IPCC report and national adaptation and mitigation 
plans will take full account of emerging ocean and fishery science related to climate change. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
     
  
 
  
Fig. 11  Global Partnership on Climate, Fisheries and Aquaculture (PaCFA) is a voluntary global level initiative among 
20 international organizations and sector bodies.  In 2009 these organizations recognized their common concern for 
climate change interactions with global waters and living resources and their social and economic consequences and 
decided to have a coordinated response from the fisheries and aquaculture sector to climate change during COP15.  See 
www.climatefish.org. 
 
 
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   55 
The workshop started with a review of the workshop objectives and an introduction to the PaCFA by Dr. 
Marie-Caroline Badjeck from the WorldFish Center.  This was followed by presentations from Drs. Tarub 
Bahri (FAO), Edward Allison (WorldFish Center) and Sung Bung Kim (OECD) who outlined their respective 
experience in 2009 in terms of developing research and policy messages in the runup to the COP15 and their 
current post-Copenhagen activities and plans for continued engagement in the UNFCCC process. 
 
Following the presentations, the participants divided into two groups on (1) Impacts and exposure and  
(2) Adaptation and mitigation, with the guidelines of identifying the major policy issues to be addressed and 
the science needed to address them.  The key messages that were highlighted during the plenary discussions 
are summarized below. 
 
 
W1 Summary of the discussion:  Critical gaps 
 
It was agreed that climate change adds to other issues such as overfishing and ecosystem impacts that are 
already affecting many of the fisheries systems around the world.  The group agreed that the focus should be 
on sustaining and restoring productive ecosystems, which are key long-standing objectives that would need to 
be addressed through an ecosystem approach, as agreed in the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable 
Development.  Climate change should not be an excuse for dropping the focus on existing fishing problems 
such as the need to reduce effort or seek alternative livelihoods.  The importance of social science analysis of 
adaptations required in management systems was further highlighted, as well as the need for determining 
whether existing plans to manage and use resources will be derailed by climate change. In this respect, the 
diversification of livelihoods, both at household and at community level, was mentioned as one relevant option 
that would strengthen robustness to change, including to climate change. 
 
In regard to mitigation issues, reducing fishing capacity has a side benefit on reducing emissions.  However, a 
balance is needed between emissions benefits and effects on livelihoods.  Carbon emissions cycles were also 
discussed and it was noted that some fish production systems may be relatively efficient with respect to other 
food production systems (for instance, livestock), yet there still is a need for a carbon life cycle analysis for 
fisheries products and for the development of low-carbon or even carbon-neutral aquaculture systems.  
 
Lack of information and data was thoroughly discussed and scale issues were raised while addressing gaps in 
the knowledge currently available on exposure to, and impacts of, climate change.  It was underlined that there 
is a fair knowledge and modeling capacity to represent and/or forecast the trends in environmental variables, 
but the link to fish stocks productivity is largely missing.  There is a research need to downscale global 
information and models to regional and local ones, in particular regarding the link between physical and 
biological systems (e.g., identifying the impacts of climate change on the distribution of Pacific micronekton 
that are the food of tuna). 
 
Moreover, there is still a need to pull together local knowledge on the array of climate change impacts 
(intensity and frequency of storms, changes in salinity, sea level rise, effects on habitats and productivity, 
effects on the ability of fishermen to fish, biodiversity and invasive species, etc.) so that these can inform local 
adaptation strategies which may be more suitable as a result of having been based on local observation.  
 
An important gap underlined by the group was the lack of socio-economic information related to climate 
change impacts on societies and economies.  Participants raised the question about the socio-economic 
indicators that should be used to monitor the impacts of climate change and underlined the need to understand, 
identify and use indicators that reflect the country/local adaptive capacity.  The discussion also addressed the 
level of aggregation of the information, in particular the fact that global analyses do not pick up local issues 
that may appear to be contradictory.  An example was given of the United States which seems to be one of the 
less vulnerable countries at a global scale, but with highly vulnerable local situations, e.g., North American 
indigenous groups whose vulnerability is higher because of their stronger reliance on fisheries. 
 
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
56  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
The need for household level knowledge on impacts of climate change was highlighted. More science is 
currently needed to understand the exposure to, and impact of, climate change.  In particular, the lack of long-
term observation mechanisms providing data and information to run socio-economic models was underlined. 
Investments should be made accordingly and interaction should be sought with national statistic departments, 
in particular regarding the inclusion of fisheries and aquaculture-related information in household living 
standard (HLS) surveys.  This would allow for the measurement of impacts of climate change and success of 
adaptation measures. The WorldFish Centre has been encouraging the inclusion of fisheries-related 
information in HLS measurement surveys in Uganda and Malawi, but this is required more broadly, 
particularly in countries with substantive artisanal marine fisheries.  Bottom-up analyses, rather than top-down, 
are currently needed to scale up the knowledge from local to regional scale and to be able to incorporate 
traditional knowledge that is too often disregarded. 
 
This lack of information is linked to the lack of political power of local fisherfolk and the fact that the most 
vulnerable do not have a strong voice in policy terms (i.e., social justice), thus underlining the need for clear 
messages for policy makers and economic leaders.  A positive example of Vietnam was given where a study 
was carried out on the measurable benefit and cost for mitigation/adaptation of fishing communities that 
convinced policy makers to act.  However, while reviews were carried out on climate change justice issues 
across other sectors, those for fisheries are lacking.  This is contrary to the fact that fishing-dependent 
communities are generally highly vulnerable, and fisheries often serve the role of a livelihood option of last 
resort. 
 
At the same time, it was recalled that the need for improved science should not be used as an excuse for not 
acting and that our growing understanding of the underlying uncertainty should be used as a powerful 
instrument to advocate for a precautionary approach rather than just as a basis for increasing research 
requirements which, unfortunately, often leads to a reason for not acting.  It was agreed that fisheries scientists 
should improve the way they convey uncertainty and the related risks and take advantage of the fact that 
politicians are risk averse and are more likely to take precautionary measures if they understand those 
uncertainties.  A discussion was held on how researchers/scientists should present uncertainty when 
communicating with policy makers and, in particular, on the need to highlight the risks of socio-economic 
losses if no action is taken. In this respect, the mismatch between social and natural research, both in 
vocabulary and in methods and approaches, was underlined and the need for collaborative research was 
recalled. 
 
The participants highlighted that scientists should not only better communicate their findings to policy makers, 
but also to consumers and other constituencies within the sector across the value chain.  Certification low-
carbon production systems can all be entry points for adaptation and mitigation but further engagement with 
the private sector and consumers and innovative partnerships are needed.  
 
The need for sectoral integration was discussed, underlining the inter-dependence of the different sectors and 
the need for a better understanding of the links between aquaculture and capture fisheries, both small scale and 
industrial sectors, in terms of adaptation and mitigation strategies.  If climate change affects the ability of 
capture fisheries to provide food for aquaculture products, the effects on aquaculture need to be assessed. 
Contradictions and tradeoffs related to food security and climate change were also underlined, in particular the 
case of fish culture in rice farms that was encouraged to meet food security but which appears to be an 
important source of methane emissions.  Finally, the disconnect of fisheries policies and biodiversity policies 
in the face of climate change was commented on, as for example, the increasing risk of released farmed fish 
into the natural watershed because of increased storm events and the consequences on biodiversity.  Generally 
speaking, the policy frameworks on biodiversity and on food security and fisheries are on two different tracks 
and will need to come together in the global climate change discussions. 
 
 
  
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   57 
W1 Recommendations 
 
• In responding to climate change, do not lose the focus on existing problems in fisheries (harmful 
ecological impacts, overcapacity, need for livelihood diversification…); 
• A carbon life cycle analysis should be carried out for the fisheries sector for emissions accounting 
purposes and to inform both consumers and national planners on the options for low-carbon futures for 
different livestock and fisheries/aquaculture production systems; 
• Global climate impact models should be scaled down to regional and local levels, in particular to link 
impacts of climate change and fish productivity at these higher resolutions; 
• Socio-economic data and information should be collected to improve information on the impacts of 
climate change at fleet, community and household level; 
• Issues related to climate change should be addressed through an ecosystem approach to fisheries so that 
they are considered alongside other forcing factors; 
• Scientists should improve the way they convey uncertainty while interacting with policy makers and 
stakeholders to evaluate risks of different policy options; 
• Sectoral integration should be sought, in particular to find common ground between food security, 
biodiversity and fisheries in the global discussions on climate change. 
 
 
  
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
58  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
 
 
 
Workshop W2:  Potential impacts of ocean acidification on marine ecosystems 
and fisheries 
Co-Convenors  
Kenneth L. Denman (Canadian Centre for Climate Modelling and Analysis; DFO, Canada)  
Yukihiro Nojiri (National Institute for Environmental Studies, Japan)  
Hans Pörtner (Alfred-Wegener Institute, Germany) 
 
 
The oceans are becoming acidic as carbon dioxide from fossil fuel emissions enters surface ocean waters from 
the atmosphere. Talks and posters presented at the workshop reported on manipulation experiments and 
observations on the effects of elevated carbon dioxide on organisms at all trophic levels of fisheries foodwebs, 
and modeling approaches to predict the impact of continuing increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide. 
 
The first talk (Denman et al.) presented observational evidence of open ocean increases in pCO
2
 and decreases 
in pH, followed by model projections of global mean and spatial patterns of the decrease in pH until the end of 
this century.  Several talks and posters reported on studies of organisms with calcium carbonate skeletal 
structures subjected to various experimental exposures to low pH (high pCO
2
) waters in controlled laboratory 
or field situations.  Several other talks and posters reported on physiological and behavioural responses of 
animals to elevated CO
2
 conditions.  One poster evaluated the adequacy of several ecosystem models to 
simulate adaptation over long time scales to changes in CO
2
 (and other related variables) associated with 
climate change. 
 
Nakamura et al. reported on a depression of metabolism and growth in coral larvae with elevated CO
2
 levels. 
Similarly, Lartey-Antwi (co-authored with Anderson) found decreased growth rates in flat-tree oysters. Suwa 
(co-authored with Shirayama) presented data obtained with a system precisely mimicking constant and 
fluctuating CO
2
 levels, where the fluctuating levels showed less impact on the growth and skeletal structures of 
echinoderm larvae than CO
2
 levels set permanently high.  Kurihara provided an overview on different levels of 
CO
2
 sensitivities according to taxon and in early life stages.  Ishimatsu et al., Munday et al. and Dissanayake 
et al. reported on changes in various processes indicating tolerance limits, decreased aerobic scope and 
behavioural changes in shrimp and young fish in response to elevated CO
2
 levels, with species-specific 
differences even among closely related fish species.  Salau talked about a model of reduced carrying capacity 
for pteropods as pH decreases, and the feedback effects on pink salmon: as a result even and odd year 
differences in salmon stock size will increase over time with management implications for repeating strong and 
weak returns in alternating years.  Rumrill et al. presented long-term observations of an estuary showing 
decreasing pH effects on oysters in the outer saline estuary and increasing pH probably resulting from changes 
in precipitation and freshwater runoff.  Takami et al. demonstrated how elevated CO
2
 levels slow and disturb 
development in abalone and Sugie et al. found enhanced drawdown in Si:N by Bering Sea phytoplankton as 
pH fell and iron was limited.  B.K. Kim (co-authored with H.W. Kim) used brine shrimp as a model for 
identifying changes in the expression of individual genes during exposure to low pH.  Finally, Le Quesne and 
Pinnegar (presented by Pinnegar) analyzed various ecosystem models emphasizing that parameterizations of 
various physiological processes would be needed to support the evaluation of responses to changing pH. 
 
 
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   59 
W2 Summary of noteworthy findings 
 
• Overall, investigators are observing different sensitivity levels among investigated organisms, some 
closely related, ranging from calcification and growth to development, behaviours and ecosystem level 
responses.  The consideration and introduction of environmental variability changes the pattern and level 
of response.  In light of the complexity and diversity of responses observed, it is thus too early to draw 
general conclusions regarding the responses of ecosystems to elevated CO
2
. 
• The inclusion of preindustrial levels (around 280 ppm CO
2
) in experimental protocols as well as the 
precise control of diel CO
2
 cycling was considered highly valuable in studying the impact of ocean 
acidification.  In fact, one study reported improvement in calcified structures in echinoderm larvae under 
pre-industrial compared to present day levels of ambient CO
2
.  Investigations of mechanisms under high 
pCO
2
 need be complemented by testing the role of such responses under expectable pCO
2
 according to 
ocean acidification scenarios. 
• In terms of behavioral and physiological responses to elevated CO
2
, these studies of organisms that are not 
necessarily calcifiers are less mature, but are exciting because so little is known from the past. 
 
 
W2 Recommendations and key questions 
 
• Pre-industrial control runs should be done more often, since organisms have already adapted from that 
point. 
• Experiments often include current day pCO
2
 (~380 ppm) and an elevated level, often ~1000 ppm. If 
emissions are controlled to try to achieve < 3°C global warming, then intermediate levels of, say 450, 
550, and 700 ppm pCO
2
 require consideration.  Both these recommendations require precise pCO
2
 
(pH) control. 
• Long-period culture experiments/multi-generation studies are both required to try to obtain information 
on long-term adaptive capacity and evolutionary change, but are usually restricted to species with 
generation times of less than 1 year.  Comparisons of species from various climate regimes and CO
2
 
environments may help to circumvent these constraints in long-lived species. 
• In experimental studies diel, seasonal and inter-annual variability of CO
2
 levels should be simulated if 
relevant for the respective ecosystem.  Such experiments would be needed to identify slow trends 
embedded in highly variable environments. 
• Population genetic and functional genomic analyses need to be applied more widely.  
• Models need to be examined as to whether they formulate physiological and behavioural processes that 
are dependent on changing environmental drivers such as pCO
2
 or temperature. 
• Some aquaculture species respond differently than their “wild” counterparts.  Have they already 
become adapted to higher pCO
2
, e.g., by being cultured in water supply from depths below the mixed 
layer that already have elevated pCO
2
 relative to the depths at which the wild populations live? 
• Can we learn from species already experiencing higher pCO
2
 naturally?  For example, some species of 
copepods and euphausiids already migrate several hundreds of metres vertically on diel and seasonal 
timescales (diapause) where at depth they are exposed to pCO
2
 levels of 500 to 1000 ppm.  
• Importantly, experimental protocols must include behavioural and physiological dependencies on 
multiple variables that we expect to change with the climate: pCO
2
, dissolved oxygen, temperature, 
micro-nutrients (Fe), etc. (e.g., Pörtner and Farrell, 2008). 
• Sensitivities need to be systematically identified across taxa and in between species comparisons. 
• Through a combined experimental and modeling approach, can we start to evaluate possible changes in 
whole ecosystem structure resulting from the possible disappearance and replacement of key species? 
  
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
60  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
 
 
 
Workshop W3:  Coupled climate-to-fish-to-fishers models for understanding 
mechanisms underlying low frequency fluctuations in small pelagic fish  
and projecting its future  
Co-Convenors   
Salvador E. Lluch-Cota (Fisheries Ecology Program, Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas-del Noroeste, Mexico)   
Enrique N. Curchister (Institute of Marine and Coastal Sciences, Rutgers University, USA)  
Shin-ichi Ito (Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute FRA, Japan) 
 
 
Low-frequency variability of abundance of small pelagic fish is one of the most emblematic and best 
documented cases of population fluctuations not wholly explained by fishing effort. Over the last 25 years, 
diverse observations have led to several hypotheses.  However, because of limited-duration time series, testing 
hypotheses has proven extremely difficult with available statistical and empirical tools.  As a result, the 
mechanistic basis for how physical, biogeochemical, and biological factors interact to produce the various 
patterns of synchronous variability across widely separated systems remains unknown.  Identification of these 
mechanisms is necessary for exploring projections and building scenarios of the amplitude and timing of stock 
fluctuations and their responses to human interactions (fisheries) and climate change.  The workshop was 
intended to compare state-of-the-art modeling tools and discuss what expertise is necessary to tackle this 
important scientific and environmental problem. 
 
The workshop, attended by about 50 scientists, started with an opening address by the convenors. Six oral 
presentations were given. Ryan Rykaczewski used bioenergetic models to compare anchovy and sardine 
growth potential in the California Current region.  He found that anchovy growth is dependent on the 
community structure of nearshore eutrophic waters, and that sardine growth is possible under offshore 
oligotrophic conditions.  He also discussed the importance of accurate representation of plankton size structure 
for mechanistic models of sardine and anchovy populations.  Wolfgang Fennel introduced a NPZDF (nutrient, 
phytoplankton, zooplankton, detritus and fish production) model with two-way coupling between prey and 
predators; hence, mass balance between NPZD and fish or prey fish and predator fish are conserved.  The 
model was applied to the Baltic Sea where the fish dynamics is dominated by two prey species (sprat and 
herring) and one predator (cod).  To demonstrate performance of the model, the effects of eutrophication and 
fishery scenarios were addressed.  Three 3-D NPZDF models were presented by Triantafyllou et al., Ito et al., 
and Hedström et al. who discussed applications of super Individual-Based Models (IBMs) for three different 
regions of the globe.  Triantafyllou et al. developed a super IBM for the European anchovy in which particles 
representing fish have information of fish population, adding to those of age, position, length, and weight of 
the fish.  This Lagrangian model is coupled to a biophysical model based on the Princeton Ocean Model 
(POM) and the European Regional Seas Model (ERSEM).  Moreover, the ERSEM was assimilated to satellite-
derived phytoplankton density. 
 
Ito et al. introduced a super-IBM of the Japanese sardine and clearly showed the significance of the density 
dependence effect on fish distribution and growth.  They also demonstrated the importance of predators on 
migration of prey fish. 
 
Hedström et al. used a community biophysical model; the Regional Ocean Modeling System (ROMS) for the 
physical circulation model and NEMURO (North Pacific Ecosystem Model for Understanding Regional 
Oceanography) for the NPZD model.  They intend to include a fishery effect in their model and extend it to an 
end-to-end model.  They noted difficulties of such a state-of-art NPZDF model, including spatially locating 
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   61 
eggs after spawning and scaling the predator–prey interactions among fish species.  In the final talk, Rose 
addressed issues that arise with developing complicated models in general, and new issues specific to the 
development of end-to-end models. 
 
An open discussion was held in the afternoon session.  Based on the presentation by Rose, participants 
discussed end-to-end models and how they deal with different issues, particularly zooplankton dynamics and 
linkages with upper and lower trophic levels.  Several attendees expressed concern over the uncertainty and 
increasing error derived from coupling different models, especially when outcomes from one model are used 
as input for a chain of other models.  Also, strong concern was expressed on how to evaluate performance or 
validate the models because of the multiscale nature of these models.  No single data set seems to be sufficient. 
After recognizing the valuable review by Plagányi (2007), the group discussed the need to quantitatively 
compare performance of models for different processes and promote the use of the best modeling approach 
option for each question.  In this sense, keeping modeling approaches diverse was considered a better strategy 
than agreeing to a single model.  Assemblages of models, as done by the climate community, do not seem to 
be a feasible approach for end-to-end models.  However, the group believed it would be useful for small 
pelagic fish and climate change research to compile and/or develop different models for at least some of the 
major small pelagic fishing regions, specifically the Benguela, California, Humboldt, and Kuroshio/Oyashio 
currents. 
  
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
62  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
 
 
 
Workshop W4:  Salmon workshop on climate change 
Co-Convenors   
James R. Irvine (Pacific Biological Station, DFO, Canada)   
Masa-aki Fukuwaka (Hokkaido National Fisheries Research Institute, FRA, Japan)   
Suam Kim (Pukyong National University, Korea)   
Vladimir Radchenko (Sakhalin Research Institute of Fisheries and Oceanography (SakhNIRO), Russia)   
Loh-Lee Low (Alaska Fisheries Science Center, Seattle, USA)    
Shigehiko Urawa (North Pacific Anadromous Fish Commission)  
 
 
Introduction 
 
The North Pacific region is home to multiple species of salmonid fishes, including anadromous Pacific salmon 
that regularly migrate from freshwater to the sea and back.  Salmon provide economic benefits in the form of 
subsistence, commercial, and recreational fisheries, and contribute to the cultural enrichment of the regions 
where they occur.  Their ecological role is complex as they facilitate energy transfer directly and indirectly at 
multiple trophic levels in many ecosystems.  Their ability to occupy habitats in fresh, salt, and brackish water 
has led to a remarkable diversity of life histories, but climate change threatens to alter their distribution and 
abundance. 
 
Salmon are found most frequently in cooler regions of the Pacific Ocean. In recent years, commercial catches 
have been among the highest on record, with no indication of declines.  Yet coho, Chinook, and some sockeye 
salmon populations are declining in many areas. 
 
This 1-day workshop examined scenarios for the future of Pacific salmon, based on climate projections from 
coupled ocean/climate or other models or from statistical projections of expected climate changes. 
 
Following welcoming remarks from Dr. Vladimir Fedorenko, Executive Director of the North Pacific 
Anadromous Fish Commission (NPAFC), 9 oral presentations and 5 oral poster presentations were given, 
followed by 2 discussion sessions.  Presentations were diverse and informative. The majority (12/14) dealt 
with Pacific salmon (9 marine, 2 fresh water, 1 database) while 2 presentations dealt with Atlantic salmon. 
 
The first presentation, by Irvine and Fukuwaka, set the stage for much of the rest of the day, providing an 
overview of abundance trends for Pacific salmon at the scale of the North Pacific, Asia, and North America. 
All nations’ commercial catch data indicate that marine production of Pacific salmon is at all time high levels, 
dominated by chum and pink salmon, albeit with significant contributions from hatcheries.  High levels of 
synchrony among regions for catches of chum and pink salmon were found by Fukuwaka et al., although the 
response of salmon abundance to various climate indices varied among regions. Kaeriyama et al.  (presented 
by Seo) showed that increased temperatures have resulted in faster growth and survival for Hokkaido age-1 
chum salmon. Interestingly, this may lead to population density-dependent effects that will ultimately reduce 
the growth and extend the maturation schedule for chum salmon in the Bering Sea.  Farley et al. reported 
results from their research in the eastern Bering Sea that fortuitously covered 4 consecutive warm years (2002–
2005) followed by 4 cool years (2006–2009).  Warm years tended to benefit age-0 walleye pollock resulting in 
higher growth potential for salmon.  Farley et al. also reported preliminary results from Russian work carried 
out in February/March 2009, evaluating sockeye salmon lipid levels. 
 
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   63 
Mundy and Evenson concluded the timing of spawning migrations of high latitude chinook will become more 
highly variable as climate warms.  Wainwright and Weitkamp used an ecosystem approach to evaluate climate 
effects on Oregon coho salmon.  They determined that climate change will likely have a strong negative effect 
on coho, although there remains great uncertainty in biological responses.  Reed et al. applied an evolutionary 
model to predict how well some Fraser River sockeye salmon might respond to predicted changes in river 
temperature resulting from global warming.  They concluded the persistence of some salmon populations will 
depend on their ability to adapt quickly, which will be determined by the existence of sufficient genetic 
variation.  Peterman et al. presented the development of a Salmon Monitoring Advisor web site designed to 
help in the design of salmon monitoring programs.  Wasserman described the successful experience of the 
Skagit Climate Science Consortium which is integrating scientific analyses at the watershed level in order to 
manage salmon populations in the face of climate change. 
 
Piou and Prévost and Prusov et al. described their findings on populations of Atlantic salmon in the Scorff 
River (France) and the White Sea (northwest Russia), respectively.  Piou and Prévost’s models projected 
climate change-related life history effects, concluding that marine conditions and freshwater flow regimes are 
of utmost importance in determining stock abundance.  Prusov et al. described changes in Atlantic salmon 
growth and age compositions during recent years of increasing temperatures but concluded that changes in 
management practices have thus far had the greatest impact on the status of northern populations of Atlantic 
salmon.  Miyakoshi et al. documented changes in coastal temperatures around Hokkaido and described plans 
to adjust the release timing of young chum salmon to take advantage of these changes in an attempt to increase 
salmon survivals.  Ishida and colleagues’ archeological work showed that the distribution of chum salmon in 
Japan during an earlier warmer period was more northerly than it is today, and predicted similar northerly 
shifts in salmon distribution with climate change.  Ruggerone et al. (presented by Neilson) demonstrated that 
chinook salmon growth was related to their previous growth history and pink salmon abundance while coho 
salmon growth was strongly linked with pollock abundance, which was linked to temperature. 
 
Following presentation of papers and posters, separate discussion sessions considered the broad topics of 
forecasting impacts and long-term research needs.  Participants had been previously provided with a link to the 
recent NPAFC document (http://www.npafc.org/new/pub_special.html) describing a proposed long-term 
research and monitoring plan. 
 
The following questions were considered. 
 
Forecasting impacts 
a. Do we expect the North Pacific to remain at the current high levels of salmon production?  
b. How will climate change affect salmon differently in various regions?  
c. Will sustained warming have an opposite effect on productivities of northern and southern salmon 
populations?  
d. Are the southern and northern limits to the range of salmon shifting northward?  
 
Assessing ecosystem responses 
a. Is the North Pacific ecosystem changing to favor pink and chum salmon?  
b. What mechanisms are most likely responsible for changes to salmon distribution, production, and relative 
species composition?  
 
Although it was not possible to thoroughly debate all the above questions in the limited time available, there 
appeared to be consensus on some issues: 
• The North Pacific is currently producing large amounts of salmon but rates of increase seen during the last 
20 years will not continue. 
• Climate change is already affecting salmon differently in the northern and southern regions. There will be 
additional northward shifts in the southern boundary of salmon distribution.  There was no consensus on 
whether the northern boundary would shift further north into the Arctic. 
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
64  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
• Marine production of pink and chum salmon is increasing, but there was no consensus on how much of 
this might be due to ecosystem changes versus enhancement. 
• A proper understanding of climate change effects on salmon requires consideration of each life history 
stage. Phases to focus on include: freshwater residence, early marine (first couple of months) and the first 
winter at sea. 
• Important areas of future research include improving our understanding of effects of interactions between 
hatchery and wild salmon in their early marine environment, and linkages between coastal oceanography 
and young salmon growth and survival. 
• Integrated research programs including experts from multiple disciplines and countries are most likely to 
improve our knowledge base. 
  
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   65 
 
 
 
Workshop W5:  Networking across global marine “hotspots” 
Co-Convenors  
Gretta Pecl (Tasmanian Aquaculture and Fisheries Institute, University of Tasmania, Australia)  
Alistair Hobday (CSIRO, Marine and Atmospheric Research, Australia)  
Stewart Frusher (Tasmanian Aquaculture and Fisheries Institute, University of Tasmania, Australia)  
Warwick Sauer (Rhodes University, South Africa) 
 
 
Background 
 
Regional global warming “hotspots”, typified by above average ocean temperature increases, provide the 
potential for early warning and evidence of the response by natural resources to climate change.  In theory, 
regions at the “front-line” of climate change should also be leading the field in terms of assessing impacts and 
evaluating adaptation options.  Networking and synthesising outcomes from across hotspots can facilitate 
accelerated learning and also indicate sensible pathways for maximising adaptation and minimising impacts for 
other global regions.  
 
This workshop was designed to highlight (1) where global marine hotspots occur now, and where they are 
projected to occur in the future, (2) summarise the information currently emerging on biological climate 
change impacts in these areas, and (3) to discuss the potential for developing a global network of scientists, 
policy makers and managers working in marine hotspots. 
  
 
W5 Outcomes 
 
Twenty-four regional hotspots were identified and experts were contacted to present at the workshop. All 
contacted scientists responded positively to the concept and 12 were able to participate.  Presentations covered 
a range of temperate, sub-temperate, polar and tropical systems as well as developed and developing countries. 
 
There was discussion on the merits of using sea surface temperature (SST) to define hotspots and on other 
potential metrics. While it was noted that there are other metrics, the focus for the use of SST was on defining 
regions that were rapidly changing and thus provide the first opportunities to inform society of climate change 
impacts and adaptation options.  It was noted that temperature per se may not be the driver as it could be a 
proxy for wind regime changes and/or current shifts. 
 
It was noted that for the network to be manageable there needed to be a limit in the number of regions. The 24 
regions identified by the analysis of SST covered: 
• Tropical, temperate, sub temperate, polar, 
• Developed and developing countries, 
• Range of adaptive capacities, 
• Variety of ecosystem types,  
• Range of anthropogenic pressures and disturbances. 
 
There was broad agreement that while SST is only one driver, it was a major driver of distribution, abundance, 
phenology and life history.  Temperature was also the most common identified metric in the presentations at 
both the workshop and the broader symposium.  Although the need for a manageable number of regions was 
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
66  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
supported, it was agreed that the network would welcome participation by other areas that are experiencing 
significant biological change (e.g., upwellings, coldspots, etc.). 
 
 
W5:  What results were presented from designated case studies (to test methods)? 
 
Common themes that were apparent in the presentations include: 
• Most hotspots had temperature records “validating” selection as a hotspot.  However, in many cases 
temperature was  (partly?) a proxy for current shifts and wind regime changes; 
• Many range shifts were already being observed including movements to deeper waters; 
• Changes were occurring in fisheries distribution and associated changes in fleet structure and 
operations; 
• Many areas showed significant deoxygenation; 
• There is an increased frequency of harmful algal blooms; 
• There are shifts in species diversity of phyto/zooplantkon communities (mainly large to small 
individuals) and increased diversity and species richness of fish species; 
• Large changes were occurring in distribution and abundance of some species, subsequently acting as 
“invasives”, creating negative ecosystem impacts; 
• Regions with naturally high variability appeared to be equally vulnerable to change and were not pre-
adapted; 
• There are management implications for harvesting of “shifting biomass”, especially across jurisdictional 
boundaries; 
• Synergistic effects such as increased frequency of extreme events and temperature may not enable 
biomass to rebuild after reduction in fishing effort. 
 
The value of a “Hotspots Network” was summarized as: 
• Providing a mechanism for scientists, managers and policy makers to communicate and see how 
science was being translated into policy and practical adaptive management measures in those regions 
of the world where impacts were occurring.  
• Networking across these regions would facilitate comparative studies through:  
– Promotion of consistency in data collection, analysis, reporting; 
– Potential for greater certainty in projection models through first opportunities for validation. 
• Comparisons between regions would provide greater certainty in the understanding of impacts for 
stakeholders (i.e., other stakeholders are experiencing similar issues);  
• It would provide for shared learning and capacity building about adaptation science (successes and 
failures). 
• As the hotspots regions are at the forefront of climate change, the network would provide valuable 
insights into the impacts, model validation and the success or failures of adaptation planning for the 
broader global community. 
 
 
The path forward 
 
• A Consensus statement would be produced to be signed by participants.  Participants would be 
encouraged to obtain, in principal, support from their respective research/management institutions as 
further support for the Network.  
• Each of the regional hotspots contacted was asked to provide a summary of: 
– Physical changes documented in last few decades;  
– Observed (or predicted) biological/ecological/fisheries impacts, including changes in distribution, 
abundance and phenology at each of the trophic levels and any observed ecosystem changes; 
– Details of climate change programs or major research initiatives; 
– Indications of ecological, cultural, or economic importance. 
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   67 
This information will be summarised and developed into a manuscript.  Seed funding would be sought to 
develop a website for communication of the Network and for hosting an initial workshop to determine a 
strategic and operational plan for the Network.  The plan would identify resource implications and potential 
funding opportunities. 
• Funds would be sought to run targeted workshops on identified areas of need such as monitoring 
methodologies, inter-disciplinary approaches for linking science to practical management, etc. 
• Funds would be sought to establish demonstration projects. Examples of such projects could include:  
– Identification of key monitoring sites for global comparisons;  
– Establishment of a project to evaluate tools and approaches for implementation of adaptation 
options that identify and balance the tradeoffs in ecological, social and economic indices using 
some of these regions as case studies. 
 
 
Vision for the Network 
 
• A global network of scientists, managers and policy makers where shared information is synthesised, 
contrasted and compared across locations providing the best possible learning opportunity to address 
climate challenges; 
• A mechanism for capitalising, as efficiently and effectively as possible, on emerging information in a 
rapidly changing world;   
• A framework for facilitating accelerated learning and indication of sensible adaptation pathways for 
other global regions;   
• Implementation of local/regional adaptation needs through a global partnership of shared expertise and 
capacity building.  
  
PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
68  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
 
 
 
Workshop W6:  Examining the linkages between physics and fish:  How do 
zooplankton and krill data sets improve our understanding of the impacts  
of climate change on fisheries? 
Co-Convenors  
William Peterson (Hatfield Marine Science Center, NMFS, NOAA, USA)  
Kazuaki Tadokoro (Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute, FRA, Japan) 
 
 
Introduction 
 
The goal of this workshop was to provide an opportunity for those keenly interested in “how data on 
zooplankton and krill can be used to better understand and forecast the impacts of climate change on fisheries” 
to discuss the topic in an informal workshop atmosphere.   
 
 
W6 Summary 
 
The meeting convenors solicited papers that demonstrated explicitly how information on species of copepods 
and euphausiids might contribute to a better understanding of the linkages between physics and fish.  Although 
the convenors worked hard to invite people to submit abstracts, only 8 were submitted, thus reducing the 
workshop to a ½-day.  More than 50 people attended the workshop.  The high level of attendance was evidence 
that there is a great deal of interest in learning more about mechanistic linkages between physics through the 
zooplankton to fish. 
 
 
W6:  What results were presented from designated case studies (to test methods)? 
 
Most of the discussion focused on a discussion of case studies.  These case studies were previously described 
in the PICES Press (Vol. 18, No. 2, 2010) and are summarized here for this report. 
 
William Peterson opened the meeting with an overview of mechanisms linking physical forcing and 
zooplankton distribution and abundance to fishes in the North Pacific.   
 
Ryan Rykaczewski gave a Pacific basin-scale perspective on how the Kuroshio and California Current might 
be linked.  He examined basin-wide variability in the depth of the nutricline across the mid-latitude North 
Pacific using a global, earth system model and found that variability in the depth of wintertime convection in 
the western North Pacific stimulates anomalies in the vertical distribution of nitrate and that these anomalies 
propagate from west to east with the North Pacific Current with a transit time on the scale of decades.   
 
William Peterson et al. discussed two hypotheses: (1) lipids and cold water copepod species, and (2) source 
water which feeds the northern California Current to see how these are linked with salmon survival. 
 
Jay Peterson (and co-author W.T. Peterson) showed that there have been chronic changes in the upwelling 
ecosystem off Newport, Oregon over the last 40 years.  First, there has been an increase in the number of 
copepod species routinely found along the coast (0.11 species per year); second, there has been an 
intensification of oxygen-depleted bottom waters on the shelf; third, there has been a deepening in the depth 
from which water upwells.   
  PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium outcomes 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   69 
Shaw et al. discussed relationships between timing and strength of upwelling and euphausiid spawning.  They 
showed that Euphausia pacifica spawning is strongly associated with the timing of the onset of upwelling but 
not with upwelling strength.  Thysanoessa spinifera, on the other hand, spawn prior to and during upwelling 
and seem to be more strongly affected by water temperature.  Future changes in the timing of the spring 
transition are likely to affect E. pacifica spawning behavior.  They predicted that a warmer ocean will likely 
lead to a decrease in T. spinifera abundance and spawning.  Both scenarios will affect the availability of 
euphausiids as a food source for higher trophic level predators.  
 
Takahashi et al. discussed some of their work carried out during a short visit at the Peterson lab (Hatfield 
Marine Science Center, NWFSC, NOAA) in Newport.  They looked at otoliths of late-larval and juvenile 
northern anchovy and Pacific sardine collected off Oregon in the summer of 2005, an unusual year in which 
upwelling began very late, in mid-July.  The results suggested that the fish responded quickly to the 
intensification of upwelling after mid-July, due to the development of a bloom of phytoplankton and a surge in 
production of cold water copepod species.  Increased secondary productivity led quickly to enhanced larval 
growth rate of northern anchovy.  
 
Tadokoro (and co-author Okazaki) noted that a great deal of work has been done on the large Neocalanus 
copepod species in the Oyashio–Kuroshio region, with relatively little research being done on the small 
copepods species upon which larval and juvenile sardines feed.  More work is needed on both food habits of 
juvenile planktivorous fishes as well as on the zooplankton upon which they feed.   
 
Kuriyama et al. reported on long-term variation in the copepod community in relation to the climatic change in 
the Kuroshio waters off southern Japan from 1971 to 2009.  They revealed that copepod abundances were high 
in the early 1970s and after the 1990s, and low in the 1980s.  Paraclanus parvus, as one of the important prey 
of the Japanese sardine, was abundant through the study period.   
 
The final talk was by Kobari et al. who demonstrated decadal changes in seasonal timing and population age-
structure of Eucalanus in the Oyasiho from a time series that originated in the 1970s.  They showed that a 
decline in copepod abundance originated at the early life stages, and was associated with a shift in atmospheric 
and oceanographic conditions.  Possible biological mechanisms to account for the decline were reduced egg 
production, lower survival for the portion of the annual cohort with late birth date, and overwintering of the 
survivors at younger stages. 
 
 
W6 Recommendations 
 
The workshop participants recommended the following:  
• Zooplankton time series that are based on either size of copepod taxa, or on species abundance, have 
far greater value than time series of “total biomass” or “volume” of the catch. 
• Future workshops on the same topic would be welcomed. 
 
More specialized workshops should be convened whereby zooplankton ecologists with long time series could 
work with fisheries scientists from the same region to try harder to relate inter-annual variations in 
zooplankton abundance and species composition with variations in some key aspects of pelagic fishes life 
history – either recruitment or growth. 
 
Symposium-related publications 
70  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
 
 
 
Peer-reviewed publications related to the Symposium presentations 
Badjeck, M.C., Allison, E.H., Halls, A.S. and Dulvy, N.K.   2010. Impacts of climate variability and change on fishery-based 
livelihoods.  Mar. Policy 34(3): 375–383. 
Barange, M., Allen, I., Allison, E., Badjeck, M.C., Blanchard, J., Drakeford, B., Dulvy, N.K., Harle, J., Holmes, R., Holt, J., 
Jennings, S., Lowe, J., Merino, G., Mullon, C., Pilling, G., Rodwell, L., Tompkins, E. and  Werner, F. 2011. Predicting the 
impacts and socio-economic consequences of climate change on global marine ecosystems and fisheries: the QUEST_Fish 
framework, pp. 29–59 in World Fisheries: A Social – Ecological Analysis edited by R.E. Ommer, R.I. Perry, K. Cochrane and 
P. Curry, Wiley-Blackwell, 440 pp. 
Bell, J.D., Reid, C., Batty, M.J., Lehodey, P., Rodwell, L., Hobday, A.J., Johnson, J.E. and Demmke, A. 2013. Effects of climate 
change on oceanic fisheries in the tropical Pacific: implications for economic development and food security. Climatic 
Change doi 10.1007/s10584-012-0606-2. 
Beltrán, F., Sansó, B., Lemos, R.T. and Mendelssohn, R. 2012.  Joint projections of North Pacific sea surface temperature from 
different global climate models.  Environmentrics 23(5): 451–465. 
Ben Rais Lasram, F., Guilhaumon, F., Albouy, C., Somot, S., Thuiller, W. and Mouillot, D. 2010.  The Mediterranean Sea as a 
‘cul-de-sac’ for endemic fishes facing climate change.  Global Change Biol. 16(12): 3233–3245. 
Blanchard, J.L., Jennings, S., Holems, R., Harle, J., Merino, G., Allen, J.I., Holt, J., Dulvy, N.K. and Barange, M. 2012.  Potential 
consequences of climate change for primary production and fish production in large marine ecosystems. Phil. Trans. Roy. 
Soc. Lond. B 567: 2979–2989, doi10.1098/rstb.20120231. 
Chang, Y., Lee, M.A., Lee, K.T. and Shao, K.T. 2013. Adaptation of fisheries and mariculture management to extreme oceanic 
environmental changes and climate variability in Taiwan. Mar. Policy 38: 476–482. 
Cheung, W.W.L., Dunne, J., Sarmiento, J.L. and Pauly, D. 2011. Integrating ecophysiology and plankton dynamics into projected 
maximum fisheries catch potential under climate change in the Northeast Atlantic.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68(6):1008–1018. 
Engelhard, G.H., Pinnegar, J.K., Kell, L.T. and Rijnsdorp, A.D. 2011. Nine decades of North Sea sole and plaice distribution.  
ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68(6): 1090–1104. 
Frusher, S.D., Pecl, G.T. and Gardner, C. 2010. The east coast Tasmanian rock lobster fishery: vulnerability to climate change 
impacts and adaptation response options. 2010 International Climate Change Adaptation Conference, June 29–July 1, 2010, 
Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia. 
Fulton, E.A. 2011. Interesting times: Winners and losers and system shifts under climate change around Australia.  ICES J. Mar. 
Sci. 68(6): 1329–1342. 
Geffen, A.J., Høie, H., Folkvord, A., Hufthammer, A.K., Andersson, C., Ninnemann, U., Pedersen, R.B. and Nedreaas, K.  2011.  
High-latitude climate variability and its effect on fisheries resources as revealed by fossil cod otoliths.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 
68(6):1081–1090. 
Gibson, G.A., Hermann, A.J., Hedström, K. and Curchitser, E.N. 2013. A modeling study to explore on-shelf transport of oceanic 
zooplankton in the Eastern Bering Sea. Deep-Sea Res. II 121-122: 47–64. 
Gnandesikan, A., Dunne, J.P. and John, J. 2011. What ocean biogeochemical models can tell us about bottom-up control of 
ecosystem variability.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68(6): 1030–1044. 
Hare, J.A., Alexander, M.A., Fogarty, M.J., Williams, E.H. and Scott, J.D.  2010.  Forecasting the dynamics of coastal fishery 
species using a coupled climate –population model.  Ecol. Appl. 20(2): 452–464. 
Hare, J.A., Wuenschel, M.J. and Kimball, M.E. 2012. Projecting range limits with coupled thermal tolerance - climate change 
models: An example based on gray snapper (Lutjanus griseus) along the U.S. east coast. PLoS ONE 7(12): e52294. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0052294. 
Haynie, A. and Pfeiffer, L. 2012. Why economics matters for understanding the effects of climate change on fisheries.  ICES J. 
Mar. Sci. 69(7): 1160–1167. 
Hidalgo, M., Rouyer, T., Bartolino, V., Cerviño, S., Ciannelli, L., Massuti, E., Jadaud, A., Saborido-Rey, F., Durant, J.M., 
Santurtún, M., Piñeiro, C. and Stenseth, N.C.  2012.  Context-dependent interplays between truncated demographies and 
climate variation shape the population growth rate of a harvested species.  Ecography 35(7): 637–649. 
Hobday, A.J., Young, J.W., Moeseneder, C. and Dambacher, J.M.  2011. Defining dynamic pelagic habitats in oceanic waters off 
Australia.  Deep-Sea Res. II 58(5): 734–745. 
Hofstede, R., Hiddink, J.G. and Rijnsdorp, A.D. 2010. Regional warming changes fish species richness in the eastern North 
Atlantic Ocean.  Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 414: 1–9. 
Holt, J., Wakelin, S., Lowe, J. and Tinker, J. 2010. The potential impacts of climate change on the hydrography of the northwest 
European continental shelf.  Prog. Oceanogr. 86(3-4): 361–379. 
Howell, E.A., Wabnitz, C.C.C., Dunne, J.P. and Polovina, J.J. 2012. Climate-induced primary productivity change and fishing 
impacts on the Central North Pacific ecosystem and Hawaii-based pelagic longline fishery.  Climatic Change doi 
10.1007/s10584-012-0597-z. 
  Symposium-related publications 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   71 
Hufnagl, M. and Peck, M.A. 2011.  Physiological individual-based modeling of larval Atlantic herring (Clupea harengus) 
foraging and growth: insights on climate-driven life-history scheduling.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68(6): 1170–1188. 
Hunt, Jr., G.L., Coyle, K.O., Eisner, L., Farley, E.V., Heintz, R., Mueter, F., Napp, J.M., Overland, J.E., Ressler, P.H., Salo, S. 
and Stabeno, P.J. 2011.  Climate impacts on eastern Bering Sea food webs: A synthesis of new data and an assessment of the 
Oscillating Control Hypothesis.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68(6): 1230–1243. 
Ianelli, J.N., Hollowed, A.B., Haynie, A.C., Mueter, F.J. and Bond, N.A. 2011.  Evaluating management strategies for eastern 
Bering Sea walleye pollock (Theragra chalcogramma) in a changing environment.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68(6): 1297–1304. 
Ishimura, G., Herrick, S. and Sumaila, U.R. 2013. Stability of cooperative management of the Pacific sardine fishery under 
climate variability.  Mar. Policy 39: 333–340. 
Ito, S., Yoshie, N., Okunishi, T., Ono, T., Okazaki, Y., Kuwata, A., Hashioka, T., Rose, K.A., Megrey, B.A., Kishi, M.J., 
Nakamachi, M., Shimizu, Y., Kakehi, S., Saito, H., Takahashi, K., Tadokoro, K., Kusaka, A. and Kasai, H. 2010.  
Application of an automatic approach to calibrate the NEMURO nutrient-phytoplankton-zooplankton food web model in the 
Oyashio region.  Prog. Oceanogr. 87(1-4): 186–200. 
Ito, S., Okunishi, T., Kishi, M. and Wang, M. 2013. Modelling ecological responses of Pacific saury (Coloabis saira) to future 
climate change and its uncertainty.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 70: 980–990. 
Jang, C.J., Park, J., Park, T. and Yoo, S. 2011.  Response of the ocean mixed layer depth to global warming and its impact on 
primary production: a case study for the Northern Pacific Ocean.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68(6): 996–1007. 
Kaeriyama, M., Seo, H., Kudo, H. and Nagata, M. 2012. Perspectives on wild and hatchery salmon interactions at sea, potential 
climate effects on Japanese chum salmon, and the need for sustainable salmon fishery management reform in Japan.  Environ. 
Biol. Fishes 94: 165–177. 
Keister, J.E., Di Lorenzo, E., Morgan, C.A., Combes, V. and Peterson, W.T. 2011. Zooplankton species composition is linked to 
ocean transport in the Northern California Current.  Global Change Biol. 17(7): 2498–2511. 
Kidokoro, H., Goto, T., Nagasawa, T., Nishida, H. Akamine, T. and Sakurai, Y. 2010. Impact of climate regime shift on the 
migration of Japanese common squid (Todarodes pacificus) in the Sea of Japan. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 67(7): 1314–1322. 
Kishi, M.J., Ito, S., Megrey, B.A., Rose, K.A. and Werner, F.E. 2011. A review of the NEMURO and NEMURO.FISH models 
and their application to marine ecosystem investigations.  J. Oceanogr. 67: 3–16. 
Kurogi, M., Hasumi, H. and Tanaka, Y. 2013. Effects of stretching on maintain the Kuroshio meander.  J. Geophys. Res. 118: 
doi: 10.1002/jgrc.20123. 
Lindegren, M., Östman, O. and Gårdmark, A. 2011. Interacting trophic forcing and the population dynamics of herring.  Ecology 
92(7): 1407–1413. 
Martins, E.G., Hinch, S.G., Patterson, D.A., Hague, M.J., Cooke, S.J., Miller, K.M., Lapointe, M.F., English, K.K. and  Farrell, 
A.P. 2011.  Effects of river temperature and climate warming on stock-specific survival of adult migrating Fraser River 
sockeye salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka). Global Change Biol. 17(1): 99–114. 
Mueter, F.J., Bond, N.A., Ianelli, J.N. and Hollowed, A.B.  2011.  Expected declines in recruitment of walleye pollock (Theragra 
chalcogramma) in the eastern Bering Sea under future climate change.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68(6): 1284–1296. 
Munday, P.L., Dixson, D.L., McCormick, M.I. Meekan, M., Ferrari, M.C.O. and Ghivers, D.P.  2010.  Replenishment of fish 
populations is threatened by ocean acidification.  Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 107(29): 12,930–12,934. 
Murzina, S.A., Meyer Ottesen, C.A., Falk-Petersen, S., Hop, H., Nemvoa, N.N. and Poluektova, O.G.   2012.  Oogenesis and 
lipids in gonad and liver of daubed shanny (Leptoclinus maculates) females from Slvalbard waters.  Fish Physiol. Biochem. 
38: 1393–1407. 
Nielsen, J.N., Ruggerone, G.T. and Zimmerman, C.E. 2012. Adaptive strategies and life history characteristics in a warming 
climate: Salmon in the Arctic? Environ. Biol. Fishes doi: 10.1007/s10641-012-0082-6. 
Nonaka, M., Sasaki, H., Taguchi, B. and Nakamura, H. 2012. Potential predictability of interannual variability in the Kuroshio 
extension jet speed in an eddy-resolving OGCM.  J. Climate 25: 3645–3652. 
Okey, T.A., Alidina, H.M., Montenegro, A., Lo, V. and Jessen, S. 2012. Climate Change Impacts and Vulnerabilities in Canada’s 
Pacific Marine Ecosystems. CPAWS BC and WWF-Canada, Vancouver, BC. 156 pp. 
Overland, J.E., Wang, M., Bond, N.A., Walsh, J.E., Kattsov, V.M. and Chapman, W.L.  2011. Considerations in the selection of 
global climate model for regional climate projections: The Arctic as a case study.  J. Climate 24: 1583–1597. 
Papaioannou, E.A., Vafeidis, A.T., Quaas, M.F. and Schmidt, J.O. 2012. The development and use of a spatial database for the 
determination and characterization of the state of the German Baltic small-scale fishery sector.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 69(8): 
1480–1490. 
Perry, R.I., Ommer, R.E., Allison, E.H., Badjeck, M.-C., Barange, M., Hamilton, L., Jarre, A., Quiñones, R.A. and Sumaila, U.R. 
2010. Interactions between changes in marine ecosystems and human communities, pp. 221–250 in Marine Ecosystems and 
Global Change edited by M. Barange, J.G. Field, R.P. Harris, E.E. Hofmann, R.I. Perry and F.E. Werner, Oxford University 
Press. 412 pp. 
Plagányi, E., Weeks, S., Gibbs, M., Skewes, T., Poloczanska, E., Norman-López, A., Blamey, L., Soares, M. and Robinson, W. 
2011.  Assessing the adequacy of current fisheries management under changing climate: a southern synopsis.  ICES J. Mar. 
Sci. 68(6): 1305–1318. 
Planque, B., Bellier, E. and Loots, C. 2011. Uncertainties in projecting spatial distributions of marine populations.  ICES J. Mar. 
Sci. 68(6): 1045–1050. 
Symposium-related publications 
72  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Polovina, J.J., Dunne, J.P., Woodworth, P.A. and Howell, E.A.  2011.  Projected expansion of the subtropical biome and 
contraction of the temperate and equatorial upwelling biomes in the North Pacific under global warming.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 
68(6): 986–995. 
Pörtner, H.-O. 2010.  Oxygen- and capacity-limitation of thermal tolerance: a matrix for integrating climate-related stressor 
effects in marine ecosystems.  J. Exper. Biol. 213: 881–893. 
Rice, J. and Garcia, S. 2011.  Fisheries, food security, climate change and biodiversity: characteristics of the sector and 
perspectives on emerging issues.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68(6): 1343–1353. 
Seo, H., Kudo, H. and Kaeriyama, M. 2011. Long-term climate-related changes in somatic growth and population dynamics of 
Hokkaido chum salmon.  Environ. Biol. Fish. 90: 131–142. 
Sumaila, U.R., Cheung, W.W.L., Lam, V.W.Y., Pauly, D. and Herrick, S.  2011. Climate change impacts on the biophysics and 
economics of world fisheries. Nature Climate Change 3(3): 449–456. 
Sumata, H., Hashioka, T., Suzuki, T., Yoshie, N., Okunishi, T., Aita, M.N., Sakamoto, T.T., Ishida, A., Okada, N. and 
Yamanaka, Y. 2010. Effect of eddy transport on the nutrient supply into the euphotic zone simulated in an eddy-permitting 
ocean ecosystem model. J. Mar. Syst. 83: 67–87. 
Voss, R., Hinrichsen, H.-H., Stepputtis, D., Bernreuther, M., Huwer, B., Neumann, V. and Schmidt, J.O.  2011. Egg mortality: 
predation and hydrography in the central Baltic. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68 (7): 1379–1390. 
Wang, M., Overland, J.E. and Bond, N.A. 2010. Climate projections for selected large marine ecosystems.  J. Mar. Syst. 79: 258–
266. 
Wilderbuer, T., Stockhausen, W. and Bond, N. 2013. Updated analysis of flatfish recruitment response to climate variability and 
ocean conditions in the Eastern Bering Sea.  Deep-Sea Res. II 94: 157–164. 
Zhang, C.I., Hollowed, A.B., Lee, J.-B. and Kim, D.-H. 2011. An IFRAME approach for assessing impacts of climate change on 
fisheries.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68(6): 1318–1328. 
 
  WG-FCCIFS Summary 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   73 
WG-FCCIFS Summary Relative to its Terms of Reference 
  
As noted in the introduction, the Terms of Reference for WG-FCCIFS were to: 
1. Promote research on climate change impacts on marine ecosystems by scientists in ICES and PICES 
member nations through coordinated communication, exchange of methodology, and organization of 
meetings to discuss and publish results.  
2. In collaboration with relevant expert groups in PICES and ICES, develop frameworks and methodologies 
for forecasting the impacts of climate change on marine ecosystems, with particular emphasis on the 
distribution, abundance and production of commercial fish and shellfish; 
3. Review the results of designated case studies to test methods; 
Explore techniques for estimating and communicating uncertainty in forecasts;  
4. Explore strategies for research and management under climate change scenarios, given the limitations of 
our forecasts; 
5. Plan for a science symposium in early 2010 to present, discuss and publish forecasts of climate change 
impacts on the world’s marine ecosystems, with particular emphasis on commercial fish and shellfish 
resources. 
6. Produce publications that are relevant to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change; 
7. Publish report(s) summarizing work. 
 
The actions of WG-FCCIFS achieved all of these activities.  Review of the literature cited in this report serves 
as a testament of the success of the group’s ability to foster interest in climate change and its potential impacts 
on fish and shellfish throughout the Northern Hemisphere.  We anticipate that the papers generated through the 
efforts of the Working Group will be useful to writers preparing the IPCC’s Fifth Assessment Report.  The 
formation of the Section (Strategic Initiative) on Climate Change Effects on Marine Ecosystems will allow 
PICES and ICES to remain leaders in fostering and supporting the science needed to understand, assess and 
project the implications of climate change on marine ecosystems. 
 
 
  
Appendix 1  WG-FCCIFS Membership 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   75 
Appendix 1    
WG-FCCIFS membership 
PICES members 
Canada
Richard J. Beamish  
Fisheries and Oceans Canada  
Pacific Biological Station  
3190 Hammond Bay Rd.  
Nanaimo, BC, V9T 6N7  
Canada  
E-mail: Richard.Beamish@dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
Michael G. Foreman  
Fisheries and Oceans Canada 
Institute of Ocean Sciences  
P.O. Box 6000  
Sidney, BC, V8L 4B2 
Canada  
E-mail: mike.foreman@dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
Jacquelynne R. King  
Fisheries and Oceans Canada 
Pacific Biological Station  
3190 Hammond Bay Rd.  
Nanaimo, BC, V9T 6N7  
Canada  
E-mail: Jackie.King@dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
 
 
 
 
Japan 
Shin-ichi Ito 
Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute, FRA  
3-27-5 Shinhama-cho  
Shiogama, Miyagi 985-0001 
Japan  
E-mail: goito@affrc.go.jp 
 
Yasuhiro Yamanaka 
Hokkaido University  
N10W5 Kita-ku  
Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-0810   
Japan  
E-mail: galapen@ees.hokudai.ac.jp 
Akihiko Yatsu 
Hokkaido National Fisheries Research Institute, FRA  
2-4-1 Nakanoshima 2jyou  
Sapporo, Toyohira-ku 062-0922  
Japan  
E-mail: yatsua@fra.affrc.go.jp 
 
 
 
 
 
WG-FCCIFS Membership  Appendix 1 
76  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
People’s Republic of China 
Xianshi Jin 
Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute, CAFS  
106 Nanjing Rd.  
Qingdao, Shandong 266071 
People’s Republic of China  
E-mail: jin@ysfri.ac.cn 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Republic of Korea
Sukyung Kang 
National Fisheries Research and Development Institute 
   (NFRDI), MIFAFF  
152-1 Haean-ro, Gijang-eup, Gijang-gun  
Busan 619-705  
Republic of Korea  
E-mail: kangsk@nfrdi.go.kr 
 
Suam Kim (Co-Chairman) 
Pukyong National University  
599-1 Daeyeon-3dong, Nam-gu  
Busan 608-737 
Republic of Korea 
E-mail: suamkim@pknu.ac.kr 
 
 
 
 
Russia
Vladimir I. Radchenko  
Pacific Research Institute of Fisheries and 
   Oceanography (TINRO-Center)  
4 Shevchenko Alley  
Vladivostok, Primorsky Kray 690950 
Russia    
E-mail: Radchenko@tinro.ru 
 
Yury I. Zuenko 
Pacific Research Institute of Fisheries and 
   Oceanography (TINRO-Center)  
4 Shevchenko Alley  
Vladivostok, Primorsky Kray 690091 
Russia  
E-mail: zuenko_yury@hotmail.com
 
 
United States of America
Anne B. Hollowed (Co-Chairman) 
Alaska Fisheries Science Center, NMFS, NOAA  
7600 Sand Point Way NE  
Seattle, WA 98115-6349  
USA  
E-mail: Anne.Hollowed@noaa.gov 
  
Franz J. Mueter  
University of Alaska, Fairbanks  
17109 Pt. Lena Loop Rd.  
Juneau, AK 99801 
USA  
E-mail: fmueter@alaska.edu 
 
James E. Overland  
Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory  
NOAA  
7600 Sand Point Way NE  
Seattle, WA 98115-6349  
USA  
E-mail: James.E.Overland@noaa.gov 
 
 
Appendix 1  WG-FCCIFS Membership 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45   77 
ICES members 
Canada 
Jake Rice  
Fisheries and Oceans Canada  
Ecosystem Science Directorate  
Station 12S014, 200 Kent St.  
Ottawa, ON, K1A 0E6 
Canada  
E-mail: Jake.Rice@dfo-mpo.gc.ca
 
 
 
Denmark 
Keith Brander 
Technical University of Denmark  
National Institute of Aquatic Resources  
Charlottenlund Slot, Jægersborg Allé 1  
Charlottenlund,  DK-2920 
Denmark  
E-mail: kbr@aqua.dtu.dk
 
 
Germany
Jürgen Alheit 
Leibniz Institute for Baltic Sea Research, IOW 
Seestr. 15  
Warnemuende 18119 
Germany  
E-mail: juergen.alheit@io-warnemuende.de 
 
Joachim Gröger 
Institute for Sea Fisheries  
Palmaille 9  
Hamburg, D-22767 
Germany  
E-mail: joachim.groeger@vti.bund.de 
 
Christian Moellmann  
Institute for Hydrobiology and Fisheries Science  
University of Hamburg  
133 Grosse Elbstrasse  
Hamburg, D-22767 
Germany  
E-mail: christian.moellmann@uni-hamburg.de 
 
Myron A. Peck  
Center for Marine and Climate Research 
University of Hamburg  
Olbersweg 24  
Hamburg, 22767  
Germany  
E-mail: myron.peck@uni-hamburg.de 
 
Markus Quante  
Institute for Coastal Research / System Analysis and 
   Modelling  
Max-Planck-Strasse 1  
Geesthacht, D-21502 
Germany  
E-mail: markus.quante@gkss.de
 
WG-FCCIFS Membership Appendix 1 
78  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Norway
Kenneth Drinkwater  
Institute of Marine Research (IMR)  
P.O. Box 1870 Nordnes  
Bergen, N-5817 
Norway  
E-mail: ken.drinkwater@imr.no 
Harald Loeng (Co-Chairman) 
Institute of Marine Research (IMR)  
P.O. Box 1870 Nordnes  
Bergen 5817 
Norway  
E-mail: harald.loeng@imr.no 
 
 
 
United Kingdom 
Manuel Barange (Co-Chairman) 
Plymouth Marine Laboratory  
Prospect Place  
Plymouth, Devon, PL1 3DH  
United Kingdom  
E-mail: m.barange@pml.ac.uk
Jason Holt  
Proudman Oceanographic Laboratory  
6 Brownlow St., Joseph Proudman Bldg.  
Liverpool  
United Kingdom L3 5DA 
E-mail: jholt@pol.ac.uk
 
Appendix 2  WG-FCCIFS meeting reports 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  79 
Appendix 2   
WG-FCCIFS inter-sessional and annual meeting reports  
 
2009 Inter-sessional WG-FCCIFS meeting, June 21, 2009, Victoria, Canada ............................................................ 80 
2009 WG-FCCIFS meeting, ICES Annual Science Conference, September 20, 2009, Berlin, Germany ................... 82 
2009 WG-FCCIFS meeting, PICES-2009, October 29, 2009, Jeju, Korea ................................................................. 83 
2010 Inter-sessional WG-FCCIFS meeting, April 29–30, 2010, Sendai, Japan .......................................................... 84 
2010 WG-FCCIFS meeting, ICES Annual Science Conference, September 23, 2010, Nantes, France ...................... 86 
2010 WG-FCCIFS meeting, PICES-2010, October 24, 2010, Portland, USA ............................................................ 88 
2011 WG-FCCIFS inter-sessional meeting, May 22, 2011, Seattle, USA .................................................................. 90 
2011 WG-FCCIFS meeting, ICES Annual Science Conference, September 19, Gdańsk, Poland .............................. 91 
2011 WG-FCCIFS meeting, PICES-2010, October 14, 2011, Khabarovsk, Russia .................................................... 91 
  
WG-FCCIFS meeting reports Appendix 2 
80  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
2009 Inter-sessional WG-FCCIFS meeting, Victoria, Canada
 
The first meeting of the joint PICES/ICES Working Group on Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish 
and Shellfish (WG-FCCIFS) was held in conjunction with the GLOBEC Open Science Meeting in Victoria, 
Canada, on June 21, 2009.   
 
The main objective of this meeting, as one of  the Working Group’s Terms of Reference, was to agree to the 
structure of a science symposium on “Climate change effects on fish and fisheries:  Forecasting impacts, 
assessing ecosystem responses, and evaluating management strategies” organised under the auspices of the 
WG-FCCIFS.  Members of the Working Group discussed plans for the symposium that would take place in 
Sendai, Japan, in April 2010. 
 
Also discussed was the relationship between WG-FCCIFS and other ICES expert groups including: the 
Steering Group on Climate Change, and Working Group on Cod and Climate Change, Working Group on 
Integrated Assessments of the Baltic Sea and Working Group on Life Cycle and Ecology of Small Pelagic 
Fish.   
 
The Working Group’s links with PICES’ Fishery Science Committee (FIS) and Physical Oceanography and 
Climate Committee (POC) were reviewed as well as the Group’s relationship with expert groups, including 
Working Group (WG 20) on Evaluating Climate Change Projections, and PICES’ second integrative science 
program, FUTURE (Forecasting and Understanding Trends, Uncertainty and Responses of North Pacific 
Marine Ecosystems) that is expected to be formally inaugurated at the 2009 PICES Annual Meeting in Jeju, 
Korea.  FUTURE will be made up of three Advisory Panels that will provide guidance to all expert groups to 
achieve the aims of FUTURE: AICE (Anthropogenic Influences on Coastal Ecosystems), COVE (Climate, 
Ocean Variability and Ecosystems), and SOFE (Status, Outlooks, Forecasts and Engagement).  WG-FCCIFS 
will have the strongest links with SOFE and COVE. 
 
Synergies with other organizations were also discussed. 
 
Dr. Kenneth Drinkwater provided an overview of the Ecosystem Studies of Subarctic Seas (ESSAS) project.  
ESSAS has elected to become a project under the Integrated Marine Biogeochemistry and Ecosystem Research 
project (IMBER).  ESSAS encourages comparative studies of ecosystems within the sub-arctic seas.  It 
provides funding for comparative ecosystem studies what will be relevant to WG-FCCFIS.  
 
Dr. Shin-ichi Ito discussed a proposal that was submitted to SCOR (Scientific Committee on Oceanic 
Research) titled “Coupled climate-to-fish-to-fishers models for understanding mechanisms underlying low 
frequency fluctuations in small pelagic fish”.  This project is likely to contribute case studies that will be 
relevant to the WG-FCCIFS effort. 
 
Dr. Manuel Barange reported on recent developments within the Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN 
(FAO), World Bank and United Nations Environment Program (UNEP), among other regional/global 
stewardship organizations.  These organizations are particularly interested in models and decision support tools 
that provide information on the socio-economic implications of, and adaptations to, climate change on fish and 
fisheries.  
 
WG-FCCIFS reviewed its Terms of Reference and determined that several items could not be undertaken until 
after the 2010 symposium in Sendai.  The symposium was expected to provide a forum for discussing 
frameworks and methodologies for forecasting impacts of climate change on the growth, distribution and 
abundance of marine life.  The Group agreed to initiate some writing assignments during the summer of 2009 
(mainly collation of existing methodologies relevant to the objectives of the Working Group).  WG-FCCIFS 
members decided to meet again the day after the Sendai symposium to summarize the results presented and to 
develop a timetable for the delivery of the Working Group products to ICES and PICES. 
Appendix 2  WG-FCCIFS meeting reports 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  81 
List of participants 
Name Country/ Organization  E-mail 
Jürgen Alheit ICES, Germany juergen.alheit@io-warnemuende.de 
Manuel Barange ICES, UK, Co-Chairman M.brange@pml.ac.uk 
Keith Brander ICES, Denmark kbr@aqua.dtu.dk 
Alexander Bychkov PICES Bychkov@pices.int 
Ken Denman Canada Ken.Denman@ec.gc.ca 
Ken Drinkwater  ICES, Norway Ken.drinkwater@imr.no 
Michael Foreman  PICES, Canada Mike.foreman@dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
Jason Holt  ICES, UK jholt@poc.ac.uk 
Shin-ichi Ito  PICES, Japan goito@affrc.go.jp 
Suam Kim PICES, Korea, Co-Chairman suamkim@pknu.ac.kr 
Jacquelynne King  PICES, Canada Jackie.King@dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
Harald Loeng  ICES, Norway, Co-Chairman Harald.loeng@imr.no 
Margaret Mary McBride  ESSAS Margaret.mcbride@imr.no 
Franz Mueter PICES, USA fmueter@alaska.edu 
Thomas Okey  Canada Thomas.okey@gmail.com 
James E. Overland PICES, USA James.e.overland@noaa.gov 
Myron Peck  ICES, Germany Myron.peck@uni-hamburg.de 
John Stein  PICES, Science Board Chairman John.e.stein@noaa.gov 
Svein Sunby Norway Svein.sundby@imr.no 
Peter Wiebe USA pwiebe@whoi.edu 
Yasuhiro Yamanaka PICES, Japan galapen@ees.hokudai.ac.jp 
 
 
WG-FCCIFS meeting reports  Appendix 2 
82  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
2009 WG-FCCIFS meeting, ICES ASC, Berlin, Germany 
 
 
The ICES/PICES Working Group on Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish  
(WG-FCCIFS) met in Berlin, Germany, on September 20, 2009.  The main objective of this meeting was to 
review workshop proposals for the symposium organised under the auspices of the Working Group in April 
2010, in Sendai, Japan.  The group discussed the possibility of developing a second symposium volume that 
would include synthesis papers developed by the theme session co-chairs.  The group finalized and submitted 
their proposal for a 1½-day Working Group meeting immediately after the Symposium.   
 
Drs. Anne Hollowed and Harald Loeng gave presentations to the ICES Science Committee Steering Group on 
Human Interactions and the Environment (SGHIE) on Monday, September 21 and Wednesday, September 23.  
Dr. Loeng also represented the WG-FCCIFS at the Steering Group on Ecosystem Function (SGEF) on 
September 21. 
 
The WG-FCCIFS discussed the ICES practice of annually revising the terms of reference of each working 
group.  As the TORs were negotiated between PICES and ICES, it was decided not to recommend any 
revisions and to keep the existing Terms of Reference. 
 
One of the TORs for the WG-FCCIFS was a review of the relationship of the planned work for the group 
relative to other activities of ICES and PICES.  The relationship between WG-FCCIFS and other ICES expert 
groups was discussed (mainly SGCC, WGCCC, WGIAB and WGLESP).  There was an introductory 
discussion about the need to raise the awareness and profile of climate change research in ICES.   
 
Dr. Alheit reported that the ICES Study Group on Climate Change (SGCC) planned to submit their report to 
SCICOM in May.  
 
Drs. Hollowed and Jon Hare discussed activities currently underway in the U.S.  Dr. Hollowed reported that 
she has been discussing the development of an overview paper that would address the strengths and weakness 
of different forecasting approaches that would be co-authored by the WG-FCCIFS co-chairs.  Dr. Hare 
mentioned that several scientists met to discuss how IPCC projection models could be utilized for fisheries 
issues at Princeton University, in June 2009 (proceedings published in Stock et al., 2011).   
 
Dr. Skip McKinnell reported on a meeting he had with Dr. Philippe Cury, EUR-OCEANS, concerning 
cooperation with EUR-OCEANS in scenario development and their co-sponsorship for the Sendai symposium. 
Dr. Christian Möellmann volunteered to contact Dr. Cury to explore this further. 
 
 
List of participants 
Name Country/ Organization E-mail 
Jürgen Alheit ICES, Germany juergen.alheit@io-warnemuende.de 
Ken Drinkwater  ICES, Norway Ken.drinkwater@imr.no 
Jon Hare  USA Jon.Hare@noaa.gov 
Anne Hollowed  PICES, USA Anne.Hollowed@noaa.gov  
Harald Loeng  ICES, Norway Harald.loeng@imr.no 
Skip McKinnell PICES McKinnell@pices.int  
Christian Möllmann ICES, Germany Christian.Moellmann@uni-hamburg.de 
Myron Peck ICES, Germany Myron.peck@uni-hamburg.de 
 
 
Appendix 2 WG-FCCIFS meeting reports 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  83 
2009 WG-FCCIFS meeting, PICES-2009, Jeju, Korea 
 
 
A WG-FCCIFS meeting was held on October 29 to discuss research activities and to review plans for the 
international symposium on “Climate change effects on fish and fisheries: Forecasting impacts, assessing 
ecosystem responses, and evaluating management strategies” to be held in Sendai, Japan.  The Working Group 
proposed two Theme Sessions for PICES co-sponsorship at the 2010 ICES Annual Science Conference in 
Nantes, France:  “Development and use of ocean observing and forecasting systems in coastal and marine 
management” and “Impact of climate variability on marine ecosystems: Understanding functional responses 
to facilitate forecasting”.  The latter was also proposed as a Topic Session for the 2010 PICES Annual 
Meeting in Portland, USA. All proposals were subsequently supported by Science Board. 
 
During the PICES Annual Meeting, the WG-FCCIFS Co-Chairs, Drs. Anne Hollowed (PICES/USA), Suam 
Kim (PICES/Korea), and Manuel Barange (ICES/UK), attended the kickoff meetings of the new Advisory 
Panels, AICE (Anthropogenic Influences on Coastal Ecosystems), COVE (Climate, Oceanographic Variability 
and Ecosystems) and SOFE (Status, Outlooks, Forecasts and Engagement) of PICES’ second integrative 
science program, FUTURE (Forecasting and Understanding Trends, Uncertainty and Responses of North 
Pacific Marine Ecosystems) to answer questions regarding the activities of the Working Group. 
 
 
List of participants 
 
Members 
 
Jürgen Alheit (ICES, Germany) 
Manuel Barange (ICES, UK) 
Michael Foreman (PICES, Canada) 
Anne B. Hollowed (PICES, USA) 
Shin-ichi Ito (PICES, Japan) 
Xianshi Jin (PICES, China) 
Sukyung Kang (PICES, Korea) 
Suam Kim (PICES, Korea) 
Franz Meuter (PICES, USA) 
Yashiro Yamanaka (PICES, Japan) 
Akihiko Yatsu (PICES, Japan) 
Yury Zuenko (PICES, Russia) 
Obervers 
 
Alexander Bychkov (PICES) 
Ik Kyu Chung (Korea) 
Laura Richards (Canada) 
Steven Rumrill (USA) 
Thomas Therriault (Canada) 
Yasunori Sakurai (Japan) 
  
WG-FCCIFS meeting reports  Appendix 2 
84  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
2010 Inter-sessional WG-FCCIFS meeting, Sendai, Japan  
 
 
The joint PICES/ICES Working Group on Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish  
(WG-FCCIFS) met in Sendai, Japan, on April 29–30, 2010.  Twenty scientists from 9 countries attended the 
meeting.  The main objective of this meeting was to review the outcomes of the PICES/ICES/FAO 
Symposium on “Climate change effects on fish and fisheries” and to discuss plans for future collaborative 
research in 2010–2012.  
 
The meeting opened with a review of ICES and PICES working groups that were related to climate change. 
The role of PICES working groups was summarized by Dr. Alexander Bychkov (Executive Secretary), 
followed by a summary of the role of ICES working groups by Dr. Manual Barange (SCICOM Chairman), by 
phone).  Both PICES and ICES see climate change research as an integrative cross-cutting activity.  Following 
the ICES and PICES overviews, Dr. Barange discussed QUEST-Fish, an ongoing project linking climate to 
fish to markets and the newly funded EURO-BASIN project.  BASIN (Basin-scale Analysis, Synthesis and 
INtegration) is an international effort to understand and simulate the impact of climate variability and change 
on key species of plankton and fish, as well as community structure as a whole, of the North Atlantic. 
 
Dr. Jürgen Alheit led a discussion that identified potential PICES and ICES topic/theme sessions for upcoming 
Annual Meetings.  There were a number of recommendations – some specific and some more general.  Continued 
co-hosting of sessions between ICES and PICES was discussed for a number of the potential sessions.   
 
WG-FCCIFS Co-Chair, Dr. Anne Hollowed, provided an update of several NOAA activities, including 
COMPASS (Communicaton Partnership for Science and the Sea) and NOAA’s new Climate Services.  Dr. 
Shin-ichi Ito updated the Working Group on ESSAS (Ecosystem Studies of Subarctic Seas project) research 
actives, and Dr. Jon Hare discussed a workshop held at NOAA’s Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory 
during the summer of 2009. 
 
Following these general issues, WG-FCCIFS reviewed the symposium workshops and suggested that a 
summary of the symposium be written and submitted for publication.  Some specific journals were identified, 
including the new Nature Climate magazine, Fisheries Oceanography and Progress in Oceanography.  
 
The final issue discussed was a timetable for a follow-up symposium.  Calendars of upcoming meetings were 
reviewed.  Specifically, the 3
rd
 Symposium on “The ocean in a high CO
2
 world” was noted as an important 
meeting for WG-FCCIFS to be aware of (http://oceanacidification.wordpress.com/2010/07/16/third-
symposium-on-the-ocean-in-a-high-co2-world/).  An offer was made by the Korean government to host the 
next Symposium on “Effects of climate change on the world’s oceans” in conjunction with the Ocean Expo 
2012 in Yeosu, Korea. This will be discussed further at the next Working Group meeting during the 2010 
ICES Annual Science Conference in Nantes, France.  
  
The Working Group requested an endorsement by ICES and PICES to organize: 
• A 5-day ICES/PICES Workshop on “Reaction of Northern Hemisphere ecosystems to the climate events in 
the late 1980s: A comparison” (May 2011, Hamburg, Germany) to be convened by Jürgen Alheit 
(Germany), R. Diekmann (Germany) and TBD (PICES). PICES is requested to nominate a co-convenor 
for this workshop. 
• A 1-day workshop on climate change effects on fish and fisheries in conjunction with the ESSAS Open 
Science Meeting (May 2011, Seattle, USA).  
• ICES/PICES Theme Session on “Atmospheric forcing of the Northern Hemisphere ocean gyres, and the 
subsequent impact on the adjacent marine climate and ecosystems” for the ICES ASC (September 2011, 
Gdańsk, Poland) to be convened by E. Di Lorenzo (PICES/USA) and I. Yasuda (PICES/Japan) H. Hatun 
(ICES/Faroe Islands) and Jürgen Alheit (ICES/Germany).  
• PICES to co-sponsor an ICES Symposium on “Forage fish interactions and ecosystem approach to 
fisheries management” (September 10–14, 2012, Nantes, France).  ICES has already agreed to sponsor it, 
therefore, this request is for action by PICES.  
Appendix 2 WG-FCCIFS meeting reports 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  85 
• A 1½-day theme session at the Symposium on “Effects of climate change on the world’s oceans” to be 
held in conjunction with Ocean Expo 2012 (May 2012, Yeosu, Korea); it was also requested that funds for 
invited speakers be included as part of the overall financial contribution to the symposium. 
 
The Working Group may request funds from ICES for a second volume of papers to be published in the ICES 
Journal of Marine Science in September, 2011. This resolution will be resolved during the ICES ASC. 
 
The WG-FCCIFS meeting closed with a warm thank you to the Local Host Organizations – Fisheries Research 
Agency of Japan (FRA) and Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute (TNFRI) FRA, and the individuals – 
Drs. Yukimasa Ishida, Manpei Shuzuki, Hiroyasu Adachi, Katsumi Yokouchi, and Shin-ichi Ito for putting on 
a wonderful Symposium.  The venue was excellent, the city of Sendai was beautiful, the support for the 
scientific program was wonderful, and the social events were very enjoyable. WG-FCCIFS also thanked the 
Symposium convenors for putting together an excellent scientific program: Drs. Anne Hollowed (Alaska 
Fisheries Science Center, NMFS/NOAA, USA), Manuel Barange (Plymouth Marine Laboratory, United 
Kingdom), Shin-ichi Ito (Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute, FRA, Japan), Suam Kim (Pukyong 
National University, Republic of Korea), Harald Loeng (Institute of Marine Research, Norway). 
 
 
List of participants 
Name Affiliation 
Jürgen Alheit Leibniz Institute for Baltic Sea Research, Germany 
Alexander Bychkov PICES Secretariat 
Michael Foreman Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Institute of Ocean Sciences, Canada 
Stewart Frusher University of Tasmania, Australia 
Jonathan Hare Narragansett Laboratory, National Marine Fisheries Service, NOAA, USA 
Anne Hollowed Alaska Fisheries Science Center, National Marine Fisheries Service, NOAA, USA 
Jason Holt Proudman Oceanographic Laboratory, United Kingdom 
Shin-ichi Ito Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute, FRA, Japan 
Sukyung Kang National Fisheries Research and Development Institute, Korea 
Adolf Kellerman Science Programme, ICES, Denmark 
Suam Kim Pukyong National University, Korea 
Skip McKinnell PICES Secretariat, Canada 
Franz Mueter University of Alaska Fairbanks, USA 
Thomas Okey Ecosystem Sciences, Westcoast Aquatic and University of Victoria, Canada 
Myron Peck Center for Marine and Climate Research, University of Hamburg, Germany 
Graham Pilling Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science, United Kingdom 
Jake Rice Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Ecosystem Science Directorate, Canada 
John Stein Northwest Fisheries Science Center, National Marine Fisheries Service, NOAA, USA 
Motomitsu Takahashi Seikai National Fisheries Research Institute, Japan 
Yury Zuenko Pacific Research Institute of Fisheries and Oceanography (TINRO-Center), Russia 
  
WG-FCCIFS meeting reports  Appendix 2 
86  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
2010 WG-FCCIFS meeting, ICES ASC, Nantes, France  
 
 
The WG-FCCIFS met on September 23, 2010 in Nantes, France, to review their Terms of Reference.  Drs. 
Skip McKinnell (PICES Deputy Executive Secretary), Sinjae Yoo (PICES Science Board Chairman) and Luis 
Valdés (Head, Section for Ocean Science, IOC) also attended.  The following issues were considered. 
  
• Status of Working Group report:  
The Symposium on “Climate change effects on fish and fisheries” summary report was delivered to ICES 
in September 2010. 
• Status of Symposium volume in the ICES Journal of Marine Science:  
The group discussed category 2 requests for additional pages if necessary. 
• Discussion of synthesis paper for Nature Climate: 
The group agreed that this synthesis would be an excellent activity.  Dr. Anne Hollowed will coordinate 
the synthesis with help of other symposium convenors and session co-chairs. 
• Inter-sessional activities: 
o WG-FCCIFS proposes a workshop in conjunction with the ESSAS Open Science Meeting in May 
2011, in Seattle, USA, to be convened by Drs. Harald Loeng (ICES/Norway) and Anne Hollowed 
(PICES/USA).   
o WG-FCCIFS proposes an ICES/PICES Workshop on “Reaction of Northern Hemisphere ecosystems 
to the climate events in the late 1980s: A comparison” to be convened by Dr. Jürgen Alheit 
(Germany), Christian Möllmann (Germany) and suggested PICES scientists on May 2–6, 2011 in 
Hamburg, Germany; 
o WG-FCCIFS requests PICES to co-sponsor an ICES Symposium on “Forage fish interactions and 
ecosystem approach to fisheries management” to be held from September 10–14, 2012 in Nantes, 
France.   
• Theme session proposals for ICES 2011 ASC:  
o ICES/PICES Theme Session on “Atmospheric forcing of the Northern Hemisphere ocean gyres, and 
the subsequent impact on the adjacent marine climate and ecosystems” to be convened by Dr. 
Emanuele Di Lorenzo (PICES/USA) Ichiro Yasuda (PICES/Japan) Hjálmar Hátún (ICES/Faroe 
Islands) and Jürgen Alheit (ICES/Germany). 
• Status of the WG-FCCIFS proposal for a 1½-day theme session at the Symposium on “Effects of climate 
change on the world’s oceans” in conjunction with Ocean Expo 2012 (May 2012, Yeosu, Korea). 
• A proposal for an International Research Program for the South Pacific that will be discussed at the 
upcoming Conference on the Environment and Resources in the South Pacific.  
• Opportunities for coordination with other ICES expert groups, strategic initiatives and other groups.  
• Discussion of opportunities to enhance WG-FCCIFS contributions to IPCC AR5 reports. 
• Proposals for a global effort to compare the performance of model forecasts of the effects of climate on 
fish and fisheries. WG-FCCIFS members recognize the need to develop a strategic plan for international 
fishery forecasts under climate change.   
 
Several WG-FCCIFS members attended the first PICES/ICES strategic planning meeting to develop a 
framework for scientific cooperation in Northern Hemisphere marine science on September 21, 2010, in 
Nantes, France.  The group discussed operational guidelines needed to allow smooth coordination between 
ICES and PICES.  The current operations of WG-FCCIFS adhere to most of the timelines for approval by 
ICES and PICES.  The one area where additional discussion is needed is the timeline for proposals for 
theme/topic sessions at upcoming annual science conferences/meetings of ICES and PICES.  Since ICES 
precedes the PICES meeting, the joint sessions would be approved by ICES before PICES has a chance to 
discuss the proposal. 
 
  
Appendix 2 WG-FCCIFS meeting reports 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  87 
Future directions for WG-FCCIFS 
 
In recognition of the long-term research interest in climate change impacts on marine ecosystems, ICES plans 
to develop further a Strategic Science Initiative on Climate Change (SSICC).  During the WG-FCCIFS 
meetings at the ICES ASCs and PICES Annual Meetings, participants discussed the possibility of merging 
WG-FCCIFS activities with the initial plans for a SSICC.  This would require consideration and approval by 
PICES and ICES.  Working Group members will work with ICES SSICC members and others to develop a 
document to be tabled at the end of April 2011 (at the PICES inter-sessional Science Board meeting) and early 
May (at the ICES SCICOM meeting), with a plan of action describing the objectives, approaches and activities 
to be conducted under an ICES/PICES SSICC (e.g., theme sessions, workshops, working groups, symposia). 
This document may already have indications of funding needs, which both organizations will have to discuss 
at their meetings in the fall of 2011.  The document may also indicate additional partners (not necessarily 
sponsors), to ensure the activity plays its full leadership role in setting the climate change research agenda in 
the marine environment.  The Working Group agreed to work on the SSICC document and to support the 
merging of WG-FCCIFS with the ICES SSICC to create a more permanent long-term research effort. 
 
 
 
 
 
WG-FCCIFS meeting reports  Appendix 2 
88  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
2010 WG-FCCIFS meeting, PICES-2010, Portland, USA 
 
 
WG-FCCIFS met on October 24, 2010, in Portland, USA, to review their Terms of Reference.  The group 
discussed the topics (summarized in the report above from the ICES ASC in Nantes, France).  Dr. Ian Perry 
presented a request for PICES to support an international Workshop on “Climate and oceanic fisheries, and 
development of climate tools for fisheries” which will be held by the Cook Islands Meterological Service, 
Rarotonga, Cook Islands, on October 3–5, 2011.  WG-FCCIFS supported the idea of PICES involvement and 
supported the proposal.  Working Group members also discussed opportunities for coordination with other 
ICES expert groups, strategic initiatives and other groups (see also the report above from the ICES ASC).   
 
The Co-Chairmen of WG-FCCIFS, Drs. Anne Hollowed (PICES/USA), Suam Kim (PICES/Korea) and Harald 
Loeng (ICES/Norway) also attended the FUTURE Advisory Panel meetings of AICE (Anthropogenic 
Influences on Coastal Ecosystems), COVE (Climate, Ocean Variability and Ecosystems) and SOFE (Status, 
Outlooks, Forecasts and Engagement) to any answer questions regarding the activities of the Working Group. 
 
The Working Group will have their next meeting in May 2011 in conjunction with the ESSAS Open Science 
Meeting in Seattle, USA. 
 
Deliverables 
• Publish the results of the PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium on “Climate change effects on fish and fisheries” 
held April 26–29, 2010, in Sendai, Japan, in the July 2011 issue of the ICES Journal of Marine Science.  
Some Working Group members will serve as guest editors for this publication. 
• Symposium co-chairs and interested Working Group members will develop a synthesis paper that will 
describe the issues and challenges facing the scientific community as they embark on an effort to assess 
climate change effects on fish and fisheries. 
• WG-FCCIFS proposes to convene a 1-day workshop on “Biological consequences of decrease in sea ice 
in Arctic and Sub-Arctic Seas” in conjunction with the ESSAS Open Science Meeting in May 2011, in 
Seattle, USA. ICES has already agreed to sponsor it, therefore, PICES endorsement is requested.   
• WG-FCCIFS proposes to convene an ICES/PICES Workshop on “Reaction of Northern Hemisphere 
ecosystems to the climate events in the late 1980s: A comparison” to be convened by Dr. Jürgen Alheit 
(Germany), Christian Möllmann (Germany) and suggested PICES scientists on May 2–6, 2011 in 
Hamburg, Germany. ICES has already agreed to sponsor it, therefore, PICES endorsement is requested.   
• WG-FCCIFS requests that PICES co-sponsor an ICES inter-sessional meeting on “Forage fish 
interactions and ecosystem approach to fisheries management”, to be held in Nantes, France, from 
September 10–14, 2012.  ICES has already agreed to sponsor it, therefore, this request is for action by 
PICES only. 
• Working Group members will convene a 1½-day theme session at the Symposium on “Effects of climate 
change on the world’s oceans” in conjunction with Ocean Expo 2012 (May 2012, Yeosu, Korea). ICES 
has already agreed to sponsor it, therefore, this request is for action by PICES only.  WG-FCCIFS also 
requests that ICES and PICES clarify that funds for invited speakers be included as part of the overall 
financial contribution to the symposium.   
• WG-FCCIFS will report to ICES (via SSGHIE) by September 1, 2011. 
 
Funding requests 
• WG-FCCIFS may request funds from ICES for additional papers to be published in the ICES Journal of 
Marine Science in September, 2011.  
• Travel support for 2 PICES scientists to attend an ICES/PICES Theme Session on “Atmospheric forcing of 
the Northern Hemisphere ocean gyres, and the subsequent impact on the adjacent marine climate and 
ecosystems” at ICES ASC (in September 2011, Gdańsk, Poland). 
• Travel support for 2 PICES scientists to attend inter-sessional workshops. 
• WG-FCCIFS may request an endorsement by ICES and PICES of the addition of 1–2 new Working Group 
members who would represent an emerging new South Pacific marine science organization. 
Appendix 2 WG-FCCIFS meeting reports 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  89 
List of participants
 
Members 
 
Jürgen Alheit (ICES, Germany) 
Michael Foreman (PICES, Canada) 
Anne Hollowed (PICES, USA) 
Suam Kim (PICES, Korea) 
Jacquelynne King (PICES, Canada) 
Harald Loeng (PICES, Norway) 
Yury Zuenko (PICES, Russia) 
 
 
Observers 
 
Teresa A’Mar (USA) 
Robin Brown (USA) 
Jonathan Hare (USA) 
Jin-Yeong Kim (Korea) 
Vladimir Kulik (Russia) 
Phillip Mundy (USA) 
Thomas Okey (Canada) 
Ian Perry (Canada) 
John Stein (USA) 
Mikhail Stepanenko (Russia) 
Motomitsu Takahashi (Japan) 
Sinjae Yoo (PICES Science Board Chairman) 
 
 
 
 
WG-FCCIFS meeting reports Appendix 2 
90  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
2011 Inter-sessional WG-FCCIFS meeting, Seattle, USA 
 
 
WG-FCCIFS met in Seattle, Washington, USA, on May 22, 2011, after the ICES/PICES Workshop on 
“Biological consequences of decreases in sea ice in Arctic and Sub-Arctic seas” (see Appendix 3) to plan 
future topic/theme sessions for the ICES ASC and PICES Annual Meeting, and to discuss the Science Plan for 
the ICES/PICES Strategic Initiative on Climate Change Effects on Marine Ecosystems (SICCME) and tasking 
for development of the SICCME Implementation Plan (see Appendix 4). 
 
 
List of participants 
Name Organization  E-mail 
Jürgen Alheit Institut für Ostseeforschung Warnemünde 
Biologie, Germany 
Juergen.alheith@io-warnemuende.de 
Alexander Bychkov PICES bychkov@pices.int 
Ken Drinkwater Institute of Marine Research, Norway Ken.Drinkwater@imr.no 
Anne B. Hollowed AFSC, NMFS, NOAA, USA Anne.Hollowed@noaa.gov 
Adi Kellermann ICES adi@ICES.dk 
Suam Kim Pukyong University, Korea suamkim@pknu.ac.kr 
Harald Loeng Institute of Marine Research, Norway Harald.Loeng@imr.no 
Franz Meuter University of Alaska, USA fmeuter@alaska.edu 
James Overland PMEL, NOAA, USA James.E.Overland@noaa.gov 
Svein Sundby Institute of Marine Research, Norway SveinSundby@imr.no 
 
 
 
Appendix 2 WG-FCCIFS meeting reports 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  91 
2011 WG-FCCIFS meetings, ICES ASC, Gdańsk, Poland, and  
PICES-2011, Khabarovsk, Russia 
 
 
WG-FCCIFS held its meetings during the ICES Annual Science Conference in Gdańsk, Poland (on  
September 19) and the PICES Annual Meeting in Khabarovsk, Russia (on October 14).  The SICCME Science 
Plan and Implementation plans were presented to leadership within both organizations and both organizations 
approved the formation of a Strategic Initiative/Section on Climate Change Effects on Marine Ecosystems 
(SICCME).   The group used the time to plan for future theme and topic sessions to be held in conjunction with 
the 2
nd
 Symposium on “Climate change effects on the world’s oceans” in Yeosu, Korea, in May 2012, and for 
the next ICES Annual Science Conference and PICES Annual Meeting. 
 
 
Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS Appendix 3 
92  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Appendix 3 
Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS activities 
 
2009 ICES Annual Science Conference, September 21–25, 2009, Berlin, Germany ........................................... 93 
2009 PICES Annual Meeting, October 23–November 1, 2009, Jeju, Korea ............................................................. 101 
2010 ICES Annual Science Conference, September 20–24, 2010, Nantes, France ................................................... 105 
2010 PICES Annual Meeting, October 22–31, 2010, Portland, USA ....................................................................... 109 
2011 inter-sessional workshop, May 2–6, 2011, Hamburg, Germany ....................................................................... 113 
2011 inter-sessional workshop, May 22, 2011, Seattle, USA .................................................................................... 115 
2011 inter-sessional workshop, June 6–10, 2011, Woods Hole, USA....................................................................... 116 
2011 ICES Annual Science Conference, September 19–23, Gdańsk, Poland ........................................................... 118 
2011 PICES Annual Meeting, October 14–23, 2011, Khabarovsk, Russia ............................................................... 128 
 
 
 
Appendix 3 Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  93 
ICES Annual Science Conference 
September 21–25, 2009 
Berlin, Germany  
 
 
ICES/PICES Theme Session E  
Climate impacts on marine fish: Discovering centennial patterns and 
 disentangling current processes 
 
Convenors:  Myron A. Peck (Germany), Brian MacKenzie (Denmark), Skip McKinnell (PICES) and Corinna 
Schrum (Norway)  
 
Climate change will impact fisheries resources and challenge both fishers and managers to develop sustainable 
exploitation strategies and disentangling the effects of climate variability from those due to fishing pressure is 
problematic.  Unfortunately, the bulk of information on the impacts of climate variability on fish populations is 
often merely descriptive and stems from the last century (from periods of intense exploitation).   
 
The goal of the session was to provide a venue for the presentation and discussion of both long-term 
(historical) and current (process-based) research on the impacts of climate variability and change on marine 
fish species.  A second goal was to foster the links that have been established between PICES and ICES in 
terms of research targeting climate impacts on marine fisheries.  The session attracted the largest number of 
submissions at this year’s ICES ASC.  In total 28 oral presentations and five posters were delivered.  
Presentations covered a wide range of topics that, for convenience in this session report, could be separated 
into different categories (Fig. A3.1).  Presentations focused on: 1) examining correlations between the vital 
rates of single species and environmental variability, 2) evaluating the impacts of climate variability and 
change on multiple populations/community analyses, 3) constructing and analyzing long-term/historical data 
sets, and 4) process studies utilizing biophysical modeling and other methods.  Naturally, most presentations 
could be included within multiple categories (categories were not mutually exclusive). 
 
 
 
 
Fig. A3.1 Overview of presentations (oral and poster) within session E including various study categories.  Note, most 
studies can appear in more than one category. 
 
Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS Appendix 3 
94  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
1) Single species/stocks 
 
The most common theme of presentations centered on correlative studies of various time series data 
emphasizing a single population and/or stock and its variation due to environmental factors.  One presentation 
(E:27) attempted to test the hypothesis that cohort survival and year class success of striped bass (Morone 
saxatilis) were associated with periods of strong river discharge due to changes in the dynamics of an estuarine 
turbidity maximum zone (TMZ) in the upper Chesapeake Bay estuary.  This and other correlative studies 
speculated on the causal mechanisms and processes underlying trends in time series data including changes in 
vital rates (rates of survival, growth, reproduction) and/or distribution.  Time series data were often statistically 
evaluated with respect to various environmental factors and/or climate indices such as the Gulf Stream index 
(GSI), the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO), the Atlantic Multi-decadal Oscillation (AMO) or the Siberian 
High.  These included studies on redfish (Sebastes mentella) in the Irminger Sea (E:15), haddock 
(Melanogrammus aeglefinnus) on the Scotian Shelf (E:31), Pacific cod (Gadus macrocephalus) in the Yellow 
Sea (E:28), two studies on European sardine (Sardina pilchardus) on the Iberian Atlantic coast (E:20 and E:30) 
and saithe (Pollachius virens) in the Faroe Islands (E:23).  Some of these studies included relatively long time 
series data, including work on spawning stock biomass of Northeast Artic cod (Gadus morhua) (1946–2002) 
(E:05, see Fig. A3.2), the condition of saithe (1962–2007) and Pacific cod (1969–2006), size-at-age of haddock 
(1970–2008) and egg production rates by Baltic cod (1957–1996) presented in E:06.  One poster presentation 
examined the response of yellowtail (Seriola quinqueradiata) in Japanese waters to sea water temperature over 
the last century (E:34).  Most studies evaluated stocks using data collected after 1970, concentrating on time 
series that included years associated with a regime shift (e.g., late 1980s in the North Sea). 
 
 
 
Fig. A3.2  Example of single species time series data presented in Session E:  Spawning stock biomass of Northeast 
Arctic cod.  Environmental factors were included (e.g., four-year mean weighted temperature anamolies at the Kola 
section) and the stock separated into three productivity regimes to help generate robust recruitment predictions (for details, 
see Kotenev et al., 2009). 
 
 
Trends in some time series of abiotic factors were related to the ecophysiology of specific life stages (e.g., eggs 
and larvae of Pacific and Baltic cod; E:28 and E:04, respectively).  A particularly interesting example of this 
was a presentation calculating the impacts of increased hypoxia (low dissolved oxygen concentrations) on 
various life stages of Baltic cod including: egg survival (6% decrease per decade), larval vertical migration  
Appendix 3 Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  95 
(–5%/decade), juvenile settlement (area decreases of 900 km
2
 per decade), feeding of adults based upon gastric 
evacuation rate (decrease about 5% per decade) and adult age-dependent egg survival probability (larger/older 
females produce larger more buoyant eggs).  The latter calculation indicated an increase in the female age from 
4 to 8 years based on the probability for 50% egg survival.  Utilizing ecophysiology to understand climate 
impacts was a theme discussed within two posters (E:37 and E:38). 
 
2) Multiple populations/community analyses 
 
A few studies evaluated climate-driven changes in demographic features of different populations or vital rates 
of conspecifics inhabiting different ecosystems.  This included work on various spawning stocks of Atlantic 
herring (Clupea harengus) (E:17) as well as Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) larvae on Georges Bank, around 
Iceland, in Lofoten and the North Sea (E:03).  A third example evaluated environmental impacts impacting 
juvenile salmon emerging from 60 different Norwegian rivers (E:27) identifying common trends and river-
specific patterns due to differences in land-use/anthropogenic activities.  In the Baltic Sea, spatial differences 
in the rate of change in water temperature (depth-specific) were assessed with regard to potential impacts on 
key fish species based upon ecophysiological thresholds (tolerances to abiotic factors) of early life stages of 
sprat (Sprattus sprattus) and Baltic cod.  Other presentations examined the impacts of climate variability (5 to 
20 years) on changes in species-pairs such as potentially competing flatfish species in the North Sea (E:02) and 
the community composition of fishes within various systems.  The community-level analyses included work in 
the Barents Sea (E:21) and North Sea (E:11) with an emphasis on demersal fishes and their habitat 
characteristics (including potential prey species). 
 
One presentation reconstructed the fisheries landings in the North Sea since the 1890s (see Fig. A3.3) and 
asked the question: Can one describe time series in changes in fish stocks using only catch data – or does one 
also need to include climate as an explanatory variable?  This modeling effort with ECOSIM had 46 functional 
groups, including seabirds, seals, sharks, cephalopods with time series built from a variety of sources.  Five 
fishing gears were used in the model (seal hunting, trawlers, drifters, etc. The presentation provided a clear 
example of process-oriented research attempting to disentangle the effects of exploitation (fishing) and 
climate. 
 
 
 
Fig. A3.3 Time series of landings for various fish species in the North Sea (Pinnegar et al., E:24).  This analysis was 
part of a modelling exercise (ECOSIM) attempting to disentangle the impacts of fishing and climate on the North Sea fish 
assemblage. 
 
 
  
Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS Appendix 3 
96  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
A world-wide view of climate impacts on fisheries was provided by Sherman et al. (E:01) who summarized 
data series on fisheries catches in 64 large marine ecosystems that, together, account for > 80% of fisheries 
production.  Based upon analyses of temperature time series from 1982 to 2006, these systems were classified 
as having either slow (n = 23), moderate (20), fast (12) or “super fast” (6) warming (Fig. A3.4).  The share of 
world-wide fish production within large marine ecosystems has declined in the last 25 years. 
 
 
 
Fig. A3.4  Map of 64 large marine ecosystems (LMEs) with color code indicating relatively slow (blue) to rapid (red) 
trends in warming from 1982 to 2006.  The right panel indicates fisheries yields within and outside of LMEs versus time 
since the 1950s.  The share of world-wide catches coming from LMEs is indicated (green line) (from Sherman et al., 2009). 
 
 
3) Long-term historical studies 
 
The longest time series (1520s to 1960s) was provided by Caballero-Alfonso et al. (E:10) describing changes 
in bluefin tuna (Thunnus thynnus) caught using almadrabas traps, a traditional fishing method that has been 
employed since ~900 BC (Fig. A3.5).  Catches in various regions were analyzed with respect to a number of 
environmental factors including precipitation, solar irradiance, SST, air temperature, sunspot number, volcanic 
dust and the concentration of green house gasses.  Almost all climatic patterns were significantly correlated 
with catches, but green house gasses were the most important single factor along with temperature. 
 
 
 
Fig. A3.5  Catches of bluefin tuna from almadrabas traps from thee sites in the western Mediterranean (from Caballero-
Alfonso et al., 2009). 
 
 
A second presentation (E:12) reconstructed rates of fishing mortality and environmental stressors (e.g., jellyfish 
outbreaks) impacting Atlantic herring within Danish (Limfjord) waters during the 1800s.  The message from that 
presentation was that overfishing makes ecosystems more vulnerable to trophic reorganization which can result in 
fish populations that are more vulnerable to future collapses.  A third presentation (E:01), presenting North Sea 
time series data from the 1890s onwards was discussed in a previous section. 
Appendix 3 Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  97 
4) Biophysical processes 
 
Key processes impacting early life stages of marine fish were examined within a number of presentations.  
Both match-mismatch (prey field dynamics) and transport (member-vagrant) dynamics were examined.  For 
example, transport mechanisms were also the main theme in a presentation summarizing trends in transport 
(via upwelling filaments) and changes in the larval clupeids assemblage in the Canary Islands (E:16). A second 
presentation employed hydrodynamic modeling to explore seasonal and inter-annual transport dynamics of 
European anchovy (Engraulis encrasicolus) in the Bay of Biscay (E:08).  The latter study explored climate-
driven changes in transport patterns by statistically interpreting drift routes via dispersion kernel analyses. 
 
The impacts of climate-driven changes in prey fields (e.g., match-mismatch dynamics) were assessed using 
coupled 3-D Biophysical modeling of early life stages of Atlantic cod, European anchovy and Atlantic herring 
in European waters.  Climate-driven changes in key abiotic/physical factors such as wind fields, solar 
irradiance and associated hydrographic impacts (current fields and water temperatures) were examined using 
scenario modeling.  In one study, a mechanistic (physiologically-based), individual-based model that included 
foraging and growth subroutines was employed to calculate historical (1970 to 2005) changes in prey 
requirements of larval herring in the North Sea and the potential for climate-driven “bottom-up” regulation of 
survival during the larval overwintering period (E:09).  In a second example, climate-driven changes in prey 
fields were included in simulations by coupling an NPZD (nutrient phytoplankton, zooplankton and detritus) 
model and generating prey fields for an individual-based model constructed for larval Atlantic cod (E:18).  The 
NPZD-IBM was used to generate maps of potential larval survival (Fig. A3.6).  A main message from that 
presentation was that a number of environmental factors can interact to influence model estimates of survival 
and that caution must be taken when only analyzing temperature impacts. 
 
 
 
Fig. A3.6  IBM-based estimates of potential survival of Atlantic cod larvae in different years in the North Sea.  Among 
these years, 1996 was the coldest (negative NAO) year (from Daewel et al., E:18). 
 
 
The impacts of spatiotemporal variability in environmental factors on early life stages were also examined 
using a dynamic energy budget (DEB) approach which identified areas based upon unsuitable combinations of 
temperature and food to support energy allocation into reproduction by adult anchovy in the Bay of Biscay 
(E:22).  Finally, North Sea and Bay of Biscay hydrodynamic model outputs were analyzed with respect to their 
spatiotemporal variance attributes using empirical orthogonal function (EOF) analysis and correspondence of 
those hydrodynamic factors to one another and in time using multi-factorial analysis (MFA).  The variance of 
key factors was then discussed in relation to the timing of key life history events of fish species inhabiting both 
shelf sea areas. 
 
Finally, a presentation by Curchitser (E:26) described ongoing efforts to construct end-to-end models to 
explore climate impacts in the North Pacific Ocean.  That modeling effort includes: 1) multi-scale ocean and 
atmospheric physics, 2) community-based lower trophic level biology and 3) spatially-explicit, full life cycle, 
individual-based higher trophic level biology including a fishing fleet. A multi-species fish model can simulate 
5–6 species using an individual-based approach, species can compete for food resources and eat each other.  
One species can represent a fishing fleet.  The model will explicitly model growth, mortality, reproduction and 
Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS Appendix 3 
98  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
movement.  The presentation also highlighted issues concerning downscaling from global climate models to 
regional hydrodynamic impacts.  The presentation highlighted future advances that will be necessary (e.g., 
incorporation of deterministic and probabilistic elements) and the need for observations to be made at the same 
“big picture” scale as is being used in complex model development. 
 
5) Final discussion 
 
The session ended with a half hour discussion period.  To stimulate discussion, the conveners posed four 
questions to the audience: 
1. Have we learned all we can from time series and correlation analyses? 
2. How much process understanding is “enough”? 
a. When do you know you have “enough” knowledge for a question of interest? 
b. Has uncertainty been adequately addressed? 
3. Are climate impact studies on single-species level sufficient for Ecosystem-Based Management? 
4. What messages do we wish ICES to put out to the “scientific community” in its “White Paper” on climate 
change impacts on marine ecosystems? 
 
Given that it was the last session on the last day, the audience became vigorously engaged in the discussion, 
although not always on the questions posed. Main comments from the discussion included: 
• Time series and correlative analyses are an essential first step in the development of process 
understanding.  The importance of long-term data sets (and the need to continue their collection) was 
stressed.  Continued data mining and compilation of long-term data sets are essential activities and more 
value may be obtained from them by subjecting multiple time series data sets to meta-analysis using, for 
example, the traffic light approach.  Time series are essential for assessing model results.  
• There is a need to understand the effects of ocean acidification on fish, in addition to the calcareous 
organisms.  A convener noted that the lack of presentations on ocean acidification in the session may be 
because ocean acidification is a CO
2
 pollution problem, not a climate change problem. 
• Communication of ICES results within peer-reviewed, high impact literature may be a more rapid route to 
engaging the public and should be utilized along with the publication of an ICES cooperative research 
report focusing on climate impacts.  
• The vast majority of studies discuss negative impacts of climate change. However, some benefits can also 
be expected (in particular areas and/or for specific species) and these should not be overlooked. 
• An upcoming symposium in Sendai (April 2010) sponsored by ICES, PICES and FAO was advertised as a 
venue for research on climate impacts on fish and fisheries.  Associated workshops to that conference will 
address ocean acidification, policy, and other topics. 
• The need for better laboratory data on physiological tolerances of various life stages of fish species was 
indicated including basic data on interaction effects (e.g., dissolved oxygen and temperature vs. growth 
and survival of larval fish). 
• Community-level analyses often reveal important responses to environmental variability/climate trends 
that single-species analyses do not. 
 
 
List of papers 
 
Oral presentations 
Kenneth Sherman, Igor Belkin, Kevin D. Friedland, Jay O’Reilly, and Kimberly Hyde 
Accelerated warming and emergent trends in fisheries biomass yields of the world’s large marine ecosystems 
R. Van Hal, F. Stuke, I. Tulp, and A. D. Rijnsdorp 
Climate induced changes in the growth rate of flatfish species in the North Sea by means of food competition 
T. Kristiansen, K. Drinkwater, and J. Zavala-Garay 
Analyzing warm and cold climate phases to understand differences in survival and connectivity of larval cod: possible 
implications for climate change 
  
Appendix 3 Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  99 
Rudi Voss, Christoph Petereit, and Hans-Harald Hinrichsen 
The spatial dimension of climate-driven temperature change in the Baltic Sea 
B. N. Kotenev, V. P. Serebryakov, M. V. Bondarenko, and A. D. Morozov 
Climatic impact on Northeast Arctic cod year-class strength: relevance of the Ricker and Beverton-Holt models for determination 
“recruitment-stock” dependence 
Hinrichsen, Huwer, Makarchouk, Neuenfeldt, Petereit, Schaber, and Voss 
Climate driven long-term evolution of oxygen concentration in the Baltic Sea: potential consequences for the Baltic cod stock 
E. M. Karasiova, G. Kraus, and R. Voss 
Long-term fluctuations of Baltic cod egg production in relation to major inflow events 
Martin Huret, Pierre Petitgas, and Fabien Léger 
Sensitivity of anchovy larval dispersal to climate variability in the Bay of Biscay 
Marc Hufnagl, Myron A. Peck, Mark Dickey-Collas, Richard D. M. Nash, and Thomas Pohlmann 
Climate-driven changes in the recruitment of North Sea herring: Bottom-up control on the survival of early life stages identified 
using a biophysical individual-based model 
Ángela M. Caballero-Alfonso, A. Trujillo-Santana, U. Ganzedo-López, A. Santana del Pino, and J. J. Castro-Hernández 
Do climate patterns explain by themselves the oscillations observed for the Bluefin tuna (Thunnus thynnus) at the Western 
Mediterranea ‘almadrabas’ traps catches since 1500s to 1960s? 
A. F. Sell, A.F., S. Ehrich, V. Stelzenmüller, and G. Wegner 
Regional effects of climate change on North Sea bottom fish assemblages 
Brian R. MacKenzie and Bo Poulsen 
Fishing and jellyfish eradicate fish 180 years ago 
Jaime Otero, Arne J. Jensen, Jan Henning L’Abée-Lund, Nils Chr. Stenseth, Geir O. Storvik, and Leif Asbjørn Vøllestad 
Factors affecting year-to-year and within river variability of one-sea winter Atlantic salmon in Norwegian rivers 
S. P. Melnikov, A. L. Karsakov, V. I. Popov, V. L.Tretyak, and I. S. Tretyakov 
The impact of variations in oceanographic conditions on distribution, aggregation structure and fishery pattern of redfish 
(Sebastes mentella Travin) in the pelagial of the Irminger Sea and adjacent waters 
Marta Moyano, Jose María Rodríguez, and Santiago Hernández-León 
Clupeoid fish in the Canaries-African coastal transition zone: transport dynamics and links to climate 
Thomas Brunel and Mark Dickey-Collas 
Can we estimate the effects of temperature change on herring growth? A macroecological analysis of temperature and density-
dependence on North Atlantic herring growth 
Ute Daewel, Corinna Schrum, and Myron Peck 
Impact of environmental change on North Sea Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua): Scenario modeling in the North Sea 
Mark R. Payne, Hjálmar Hátún, Asbjørn Christensen, and Jan Arge Jacobsen 
Recruitment in a changing environment: the role of oceanographic processes in blue whiting population dynamics 
G. J. Pierce, M. B. Santos, J. M. Cabanas, I. Riveiro, and C. Porteiro 
Are there climatic signals in fishery data for sardine (Sardina pilchardus) along the Iberian Atlantic coast? 
M. Fossheim, E. Johannesen, R. Primicerio, and M. Aschan 
Spatial variation and structural change of the Barents Sea fish community 
Caroline Struski, Pierre Petitgas, and Martin Huret 
Long-term hindcast and climate change forecast of habitat suitability using a bioenergetics model: anchovy in the Bay of Biscay 
and the North Sea 
Eydna í Homrum, Petur Steingrund, Lise H. Ofstad, and Hjálmar Hátún 
Is the growth of Faroe Saithe density dependent or climate dependent? 
John K. Pinnegar, Steven Mackinson, and Georg H. Engelhard 
Back to the Future: 115 years of climate and fisheries in the North Sea 
Pierre Petitgas, Martin Huret, Fabien Léger, Myron Peck, and Adriaan Rijnsdorp 
Summarising with Multiple Factor Analysis (MFA) the seasonal and inter-annual variability in the long-term hindcasts of lower 
trophic ecosystem models: applications in the North Sea and Bay of Biscay 
Enrique Curchitser, Kenneth Rose, Kate Hedstrom, Jerome Fiechter, Shin-ichi Ito, Salvador Lluch-Cota, and Bernard 
Megrey 
Development of a climate-to-fish-to-fishers model: progress, issues, and some solutions 
Ginger L. Jahn and Elizabeth W. North 
Do striped bass (Morone saxatilis) spawn in response to high river flow events? 
  
Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS Appendix 3 
100  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
H. Kim, H. J. Hwang, D. H. Kim, M. H. Sohn, J. B. Kim, K. H. Choi, and I. Yeon 
Effect of Siberian High on the catch fluctuation of pacific cod, Gadus macrocephalus, in the Yellow Sea 
Sean P. Powers, F. Joel Fodrie, Nicole Shaffer, Matthew W. Johnson, and Robert L. Shipp 
Changes in growth rates of reef fish in the Gulf of Mexico: Evidence for climate change or overharvesting? 
M. F. Borges 
Fish production regime shifts in the West Iberia upwelling system and their relation to climate patterns: a review 
Anna B. Neuheimer and Christopher T. Taggart 
Climate and fishing: Disentangling factors affecting growth in Scotian shelf haddock (Melanogrammus aeglefinus) 
 
Posters 
A. V. Dolgov, O. V. Smirnov, K. V. Drevetnyak, and O. Yu. Chetyrkina 
New data on composition and structure of the Kara Sea ichthyofauna 
Vladimir Laptikhovsky and Alexander Arkhipkin 
Environmental changes caused recent increase in abundance of rock cod, Patagonotothen ramsayi in the Southwest Atlantic 
Yongjun Tian, Hideo Sakaji, Ken Watanabe, and Masahiro Kuno 
Response of yellowtail Seriola quinqueradiata in the Japanese waters to sea water temperature over the last century and potential 
effect of global warming 
Harald Loeng and Øystein Skagseth 
The rise and fall of the blue whiting stock 
D. L. Lajus, Ya.I. Alekseeva, Z. V. Dmitrieva, A. V. Kraikovsky, and J. A. Lajus 
Climate effect on populations of Atlantic salmon Salmo salar in the Barents and White Sea basins (17–20th cc.) 
Maja Walter, Muriel-Marie Kroll, and Myron A. Peck 
Larval fish growth physiology and climate impacts: species-specific differences in thermal tolerance 
Myron A. Peck, Mark R. Payne, Ute Daewel, Marc Hufnagl, Irina Alekseeva, and Corinna Schrum 
Climate-driven changes in suitable habitats for North Sea fish: Physiological constraints on the survival of early life stages 
  
Appendix 3 Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  101 
PICES Eighteenth Annual Meeting (PICES-2009) 
October 23–November 1, 2009 
Jeju, Korea 
 
 
POC/FUTURE Topic Session (S9)  
Outlooks and forecasts of marine ecosystems from an earth system science perspective:  
Challenges and opportunities 
 
Co-sponsored by IMBER  
 
Co-Convenors: Harold P. Batchelder (USA), Michael Foreman (Canada), Anne B. Hollowed (USA) and 
Hiroaki Saito (Japan)  
 
Background  
 
The prediction of responses of marine ecosystems to future climate scenarios is an important objective of 
PICES’ new science program, FUTURE (Forecasting and Understanding Trends, Uncertainty and Responses 
of North Pacific Marine Ecosystems).  However, the marine ecosystem is part of the earth system and its 
prediction needs integrated knowledge from physical, chemical, and biological perspectives.  Earth system 
science is an interdisciplinary approach that integrates anthropology, atmospheric science, biology, 
oceanography, geophysics and policy to provide predictions of ecosystem response to climate change.  The 
earth system is complex with non-linear feedbacks, threshold responses, and, in some cases, irreversible 
change.  Understanding the mechanisms controlling these system properties is critical to accurately forecasting 
future states of nature in a changing climate.  Moreover, conducting large-scale experiments on the earth 
system is impossible.  Therefore, regional marine ecosystem models should include the earth system science 
links that are essential for producing better predictions of marine ecosystem response to future climate 
scenarios.  This session focused on multidisciplinary coupled models and theoretical, observational and 
experimental studies designed to provide outlooks and/or forecasts of marine ecosystems.  Outlooks and 
forecasts differ in that outlooks are qualitative with (often) unbounded uncertainties, while forecasts are often 
quantitative, but must have bounded certainties.  Presentations that focus on both long-term and short-term 
predictions, and that link two or more disciplines (such as physical oceanography, climate, ecosystem 
dynamics, marine resource management, or socio-economic systems), were welcome, especially presentations 
that explore what additional information or data are needed to provide outlooks andforecasts, and especially to 
transition from providing outlooks to providing forecasts.  
 
Summary of presentations  
 
The session consisted of 17 oral presentations distributed over two days from scientists in 5 countries.  This 
was the first session at a PICES Annual Meeting that was formally considered a FUTURE topic session.  The 
intent of the session was to focus on multi-disciplinary models and observational studies designed to provide 
outlooks and forecasts—two types of forward-looking predictions.  Topics varied from relatively small-scale 
investigations of coastal lagoons to global-scale data synthesis, and included socioeconomic impacts of climate 
change and other anthropogenic forcing at local (Chesapeake Bay) to global scales.  Four presentations were 
invited (Okunishi, Murtugudde, Barange, Dalton).  
 
Several presentations described the results of coupled biophysical models.  In an invited talk, Takeshi 
Okunishi described the results of simulation models of small pelagic fish in the western North Pacific and 
found that the agreement between observations and models was best when predation by skipjack tuna was 
included in the dynamics of the small pelagics.  Fei Chai and colleagues were able to link physical, lower 
trophic level ecosystem and IBM models of anchovy off Peru to provide 9-month forecasts arising from 
NCEP-predicted atmospheric conditions that had some skill at capturing larger-scale responses of anchovy to 
large forcing (El Niño, La Niña).  Enrique Curchitser described some progress and challenges encountered in 
Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS Appendix 3 
102  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
expanding lower trophic level biophysical modeling frameworks to not only fish, but fishing fleet behaviors. 
Keiji Kiyomatsu described the use of OFES ocean hindcasts of SST and velocities to estimate transport, 
growth and survival of Japanese sardine into the Kuroshio extension region.  
 
Several presentations discussed reanalysis or new analyses of historical data sets.  Yury Zuenko examined 
climate and ocean conditions in relation to productivity and transfer of production to higher trophic levels in 
the Japan/East Sea.  V.S. Labay documented the evolution of benthic species in small Sakhalin coastal 
lagoons, and found bio-invasions from the sea.  When lagoon openings became seasonal or restricted, this led 
to changed benthos structure, and to a prevalence of species having warmer affinities.  
 
Masahiko Fujii and colleagues used projected temperatures from the MIROC IPCC climate scenario (global 
warming) model of the 21
st
 century to examine temperature related bleaching of coral reef systems near Japan. 
Though the northward extent of coral habitat was projected to extend northward by about 200 km, bleaching 
events were forecast to occur nearly every year during the decade beginning 2060 compared to no events in the 
decade beginning in 2000.  
 
Hiroaki Saito reported on the importance of composition and ballasting of particles for the vertical export of 
organic matter from the euphotic zone.  Compositional changes can strongly influence the sinking rate and rate 
of remineralization, complicating simple vertical export models.  
 
In an invited talk, Raghu Murtugudde described an end-to-end Earth system model of the Chesapeake Bay 
(East Coast of USA) system.  The model is used to provide nowcasts and forecasts at daily to decadal time 
scales.  Oxygen conditions, harmful algal blooms and sea nettle blooms are skillfully predicted at short time 
scales (few days) and with quantified levels of uncertainty. In another invited talk, Manuel Barange described 
the QUEST-Fish project which is using global climate models to estimate primary production through trophic 
relationships and assumptions of fish production. The model framework also considers other anthropogenic 
stressors, including economic policies and variable geographic and temporal exploitation.  The focus is on 
shelf-sea systems, and on the consequences of the stressors on market based fish commodities.  
 
Anne Hollowed described a framework for downscaling Bering Sea climate indices applied to the walleye 
pollock and flatfish, with designs for constructing a management strategy evaluation (MSE) for some key 
species.  Akihiko Yatsu described the results of a CCCC-CFAME Task Team exploration of the possible 
climate and global warming effects from IPCC scenarios on several key species (chum salmon, walleye 
pollock, sardine, anchovy, saury, squid) in the Kuroshio-Oyashio region. Information on the species biology 
(lifespan, prey types) and expected changes from IPCC scenarios were used to construct outlooks for several of 
these species.  
 
In an invited talk, Michael Dalton described a population-environment-technology (PET) model applied to  
9 regions worldwide. PET is multisector, multiregional and includes five production sectors and four types of 
consumer goods (energy, food, transport, other).  The value of such models is that by being based on market 
information, it allows the model to span spatial scales.  
 
Harold (Hal) Batchelder described approaches to, and results of, quantitative skill assessments of earlier and later 
implementations of ROMS physical models to the California Current and northern Gulf of Alaska regions.  The 
results showed sensitivity of the stratification to the controlling influence (temperature in the south; salinity in the 
north) in the earlier model, and greater robustness/fidelity of the later model to observed temperature and salinity. 
Highly skillful physical models are useful as the basis for ecosystem models; models lacking physical skill should 
not be the basis for coupled ecosystem models.  Jie Shi used a Princeton Ocean Model and coupled ecosystem 
and kelp models to examine the production of kelp and its control by nutrient fluxes from outer Sungo Bay, 
China.  The model suggests that reduced kelp density at the mouth of the bay would increase yield significantly in 
the whole bay, since greater nutrient fluxes would be supplied to the inner region.  
 
The recently released version of the World Ocean Atlas 2009 and World Ocean Database 2009 were described 
by Hernan Garcia.  WOA-2009 and WOD-2009 are the largest quality controlled collections of ocean profile 
Appendix 3 Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  103 
data available online.  Steve Bograd documented strong correlations between retrospective analysis of climate 
records, growth chronologies of rockfish and seabird egg laying and fledging data.  Good years for rockfish 
and seabirds were associated with strong high pressure systems, strong upwelling and cooler SSTs. 
Correlations of the biological metrics were seasonally highest with winter (JFM) conditions, indicating the 
importance of wintertime ocean conditions for ecosystem productivity.  
 
Overall, this rather diverse collection of talks was well attended, and presented a number of different 
approaches that might be used for creating outlooks and forecasts within the Advisory Panel on Status, 
Outlooks, Forecasts and Engagement (SOFE-AP).  It was an auspicious beginning to FUTURE topic sessions.  
 
 
List of papers  
 
Oral presentations  
Takeshi Okunishi, Shin-ichi Ito, Atsushi Kawabata, Hiroshi Kubota, Taketo Hashioka, Hiroshi Sumata and Yasuhiro 
Yamanaka (Invited)  
A multi-trophic level ecosystem model for understanding mechanisms of small pelagic fish species alternation  
Fei Chai, Francisco Chavez, Yi Chao, Lei Shi, Hongchun Zhang and Richard Barber  
Using remote sensing and modeling in operational forecasting of fisheries  
Keiji Kiyomatsu, Takuji Waseda and Yasumasa Miyazawa  
Reconstruction of high-resolution historical February SST in the northwestern Pacific and its application to larval dispersion  
Yury I. Zuenko  
How trends, shifts, and interdecadal fluctuations in climate reconstruct the ecosystem of the Japan/East Sea  
Raghu Murtugudde (Invited)  
Marine ecosystem forecasting with an Earth System Prediction model  
V.S. Labay  
Evolution of a benthos of coastal lagoons of Sakhalin Island: Causes and consequences  
Yumiko Yara, Masahiko Fujii, Yasuhiro Yamanaka, Naosuke Okada, Hiroya Yamano and Kazuhiro Oshima  
Projected effects of global warming on coral reefs in seas close to Japan  
Hiroaki Saito  
Modeling of organic matter dynamics in the mesopelagic zone: A perspective on modeling and ecosystem studies  
Enrique N. Curchitser, Kenneth A. Rose, Kate Hedstrom, Jerome Fiechter, Shin-ichi Ito, Salvador Lluch-Cota and 
Bernard A. Megrey  
Development of a climate-to-fish-to-fishers model: Progress, issues, and some solutions  
Manuel Barange, Icarus Allen, Eddie Allison, Marie-Caroline Badjeck, Julia Blanchard, James Harle, Robert Holmes, 
Jason Holt, Simon Jennings, Gorka Merino, Christian Mullon and Emma Tompkins (Invited)  
Predicting the impacts and socio-economic consequences of climate change on global marine ecosystems and fisheries: The 
QUEST_Fish framework  
Anne B. Hollowed, Nicholas A. Bond, James E. Overland and Thomas Wilderbuer  
Future conditions in the Bering Sea: Applications to walleye pollock and flatfish  
Akihiko Yatsu, Sanae Chiba, Yasuhiro Yamanaka, Shin-ichi Ito, Yugo Shimizu, Masahide Kaeriyama and Yoshiro 
Watanabe  
Future of Kuroshio/Oyashio ecosystems: An outcome of the CFAME Task Team and WG20  
Michael Dalton (Invited)  
Climate change and marine ecosystems: Demographic and economic implications under IPCC scenarios  
Harold P. Batchelder, Enrique N. Curchitser and Kate Hedstrom  
Modeling physical processes in the Northeast Pacific: model-data comparisons for assessing when model skill is sufficient as a 
basis for ecosystem simulation  
Jie Shi, Hao Wei and Liang Zhao  
Numerical study of the aquaculture carrying capacity in a typical raft culture bay of China  
Hernan Garcia, Sydney Levitus, Tim Boyer, Ricardo Locarnini, John Antonov, Daphne Johnson, Olga Baranova, Alexey 
Mishonov, Dan Seidov, Igor Smolyar, Melisa Zweng and Evgeney Yarosh  
The World Ocean Database and Atlas 2009  
Steven J. Bograd, Bryan A. Black, William J. Sydeman, Isaac Schroeder and Peter Lawson  
Wintertime ocean conditions synchronize rockfish growth and seabird reproduction in the California Current  
Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS Appendix 3 
104  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Posters  
Licheng Feng, Baochao Liu, Yi Cai, Zhanggui Wang, Jiping Chao and Jianping Li  
Numerical simulation of the Changjiang estuary ecosystem 
 
 
  
Appendix 3 Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  105 
ICES Annual Science Conference 
September 20–24, 2010  
Nantes, France 
 
 
ICES/PICES Theme Session S  
Responses to climate variability: Comparison of Northern Hemisphere marine ecosystems 
 
Convenors: Jürgen Alheit (ICES/Germany), Harald Loeng (ICESNorway), Anne Hollowed, (PICES/USA), 
and Suam Kim (PICES/Korea) 
 
The climate of northern regions is changing and marine ecosystems are heavily affected by climate variability. 
Relevant questions related to external forcing functions that link global and regional climate processes to the 
physical oceanography are inter alia: 
• How does the climate vary and what changes do we see in the physical conditions? 
• How does variability of the physical aspects of the marine systems affect ecosystem structure and 
processes? 
• How can we integrate across spatial and temporal scales to permit forecasting how changes in climate may 
affect the productivity and sustainability of the marine ecosystems?  
 
Climate impact studies have been made within single ecosystems or between different systems of the same 
region.  However, comparisons between ecosystems of different regions or even of different ocean basins are 
rare.  Such comparisons are vital in order to better understand responses of ecosystems to climate forcing, 
particularly with a view to large‐ scale climate forcing and teleconnection patterns.  
 
The number of participants at the joint ICES/PICES Theme Session changed between 70 to 120, reflecting the 
large interest in the theme.  The total number of oral presentations was 18.  Two 15-minute periods of extra 
discussion were included in the session to allow for comparing results from different papers.  Ten 
presentations focussed on the Atlantic, 5 on the Pacific and 3 were direct comparisons of both oceans.  The 
success of this theme session demonstrates the value of this kind of joint ICES/PICES initiatives. 
 
Atlantic 
 
The previously reported seesaw relationship of air and sea temperatures between the Labrador Sea and the 
Norwegian/Barents Sea regions from the 1950s to the mid‐ 1990s was confirmed by Drinkwater et al. (S:03). 
However, temperatures on both sides of the Atlantic are now in phase since the mid‐ 1990s, due to a spatial 
shift of atmospheric pressure patterns and a weakening of the NAO, clearly indicated by strong warming and 
reduced ice cover in both regions with concomitant ecosystem consequences. 
 
Getzlaff et al. (S:01) studied the impact of the four winter climate regimes in SLP over the North Atlantic, 
which had been identified by Hurrell and Deser (2009) from cluster analysis, on the Baltic Sea for the period 
from 1948–2008.  The different atmospheric regimes determine the circulation patterns in the Baltic Sea 
through their impacts on direction and strength of prevailing winds and thus influence ecosystem structure and 
processes. 
 
Sherman et al. (S:15) showed that reactions of Large Marine Ecosystems bordering the North Atlantic rim 
were different between the eastern and western side.  The higher warming rates in the NE Atlantic seem to 
influence particularly higher trophic levels, whereas nutrient over enrichment in relation to harmful algal 
blooms and hypoxic conditions are more important in the NW Atlantic. 
 
Johannesen et al. (S:10) compared the impact of climate variation and fishing on the Eastern Scotian shelf and 
the Barents Sea with a particular view to cod stock dynamics.  In the early 1990s, climatically induced warm 
water penetration has led to a strong increase of the cod stock in the Barents Sea, whereas demersal fish 
Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS Appendix 3 
106  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
collapsed through high fishing pressure and cold water in the Eastern Scotian shelf, leading to a trophic 
cascade favouring forage fish and affecting lower trophic levels.  The Gulf of Maine experienced a pronounced 
shift in salinity, primary and secondary production which led to significant changes in herring and tuna 
condition (Golet et al., S:20).  
 
Alheit and Wagner (S:12) showed that the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO) has driven multidecadal 
dynamics of many NE Atlantic small pelagic fish populations of herring, sardine and anchovy since at least 
early last century through lasting warm and cold periods, as demonstrated by examples from Moroccan waters 
in the south to Norwegian waters in the North. 
 
After about 40 years of absence, anchovies and sardines have re‐ invaded the North Sea and adjacent waters 
such as the Irish and Baltic seas and established there again spawning populations (Alheit et al., S:14). 
Whereas sardine arrived in larger quantities around 1990, very likely in response to warmer winter 
temperatures associated with the pronounced increase of the NAO index, anchovy followed only in the mid‐ 
1990s.  Anchovy was probably driven into the North Sea because of warmer summer temperatures due to the 
sudden increase of the AMO or the northeast shift of the NAO pressure centers or the contraction of the North 
Atlantic sub‐ polar gyre or a combination of them. 
 
Based on a long‐term time series which was started at 1919, Johannessen (S:19) showed that gadoid fish 
suffered repeated abrupt and persistent recruitment collapses which seem to have been caused by gradually 
increasing nutrient loads.  These resulted in abrupt changes in the plankton community with negative 
consequences for 0‐ group gadoids.  Global warming might increase these abrupt changes and enhance 
recruitment collapse. 
 
Otero et al. (S:13) demonstrated that contemporary ocean warming and freshwater conditions contribute to 
delay the completion of maturation of Atlantic salmon, among possible reasons being changed composition of 
marine zooplankton communities and increased precipitation and number of springtime flooding events.  
 
Pacific 
 
According to Bulatov and Klyashthorin (S:02), long‐ term trends in climate indices such as PDO, ALPI, NPI, 
Arctic temperature anomalies and Total Solar Irradiance exhibited synchronous dynamics over the last 100 
years with 60–65 years cycles and with peaks in the decades of the 1940s and 2000s and a low around the 
1960s/1970s.  Over the last 30 years, walleye pollock biomass has shown very similar dynamics. Based on 
these relationships, walleye pollock biomass is projected to decline up to 2020–30. 
 
The adjacent eastern Bering Sea (EBS) and the Gulf of Alska (GoA) ecosystems are inhabited by similar 
species communities and affected by similar anthropogenic and large scale forcing. Hunsicker et al. (S:06) 
evaluated, how environmental and demographic factors influence the variability in spatial overlap of arrow 
tooth flounder and pollock, for a better understanding of their predation interactions. 
 
Hollowed et al. (S:20) compared the impact of climate driven shifts in ocean conditions on forage fish (young 
walleye pollock and capelin) in the GoA and the EBS.  Hydrography and bathymetry are important for the 
distribution of these forage fish and frontal systems and predator avoidance plays a major role. 
 
Interannual variability in Northern California Current food web structure was studied by Ruzicka et al. (S:08) 
using different models, whereby the relative importance of alternate energy pathways at intermediate trophic 
levels (small pelagic fish, euphausiids, jellyfish) for the efficiency of the system and the productivity of the top 
trophic groups was particularly considered.  Euphausiids seem to more important in the energy transfer to top 
trophic level production than small pelgic fishes. 
 
Tian and Kidokoro (S:05) showed that there was no regime shift in the Tsushima Warm Current region in the 
Japan Sea in the mid‐ 1970s, as reported for the central and eastern North Pacific.  Instead, abrupt changes were 
Appendix 3 Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  107 
observed in the early 1970s with cold‐ water fish species such as sardines and walleye pollock increasing and 
warmwater species such as anchovy and horse mackerel decreasing. 
 
Comparison Atlantic – Pacific 
 
Bi et al. (S:07) compared the influence of climate variability by AMO and PDO on zooplankton communities 
from the east and the west coast of the USA and demonstrated that the decadal‐ scale PDO affected west coast 
communities, but the multi‐ decadal AMO did not cause consistent responses in east coast zooplankton over the 
period of observation from 1978–2008. 
 
Durant et al. (S:09) studied the ecological consequences of fisheries effects on population properties, such as 
intrinsic growth rate, in relation to fishing intensity and climate, using data from Barents Sea cod, European 
hake (three stocks) and Bering Sea pollock.  The different stocks exhibited different reactions, whereby three 
stocks showed evidence of a truncated age structure, which was caused by fishing pressure, influencing 
population persistence. 
 
 
List of papers  
 
Oral presentations  
Andreas Lehmann, K. Getzlaff, H.-H. Hinrichsen, and F. Köster 
CAVIAR: Climate Variabilityof the Baltic Sea area 
O.A. Bulatov and L.B. Klyashtorin 
Walleye pollock biomass dynamics in the Bering Sea: possibility of long-term forecasting 
Ken Drinkwater, Eugene Colbourne, Harald Loeng, Svein Sundby, and Trond Kristiansen 
Comparison of the atmospheric forcing and oceanographic responses between the Labrador Sea and the Norwegian and Barents 
Seas 
Bernard A. Megrey, Jason S. Link, Thomas J. Miller, Tim Essington, R. Ian Perry, Alida Bundy, and Ken F. Drinkwater 
Using production models as a tool to examine factors that influence productivity of marine systems: A comparative analysis 
among 10 northern hemisphere ecosystems 
Yongjun Tian and Hideaki Kidokoro 
Long-term variability in the fish populations in the Japan Sea with special reference to the impact of the mid–1970s regime shift 
Mary E. Hunsicker, Lorenzo Ciannelli, Kevin M. Bailey, and Stephani Zador 
Processes driving differences in major food web linkages of the Gulf of Alaska and eastern Bering Sea ecosystems: a conceptual 
view 
Hongsheng Bi, Bill Peterson, Cheryl Morgan, Jon Hare, and Joseph Kane 
Comparative analysis of zooplankton communities in the east and west coast of United States–biological response to large scale 
driving forcing? 
James J. Ruzicka, Robert L. Emmett, Jeannette E. Zamon, Cheryl A. Morgan, Andrew C. Thomas, John H. Steele, and 
Richard D. Brodeur 
Inter-annual variability in the Northern California Current food web structure: inferred changes in energy flow pathways and 
system response to alternate forcing scenarios 
Joël M. Durant, Manuel Hidalgo, and Lorenzo Ciannelli 
How does exploitation of prey fish affect population growth rate in changing seas? 
Edda Johannesen, Mette Skern-Mauritzen, Randi Ingvaldsen, Jan Erik Stiansen, and Emma Orlova 
Eastern Scotian Shelf and Barents Sea intercomparison: climate fluctuations, human impact and system resilience 
Carola Wagner Rita Adrian, Jürgen Alheit, Thorsten Blenckner, Stephanie E. Hampton, Franz, Hölker, Douglas J. 
Beare, and Daniel E. Schindler 
Regime shifts in marine and lake ecosystems: Teleconnection patterns 
Jürgen Alheit and Carola Wagner 
Impact of Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO) on NE Atlantic ecosystems 
Jaime Otero, Arne J. Jensen, Jan Henning L’Abée-Lund, Nils Chr. Stenseth, Geir O. Storvik, and Leif Asbjørn Vøllestad 
Contemporary ocean warming and freshwater conditions contribute to delay the completion of maturation in Atlantic salmon 
throughout the Norwegian range of distribution 
  
Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS Appendix 3 
108  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Jürgen Alheit, C. Wagner, T. Pohlmann, M. Casini, A. Sell, and R. Vorberg 
Climate variability drives anchovies and sardines into North and Baltic Seas 
Kenneth Sherman, I. Belkin, K.D. Friedland, J. O’Reilly, and K. Hyde 
Changing states of North Atlantic Large Marine Ecosystems 
Michaël Gras, Olivier Goetz, Jehane Lepoittevin, and Jean-Paul Robin 
English Channel cuttlefish (Sepia officinalis) stock structure in the reproduction period 
Walter J. Golet, Jason Stockwell, Graham Sherwood, Andrew Pershing, Jeffrey Runge, and Molly Lutcavage 
Bottoms up: Potential effects of environmental forcing on apex predators in the Gulf of Maine 
Tore Johannessen 
Repeated observations of abrupt and persistent recruitment collapses in gadoids – a potential scenario in relation to climate 
change? 
Anne B. Hollowed, S. Barbeaux, N. Cokelet, S. Kotwicki, P. Ressler, and C. Wilson 
Comparison of the effects of climate variations on pelagic ocean habitats and their potential role in structuring the forage fish 
distributions in the Bering Sea and Gulf of Alaska 
 
Posters 
F. Litvinov, N. Timoshenko, and Pavel Chernyshkov 
Oscillations of abundance in North Atlantic fishes in 1977–2010 compared to synchronous changes of commercially important 
species in other parts of the World Ocean due to global climatic variability 
Sangdeok Chung and Suam Kim 
Relationship between climate/environmental factors and Pacific cod (Gadus macrocephalus) catch in the southwestern 
Japan/East Sea 
Ana Moreira, Paulo Fonseca, Cristina Silva, Miguel Santos, Aida Campos, and Maria de Fátima Borges 
Are there evidences of environmental-driven fluctuations in landings from the Portuguese trawl crustacean fishery? 
Silje Ramsvatn, Torstein Pedersen, and Einar M. Nilssen 
Comparing trophic structure and diversity in northern ecosystems using stable isotope data 
Dhanya Pushpadas, Ute Daewel, Corinna Schrum, and Sturla Winger Svendsen 
Comparing long term changes in primary and secondary production in the North and Baltic Sea: A modelling study 
Jaime Otero Arne J. Jensen, Jan Henning L’Abée‐ Lund, Nils Chr. Stenseth, Geir O. Storvik, and Leif, Asbjørn Vøllestad 
Environmental effects on ocean entry of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) smolt across its range of distribution 
Anke Weber 
Monitoring and Evaluation of Spatially Managed Areas (MESMA) 
 
Appendix 3 Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  109 
2010 PICES Annual Meeting 
October 22–31, 2010  
Portland, USA 
 
 
FIS/POC/BIO Topic Session (S8)  
Impact of climate variability on marine ecosystems:  
Understanding functional responses to facilitate forecasting 
 
Co-sponsored by:  ICES 
 
Co-Convenors: Jürgen Alheit (ICES/Germany), Suam Kim (PICES/Korea), Harald Loeng (ICES/Norway), 
James Overland (PICES/USA) and Yasunori Sakurai (Japan) 
 
Background 
 
Understanding the role of natural variability, occurring over a variety of temporal and spatial scales, is 
essential for effective management of marine ecosystems in the wake of predicted global change.  Evidence 
suggests that climate variability can trigger regime shifts in marine ecosystems. Regime shifts are 
characterized by a reorganization of marine communities, species dominance, and tropho-dynamic 
relationships.  Often, synchronous shifts occur in aquatic ecosystems that are separated by thousands of 
kilometers.  This finding suggests that atmospheric teleconnections are mediating regional system changes.  
We postulate that comparative studies of ecosystems that have experienced regime shifts will provide insights 
into the expected responses of marine organisms to climate change.  Papers were invited that went beyond 
simple pattern matching.  The primary focus was on understanding shifts in the pelagic realm, including 
phytoplankton, zooplankton, small pelagic fishes, gadids, and squids, with preference given to research that 
provides evidence of the functional responses and relationships that underlie regime shifts, and to statistical or 
modeling studies that successfully simulate observed shifts. 
 
Summary of presentations 
 
This session was held on Tuesday, October 26, 2010 and consisted of 20 oral presentations (including 4 invited 
talks) plus 15 posters.  The session was jointly organized by PICES and ICES, as a part of 2010 WG-FCCIFS 
activities.  The first invited paper, by Hans O. Pörtner, described that the whole organism responses to 
warming or cooling link to ecosystem response, and that climate warming emphasizes the need for a common 
understanding of thermal limitation by physiologists and ecologists nowadays.  He introduced the concept of 
oxygen and capacity limited thermal tolerance (OCLT) in relation to climate change.  His recent works showed 
that a mismatch in oxygen supply versus demand causes a limitation in aerobic scope and finally transition to 
anaerobic metabolism, paralleled by the development of molecular stress events.  In fact, functional characters 
in polar species may reflect adaptation to excess oxygen availability rather than limitation. 
 
The second invited paper by Kazuaki Tadokoro showed geographical comparison of the decadal-scale 
variations in marine ecosystems in the North Pacific Ocean.  A decreasing trend in nutrients was observed in 
the surface layer of the Gulf of Alaska, Oyashio waters, Kuroshio-Oyashio Transition waters, Kuroshio, 
western subtropical waters, and East China Sea, and Chl-a concentration and zooplankton biomass also 
represented a significant decreasing trend in the waters, which suggest that global warming decreases the 
productivity of the lower ecosystems simultaneously among the regions. 
 
The third invited speaker, Shin-ichi Ito, talked about multi-trophic level ecosystem modeling for understanding 
the mechanism of small pelagic fish species alternation associated with climate regime shifts.  Various 
modelings and statistical techniques were used for coupling physical, biochemical-plankton (NEMURO: North 
Pacific Ecosystem Model for Understanding Regional Oceanography) and Japanese sardine (Sardinops 
melanostictus).  His model reasonably reproduced weight decrease of sardine during the higher stock period. 
Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS Appendix 3 
110  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Moreover, the model reproduced expansion of the habitat area and decrease of prey plankton during the period. 
The fourth invited paper by Franz J. Mueter showed long-term forecasts of walleye pollock dynamics in the 
eastern Bering Sea based on estimated responses of recruitment and growth to climate variability.  Recent 
advances in our understanding of the role of climate variability in regulating lower trophic levels in the eastern 
Bering Sea support a dome-shaped relationship between the recruitment of walleye pollock and surface 
temperatures during late summer.  He also speculated that future recruitment may not be reduced as much as 
the temperature relationship alone would suggest because of (1) reduced cannibalism on larval and early 
juvenile stages and (2) larger size-at-age of older juveniles and adults, which is likely to increase reproductive 
output. 
 
The remaining talks covered a wide range of topics and geographical regions.  Most oral presentations showed 
regional examples on ecosystem responses in relation to climate variability, and geographical coverage was 
well balanced: 4 from the Atlantic Ocean, and 15 from the Pacific Ocean (6 focused on the eastern Pacific,  
6 on the western Pacific, and 3 on the Bering Sea).  In the Poster Session, one presentation co-authored by  
C.J. Jang and S. Yoo, which received the Best Poster award for a POC-sponsored topic session (see list at the 
end of the Session Summaries report), demonstrated variability of mixed layer depth (MLD) and its relation 
with chlorophyll (CHL) concentration in the North Pacific Ocean on seasonal to year-to-year timescales.  The 
variability of MLD is well correlated with CHL variability in some regions in the North Pacific Ocean, 
including the Kuroshio Extension (KE) region.  The good correspondence between MLD and CHL suggests 
that increased MLD helps to entrain deep nutrients into the upper ocean and thus to maintain high CHL in the 
KE. 
 
The Best Poster award was shared between Sarah Ann Thompson for “Comparing pathways of functional 
response of top predators to seasonality of upwelling in the California Current”, and Chan Joo Jang for 
“Variability of mixed layer depth and its relation with chlorophyll concentration in the North Pacific Ocean”. 
 
 
List of papers 
 
Oral presentations 
Hans O. Pörtner (Invited) 
Oxygen and capacity limited thermal tolerance (OCLT): Linking climate to ecosystem change 
Julie E. Keister, Emanuele Di Lorenzo, Sanae Chiba, Vincent Combes, Cheryl A. Morgan and William T. Peterson 
Climate-related changes in ocean transport control zooplankton biogeography around the North Pacific basin 
Yury Zuenko, Ludmila Chernoivanova, Alexander Vdovin and Elena I. Ustinova 
Saffron cod fluctuations in the Japan Sea: An evidence of match/mismatch hypothesis 
William R. Crawford and James R. Irvine 
Climate variability and ecosystem response in Pacific Canadian coastal waters 
Kazuaki Tadokoro, Yuji Okazaki, Tsuneo Ono and Hiroya Sugisaki (Invited) 
Geographical comparison of the decadal-scale variations in marine ecosystems in the North Pacific Ocean 
Ken Drinkwater, Glen Harrison, Erica Head, Padmini Dalpadado, Jim Carscadden and George Lilly 
Comparison of the ecosystem responses to climate forcing and fishing between the Labrador Sea and the Norwegian/Barents seas 
Jürgen Alheit, Michele Casini, Wulff Greve, Thomas Pohlmann, Anne Sell, Ralf Vorberg and Carola Wagner 
Climate variability drives anchovies and sardines into North and Baltic Seas 
Joachim P. Gröger, Gordon H. Kruse and Norbert Rohlf 
Climate cycles and population dynamics of North Sea herring 
Anne B. Hollowed, Steven Barbeaux, Ned Cokelet, Stan Kotwicki, Patrick Ressler and Christopher Wilson 
Effects of climate change on pelagic ocean habitats and their potential role in structuring Bering Sea and Gulf of Alaska 
ecosystems 
Shin-ichi Ito, Takeshi Okunishi, Atsushi Kawabata, Hiroshi Kubota, Akinori Takasuka, Taketo Hashioka, Hiroshi 
Sumata and Yasuhiro Yamanaka (Invited) 
Multi-trophic level ecosystem modeling for understanding the mechanism of small pelagic fish species alternation associated 
with climate regime shifts 
  
Appendix 3 Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  111 
Richard D. Brodeur, James J. Ruzicka and John H. Steele 
Investigating alternate trophic pathways through gelatinous zooplankton, krill, and planktivorous fishes in an upwelling 
ecosystem using end-to-end models 
William J. Sydeman, Jarrod A. Santora, Sarah Ann Thompson, Kyra L. Mills, John C. Field, Brian K. Wells, Baldo 
Marinovic and Bryan A. Black 
Numerical responses of krill predators to variation in krill abundance and spatial organization 
Seokjin Yoon, Hiroya Abe and Michio J. Kishi 
Variance estimation of the growth and food sources of the Manila clam by global warming in a subarctic lagoon, Japan 
Harald Loeng 
Impacts of climate change on the Arctic Ocean and adjacent seas 
Franz J. Mueter (Invited) 
Long-term forecasts of walleye pollock dynamics in the eastern Bering Sea based on estimated responses of recruitment and 
growth to climate variability 
Oleg Bulatov 
Climate fluctuations and walleye pollock biomass dynamics 
Bryan A. Black, Isaac D. Schroeder, William J. Sydeman, Steven J. Bograd and Brian K. Wells 
Winter and summer upwelling modes and their biological relevance in the California Current Ecosystem 
Masahide Kaeriyama, Hideaki Kudo, Hideki Kaeriyama and Katherine W. Myers 
Spacio-temporal changes in the feeding pattern of Pacific salmon, Oncorhynchus spp., in the North Pacific Ocean ecosystems 
during 1958–2009 
Melissa A. Haltuch and André E. Punt 
On the promises and pitfalls of including decadal-scale climate forcing of recruitment in demersal fish stock assessment 
Yongjun Tian, Hideaki Kidokoro and Tsuneo Goto 
Long-term changes in the condition factor of small pelagic fishes in the Japan Sea and the impact of the late 1980s regime shift 
 
Poster presentations 
Vanessa R. von Biela, Christian E. Zimmerman, Thomas E. Helser, Bryan Black and David C. Douglas 
Terrestrial and marine correlates to black rockfish (Sebastes melanops) growth in the California and Alaska Coastal Currents 
Michael A. Litzow, Franz J. Mueter and Dan Urban 
Can rising variance predict sudden shifts in populations and ecosystems? A test using Alaskan crustacean data 
Elena A. Shtraikhert, Sergey P. Zakharkov and Tatyana N. Gordeychuk 
Inter-annual variability of the spring chlorophyll a concentration maximum in the Peter-the-Great Bay (Sea of Japan) in 1998- 
2010 
Se-Jong Ju, Chang-Rae Lee and Ah-Ra Ko 
Latitudinal variation of lipid contents and compositions in copepods, Euchaeta and Pleuromamma spp., from the Northwest 
Pacific Ocean: Its implication in feeding ecology 
James J. Ruzicka, Thomas C. Wainwright, Richard D. Brodeur, Jeannette Zamon, Elizabeth Daly, Cheryl A. Morgan 
and Robert L. Emmett 
Interannual variability in the Northern California Current food web structure: Inferring trophic pressures upon juvenile salmon 
Suam Kim, Sangwook Yeh, Chung-Il Lee, Sukyung Kang, Hyunwoo Kang, Jin-Hee Yoon, Jung Jin Kim and Sinjae Yoo 
Forecasting practice on the common squid (Todarodes pacificus) population responding to climate/oceanographic changes 
Sarah Ann Thompson, William J. Sydeman, Jarrod A. Santora, Robert M. Suryan, Bryan A. Black, William T. Peterson 
and John Calambokidis 
Comparing pathways of functional response of top predators to seasonality of upwelling in the California Current 
Jun Shoji, Syun-ichi Toshito, Ken-ichiro Mizuno and Yasuhiro Kamimura 
Possible effects of global warming on fish early life stages: Shift in spawning season and latitudinal distribution can alter growth 
of juvenile fishes through the changes in daytime length 
Chan Joo Jang and Sinjae Yoo 
Variability of mixed layer depth and its relation with chlorophyll concentration in the North Pacific Ocean 
Ken-ichiro Mizuno, Yasuhiro Kamimura and Jun Shoji 
Effect of temperature on growth of black rockfish Sebastes cheni juveniles in seagrass and macroalgae beds 
Hee Dong Jeong, Sang-Woo Kim, Yong Kyu Choi, Jeong Min Shim and Kee Young Kwon 
A striking difference of coastal SST related to climate change in the eastern coast of Korea 
Jackie R. King, Vera N. Agostini, Chris J. Harvey, Gordon A. McFarlane, Michael G. Foreman, James E. Overland, 
Nicholas A. Bond and Kerim Y. Aydin 
Climate forcing and the California Current ecosystem 
Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS Appendix 3 
112  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Ann E. Edwards and Shannon Fitzgerald 
Predicting resilience to ecosystem change in a far-ranging, pelagic, generalist forager 
Oleg N. Katugin, Konstantin A. Karyakin and Alexander A. Nikitin 
Contrasting distribution patterns of the common squid (Todarodes pacificus) in Peter the Great Bay (Japan/East Sea) in 2008 and 
2009 
Mikhail A. Zuev and Oleg N. Katugin 
Distribution patterns of the gonatid squids (Gonatidae, Oegopsina) in the northern Sea of Okhotsk in 1990-2008 
 
Appendix 3 Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  113 
2011 inter-sessional workshop  
May 2–6, 2011 
Hamburg, Germany 
 
 
Workshop on “Reaction of Northern Hemisphere ecosystems to climate events: A comparison”  
 
Co-Convenors: Jürgen Alheit (ICES/Germany), Christian Möllmann (ICES/Germany), Sukgeun Jung 
(PICES/Korea) and Yoshiro Watanabe (PICES/Japan) 
 
Regime shifts have been observed, especially during the late 1980s, in several Northern Hemisphere marine 
ecosystems in the Atlantic and the Pacific such as the Baltic Sea, the North Sea, the Mediterranean Sea, Gulf 
of Alaska/Northern California Current, the Oyashio-Kuroshio System and the Japan/East Sea which all have 
important small pelagic resources.  A respective multi-authored manuscript has been drafted by an earlier joint 
ICES/PICES workshop describing the associated climatic teleconnection patterns between these ecosystems 
which are widely separated from each other.  The present workshop will extend this descriptive exercise in a 
quantitative way.  Long-term time series of physical, chemical and biological variables from these regional 
ecosystems will be compared and analyzed by a team of experts from PICES and ICES countries using 
multivariate statistics.  These studies will yield further insight into how ecosystems change state, as, for 
example, the rates and magnitudes of change are not the same for the different systems reflecting regional 
specific differences in the forcing factors.  In any one geographical ecosystem the expression of changes 
resulting from climatic forcing may take on different patterns reflecting the detailed mechanisms and local 
processes that are influential within the constraints of the larger scale forcing.  However, there is growing 
evidence that although climate forcing appears to be a significant trigger for many regime shifts, those 
ecosystems subject to high levels of human activity such as fishing pressures appear to be at greater risk to this 
phenomena). 
 
This workshop conducted a meta-analysis of changes in ecosystem structure and function over several 
Northern Hemisphere ecosystems in relation to climate and other anthropogenic drivers
3
.  The goals of the 
workshop were to: 
a)  Assemble multivariate data sets of long-term time series of physical, chemical and biological variables 
from regional ecosystems; 
b)  Identify trends and abrupt changes (i.e., regime shifts) in the regional data sets using multivariate 
statistical and discontinuity analyses; 
c)  Identify the region-specific importance of climate events relative to anthropogenic forcing factors such as 
eutrophication and exploitation; 
d)  Conduct a meta-analysis of ecosystem trends and their potential drivers over all Northern Hemisphere 
ecosystems. 
 
 
List of presentations 
 
Christian Möllmann  
Introduction to workshop and first results of a North Atlantic Meta-Analysis of ecosystem changes 
Rabea Diekmann   
Introduction into planned statistical analyses 
Joachim Gröger  
Detection of regime and other shifts in marine time series – the new shiftogram approach 
Jürgen Alheit 
Climatic teleconnections NW Pacific – NE Atlantic   
                                                           
3
 See http://www.pices.int/members/working_groups/Disbanded_working_groups/WG-FCCIFS/2011-ICES-PICES-Wsh-
Germany-WG25.pdf for a report on the outcome of the workshop.  Individual papers were published from the workshop, 
and presented at PICES-2011. 
Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS Appendix 3 
114  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Yongjun Tian 
Data presentation Japan/East Sea, including a brief description of the area 
Yury Zuenko 
Data presentation Japan/East Sea, including a brief description of the area 
Sukgeun Jung  
Data presentation Japan/East Sea, including a brief description of the area 
Motomitsu Takahashi  
Data presentation Kuroshio/Oyashio region, including a brief description of the area 
Skip McKinnell 
Data presentation, salmon 
   
 
List of participants 
Name Organization E-mail 
Jürgen Alheit  Leibniz Institute for Baltic Sea Research 
Germany 
juergen.alheit@iowarnemuende.de 
Rabea Diekmann  Institute for Hydrobiology and Fisheries Science 
Germany 
rabea.diekmann@uni-hamburg.de 
Joachim Gröger  Joh. Heinr. von Thünen-Institute (vTI) 
Germany 
joachim.groeger@vti.bund.de 
Sukgeun Jung  School of Marine Biomedical Sciences  
Jeju National University, Korea 
sukgeun.jung@gmail.com 
Skip McKinnell  PICES mckinnell@pices.int 
Christian Möllmann  Institute for Hydrobiology and Fisheries Science 
Germany 
christian.moellmann@uni-
hamburg.de 
Saskia Otto  Institute for Hydrobiology and Fisheries Science 
Germany 
saskia.otto@uni-hamburg.de 
Motomitsu Takahashi  Seikai National Fisheries Research Institute 
 Japan  
takahamt@fra.affrc.go.jp 
Yongjun Tian  Japan Sea National Fisheries Research Institute 
Japan 
yjtian@fra.affrc.go.jp 
Carola Wagner  Leibniz Institute for Baltic Sea Research 
Germany 
carola.wagner@io-warnemuende.de 
Håkan Westerberg  Swedish Board Fisheries  
Sweden 
hakan.westerberg@fiskeriverket.se 
Yury I. Zuenko  Pacific Fisheries Research Center (TINRO-
Center), Russia 
zuenko_yury@hotmail.com 
 
 
Appendix 3 Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  115 
2011 inter-sessional workshop  
May 22, 2011 
Seattle, USA 
 
 
Workshop on “Biological consequences of a decrease in sea ice in Arctic and Sub-Arctic seas”  
 
 (held in conjunction with the ESSAS Open Science Meeting, Seattle, USA) 
 
Co-Convenors:  Anne Hollowed (PICES/USA) and Harald Loeng (ICES/Norway)  
Publication: Hollowed et al. 2013, Fisheries Oceanography 22(5) 
 
Invited Speakers: Trond Kristiansen (Norway) Hyunju Seo (Korea) 
 
This workshop reviewed life history information and habitat associations to assess the risk of immigration and 
settlement of new biological populations in the Arctic and surrounding shelf seas in response to the retreat of 
sea ice.  Criteria necessary to establish residency of new species in the Arctic Ocean and surrounding areas 
were developed and compared to expected conditions based on climate scenarios.  Ways for cooperation in 
information sharing between groups charged with managing the Arctic were explored, and the results of the 
workshop will be reported to both PICES and ICES scientists working on these issues. 
 
 
List of papers 
 
Trond Kristiansen (Invited) 
Analyzing warm and cold climate phases to understand differences in survival of larval fish: Possible implications of climate 
variability 
Hyunju Seo, Hideaki Kudo and Masahide Kaeriyama (Invited) 
The effect of global warming and density-dependence on Hokkaido chum salmon from the 1940s to the early-2000s 
Nicholas A. Bond, Paul D. Spencer and Anne B. Hollowed 
Impacts of climate change on the habitat of Bering Sea arrowtooth flounder 
Anne B. Hollowed, Steven Barbeaux, Edward Farley, Edward D. Cokelet, Stan Kotwicki, Patrick Ressler, Cliff Spital and 
Christopher Wilson 
Forecasting climate change impacts on forage fish distributions in the Bering Sea 
Michael Klages, Eduard Bauerfeind, Antje Boetius, Melanie Bergmann, Christiane Hasemann, Eva-Maria Nöthig, Ingo 
Schewe and Thomas Soltwedel 
Rapid shifts of the marine ecosystem at HAUSGARTEN deep-sea observatory (Fram Strait; 79°N, 04°E) observed over the past 
decade 
Daria Martynova and Nikolay Usov 
A life with and without ice in the White Sea: Who will stay tuned? 
 
Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS Appendix 3 
116  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
2011 inter-sessional workshop  
June 6–10, 2011 
Woods Hole, USA 
 
 
Workshop on “Basin-wide impact of Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation” 
 
Co-Convenors:  Jürgen Alheit (Germany), Ken Drinkwater (Norway) and Janet Nye (USA) 
Publication: Edwards et al., 2013, PLoS ONE 8; Alheit et al.; Journal of Marine Systems, in press 
 
Over the last 20 years, changes in abundance and distribution of plankton and fish populations have been 
recorded in ecosystems on both sides of the North Atlantic.  Similar historical observations were also made 
from about 1930 to 1960 and around the 1880s.  These long-term fluctuations cannot be explained well by 
dynamics of decadal oscillations such as the NAO.  The Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO) seems to be 
associated with these long-term dynamics of plankton and fishes.  However, the physical basis of the AMO 
and how it relates to temperature and currents in the North Atlantic is poorly understood.  We expect that the 
study of impacts of multidecadal climate variability would contribute to understand and predict impacts of 
climate change on marine ecosystems and fish stocks. 
 
The objective of the workshop was to assemble all relevant information on physical and biological processes 
related to AMO dynamics and to investigate whether AMO dynamics can be predicted.  The results of the 
workshop will allow us to better understand climate impacts on multi-decadal fluctuations in marine communities. 
 
 
List of plenary presentations 
 
Janet Nye, Ken Drinkwater, Jürgen Alheit 
Overview of ecosystem effects of the AMO and discussion  
Mike Alexander  
Overview of AMO physical properties and discussion 
Hali Kilbourne   
A palaeontological perspective on AMO 
Mingfang Ting  
Anthropogenic and natural forcing of AMO 
Sirpa Häkkinen  
Physical aspects of AMO 
Janet Nye  
Relation between AMO and subpolar gyre and with position of the Gulf Stream 
Ken Drinkwater  
Response to AMO forcing: contrasts between warm and cold periods  
Svein Sundby  
Ecological response to forcing of different frequencies 
Bob Wood, Ed Martino  
Impact of AMO on estuarine and coastal ecosystems 
Youg-Oh Kwon 
Decadal variability and western boundary current systems in the North Pacific and Atlantic 
Andrew Kenny, Joachim Gröger 
Applications of AMO for fisheries and ecosystem management 
 
 
  
Appendix 3 Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  117 
Break out group discussions 
 
Dicussion leader: Mike Alexander 
Mechanistic hypotheses responsible for AMO 
Discussion leader: Jürgen Alheit  
Ecological effects 
Discussion leader: Mingfang Ting 
Anthropogenic vs natural forcing of AMO and its relationship to global climate change 
Discussion leaders: Sirpa Häkkinen, Ken Drinkwater 
Physical aspects 
Discussion leader: Janet Nye 
Relationship of AMO with local oceanographic features 
Discussion leader: Ken Drinkwater 
Contrasts between warm and cold periods      
Discussion leader: Svein Sundby 
Ecological response to forcing of different frequencies 
Discussion leaders: Bob Wood, Ed Martino 
Impact of AMO on estuarine ecosystems and fisheries.  Can AMO be useful to nearshore/coastal environments? 
Discussion leader: Young-Oh Kwon 
Decadal variability and westeren boundary currents in N Pacific and Atlantic  
Discussion leaders: Joachim Gröger, Andrew Kenny 
Applications 
    
  
Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS Appendix 3 
118  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
2011 ICES Annual Science Conference 
 September 19–23, 2011 
 Gdańsk, Poland 
 
 
Theme Session L  
Biophysical modelling tools and their potential use in marine spatial management:  
A strategic dialogue  
 
Convenors:  Myron A. Peck (Germany), Pierre Petitgas (France) and Vanessa Stelzenmüller (Germany)  
 
Mapping the location of key habitats and understanding spatial and temporal changes in those habitats are 
prerequisites for effective management of marine fish and shellfish resources and to promote an ecosystem 
approach to marine spatial management.  Recent advancements in biophysical modelling (from individual-
based particle tracking of early life stages of single species to end-to-end ecosystem models) now allow 
researchers to move beyond mere static representations of key habitats for marine fish and shellfish species 
(e.g., maps of nursery grounds) and allow dynamic representations that include estimates of the spatial and 
temporal variability in key habitats.  These recent advances in spatial modelling have not yet been utilized by 
fishery management owing to a number of reasons including the ten- to 100-fold mismatch in spatial scales 
between model estimates (1 to 10s of kms) and marine management (100s to 1000s kms).  
 
This theme session attempts to bridge the gap between potential spatial modelling outputs and management 
requirements by providing examples of model-derived estimates of the dynamics of essential habitats (e.g., 
seasonal and interannual variability in suitability and connectivity) and scenario tests (e.g., projected future 
changes).  Presentations on this research should attempt to identify realistic ways in which model outputs can 
be utilized by management (including sensitivity analyses of results).  Furthermore, the session offers a 
platform for managers to engage researchers on how best to use these tools in light of the reformed common 
fishery policy, the marine strategy framework directive (MSFD) or implementation of marine spatial planning. 
The goal of the session is to open a dialogue between managers and researchers to ascertain how to most 
effectively utilize advancements in modelled physics and biology within ecosystem-based fishery 
management. 
 
Summary 
 
The increasing human footprint on marine environments has resulted in complex conflicts between different 
human activities due to their overlapping requirements for space and their various impacts on coastal and 
offshore waters world-wide (Halpern et al., 2008b).  To resolve these conflicts, system-specific management 
options are required which satisfy current and future needs of multiple sectors and that integrate multiple 
objectives, including those concerned with marine conservation.  Ecosystem-based management (EBM) 
represents such an integrated and holistic approach and there is consensus that implementing place-based or 
spatial management such as marine spatial planning (MSP) will facilitate the implementation of EBM (Lackey, 
1998).  Thus, the spatially-explicit assessment of the risk of spatial management options for ecosystem 
components is crucial for a sustainable development of marine resources.  This, in turn, requires a sound 
knowledge base on the spatial-temporal dynamics of species distributions, ecosystem functions, and driving 
processes. 
 
The coupling of biological and physical models in the 1980s has significantly enhanced our understanding of 
the dynamics of marine species and the ecosystems in which they live (Werner et al., 2001).  There are a 
myriad of different biophysical modelling approaches, some of which have now progressed to the point where 
their estimates can be useful for the spatial management of marine systems.  A case in point is 3-d biophysical 
individual-based models (IBMs).  IBMs are increasingly employed to explore population connectivity (Pineda 
et al., 2007) and/or the processes affecting rates of survival and growth of early life stages of marine fishes and 
invertebrates (Peck and Hufnagl, 2011).  A “best practices” guide was recently published for early life stage 
Appendix 3 Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  119 
IBMs (North et al., 2009) and the usefulness of IBMs for marine fisheries management has been reviewed 
(Hinrichsen et al., 2011). 
 
In parallel to the development of IBMs, spatially-explicit food web (Christensen and Walters, 2004; 
Christiansen et al., 2005) and fishing fleet models (e.g., Venables et al., 2009; van Putten et al., 2011) have 
been coupled (e.g., Brand et al., 2007; Fulton et al., 2010).  These more complex “end-to-end” models (e.g., 
Atlantis) specifically include management evaluation frameworks for scenario testing (Fulton et al., 2010). 
There is building consensus that this new generation of integrated modelling will be valuable to marine 
resources managers and that continued development is needed (Rose et al., 2010; Plagányi et al., 2011).  One 
appealing aspect of these coupled models is that they integrate across various parts of the ecosystem and have 
the potential act as a risk assessment tool for different management measures (Fulton, 2011). 
 
Given the recent advances and ongoing developments in biophysical models, this session was proposed to 
create a dialogue between modellers and managers.  Session participants were contacted a few months prior to 
the ICES ASC and provided with a common set of questions (recommended topics) in the hope of providing a 
“red thread” through a variety of different modelling approaches.  The questions were: 
 
1)  What are management’s objectives and how can models help obtain those objectives? (e.g., in light of 
current policies in EU, USA or CA) How can spatially-explicit models modify current management 
objectives in your area? 
 
2)  What important information can modelling reveal regarding the spatial and temporal dynamics of your 
system (e.g., seasonal and inter-annual variability in suitability and connectivity, essential habitats, 
productivity, etc.)? 
 
3)  How sensitive (reliable) are these spatial model estimates? (Have sensitivity analyses been performed, 
how much confidence do you have in the estimates?) 
 
4)  What types of scenarios have been (or can be) performed that might be helpful to spatial management 
issues? (e.g., projected future changes, closed areas, etc.) Also, how can (has) uncertainty be (been) taken 
into account to evaluate management scenarios? 
 
5)  What gaps in knowledge remain and what methodological advances are needed? 
 
The relatively small, focused session was separated into four sub-sessions: 1) predictive habitat mapping,  
2) biophysical characterization of key habitats and/or processes, 3) Coupled modelling: from habitats to 
species life history, and 4) integrative bio-economic modelling and spatial management of systems.  Within 
these subsessions there were 2, 4, 4 and 2, oral presentations, respectively.  A time slot at the end of the session 
was devoted to summary discussion.  In the following, we briefly summarize the presentations made in each 
subsession and highlight key discussion points. 
 
Subsession 1) Predictive habitat mapping 
 
Predictive habitat modelling is being increasingly embraced as an accurate and cost-effective tool to fill gaps 
in knowledge on spatial patterns and to help reveal environmental drivers causing observed distributions in 
different marine systems (Pittman et al., 2007; Leathwick et al., 2008).  Thus, spatial habitat mapping provides 
two sources of information needed for making effective spatial management decisions in marine habitats: 
where and why. 
 
Two presentations provided good examples of how models have been utilized to describe key characteristics of 
suitable habitats for target species including the spawning areas of cuttlefish in the English Channel (L:07;  
Fig. A3.7) and macrophyte habitats supporting two fish species in the Finnish archipelago of the northern 
Baltic Sea (L:04). Both presentation highlighted how a combination of techniques (e.g., examining 
Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS Appendix 3 
120  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
connectivity between habitats) and variables (positive catches of the target species) could be combined using 
generalized additive modelling (GAM) and Maximum Entropy Modelling (MaxEnt, see Phillips et al., 2006).  
In the cuttlefish example, utilization of hierarchical (or nested) models provided estimates at the regional 
(Channel) and local (small bay) scales.  In the Baltic example, ensemble-averaged projections (maps) of 
macrophyte habitats for two fish species using key environmental factors (depth, wave exposure, Secchi’s 
depth).  Different, future scenarios of eutrophication (Secchi’s depth) were examined using reference levels for 
eutrophication of the Baltic Sea Action Plan. 
 
 
 
Fig. A3.7 Example of nested (hierarchical) model-based probabilities of spawning habitats (blue = low, red = high) for 
cuttlefish in the Channel (from Bloor et al., L:07). 
 
 
Subsession 2) Biophysical characterization of key habitats and/or processes 
 
As mentioned in an earlier section, biophysical models have become popular tools to use in examining how 
characteristics of habitats can affect the distribution, growth and survival of early life stages of marine fishes 
(North et al., 2009).  The ability of these models to provide management-relevant information has been 
reviewed (Hinrichsen et al., 2011). 
 
The four presentations in this subsession illustrated how biophysical models have been utilized to explore how 
key physical features will impact on important processes within and between habitats (such as transport of 
early life stages and habitat connectivitiy).  Three talks examine the effect of wind on physical structures 
(currents, degree of hypoxia) in a shallow estuary (L:03) and/or probabilities for retention or dispersion routes 
of the larvae of herring (L:11) and cod (L:02; Fig. A3.8) in spawning and/or nursery habitats in western Baltic 
Sea. Practical applications of model outputs include the correction of survey estimates of larval fish abundance 
due to differences in retention and the identification of changes in transport routes and nursery areas due to 
inter-annual variability in physical forcing (see Figure A3.7).  A summary of 145 biophysical, individual-based 
models constructed for marine fish larvae (L:12) suggested a need for sensitivity analyses of model 
parameters, highlighted a general lack of biological and physiological data on modelled organisms, and 
recommended future research that would increase confidence in biophysical IBM estimates of larval losses due 
to advection, starvation and predation. 
 
Appendix 3 Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  121 
 
Fig. A3.8 Release areas for cod eggs and yolksac larvae in different regions of the western Baltic (left) and example of 
modelled estimates of reproductive potential (RP) taking into account the effects of salinity on egg buoyancy (from 
Hinrichsen et al., 2011). 
 
 
Subsession 3) Coupled-modelling: from habitats to species life history 
 
Spatially-explicit biogeochemical and lower trophic level models are beginning to supply information relevant 
for management needs such as the potential impacts of effluents from fish farms (Wild-Allen et al., 2010) 
and/or the spatial extent of areas of low dissolved oxygen due to eutrophication (Lenhart et al., 2010).  Some 
of these models have been used in concert with fish growth/population models to explore the factors causing 
changes in the productivity of upper trophic levels in marine systems (Sinena et al., 2008; Fennel, 2010). 
 
The four talks in the session provided different examples of how model-derived estimates of hydrodynamics 
and lower trophic level productivity (phyto- and zooplankton) can be useful to spatial management either when 
used alone (L:10) or when linked to upper trophic level (fish) models (L:05, L:06, L:09).  For example, hind-, 
now- and forecasts from operational oceanographic and biogeochemical models (L:10) have been utilized in 
the marine spatial planning of windfarms and mariculture locations in the German exclusive economic zone 
(EEZ).  When biophysical, lower trophic level and upper trophic level (fish) models are coupled, models can 
provide dynamic estimates of changes in the distribution, growth and population size of commercially 
important species.  Examples were provided for models developed for Baltic Sea sprat, cod and herring (L:06), 
anchovy in the Aegean Sea anchovy (L:05) and Pacific skipjack tuna (L:09).  Most of these models utilized the 
super-individual approach and explored different management scenarios such as the location and timing of 
seasonal closures for anchovy.  In the Pacific, a lower trophic level model (SEAPODYM) was linked to a 
spatial population dynamics model for the target species (skipjack tuna) that included two-way coupling 
between the fishing effort and spatial tuna population dynamics (Fig. A3.9).  That model system has provided 
spatial estimates of mortality and productivity for management of different EEZs in the western Pacific. 
 
Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS Appendix 3 
122  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
 
Fig. A3.9 Skipjack tuna distribution (mmt) in the North Pacific based upon coupling modelling (hydrodynamic model + 
biogeochemical and lower trophic level model + “SEAPODYM” that includes modules for tuna prey and tuna population 
dynamics).  Shown above are coupled model results using environmental forcing data from four different sources (panels) 
that include differences in spatial (2.0 to 0.25°) and temporal (30 to 7 d) resolutions (from Lehodey and Senina, 2011; 
updated Lehodey et al., submitted to Deep-Sea Research). 
 
 
Subsession 4) Integrated bioeconomic modelling and spatial management of systems 
 
Coupled, end-to-end models are being actively developed for many marine systems throughout the world 
(Rose et al., 2010).  These models are designed to evaluate the consequences of management strategies to 
marine resources, the fishing industry, and potentially other economic sectors (Fulton et al., 2011). 
 
The final two talks provided examples of how coupled models have merged environmental, ecological, and 
economic analyses to provide information useful in management strategy evaluation (MSE).  One example was 
an end-to-end model system developed for the northern prawn fishery in a small Australian bay (Fig. A3.10).  
In that region, eight models have been stitched together as a “proof of concept” that models representing all 
aspects of the environment, population dynamics/foodweb interactions, and fishing dynamics can be useful in 
exploring the most effective harvest strategies to meet management objectives.  The second presentation 
discussed the COEXIST project (http://www.coexistproject.eu/) focusing on the shrimp (Crangon) fishery in 
the German EEZ. A key result of this coupled biological-economic model was a conflict analysis in which 
mapping of overlapping activities suggested that 40% of the historical fishing revenues came from areas 
allocated for current and future windfarm development.  Again, the modelling approach can utilize various 
biological and economic scenarios to explore the best spatial management options. 
 
 
Appendix 3 Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  123 
 
Fig. A3.10 Example of a spatially-explicit, end-to-end model simulating the ecological and socio-economic costs and 
tradeoffs of management actions within Australia’s northern prawn fisheries.  The model domain is the Gulf of 
Carpentaria (right). The model loop (left and center) includes a management evaluation framework (from Morello et al., 
L:01). 
 
 
Final discusion/take home messages 
 
Based upon presentations and discussions, there was consensus that biophysical models can provide important 
estimates that will aid in the effective spatial management of marine systems.  There are a growing number of 
examples from around the world where coupled biological-physical models are providing information 
important to management.  One common theme addressed in many presentations was the need to adequately 
describe and quantify model uncertainty and confidence.  Skill assessment and sensitivity analyses are 
recurrent themes in the biophysical modelling literature (e.g., see Stow et al., 2009; Peck and Hufnagl, 2011). 
It is important to note that uncertainty originates from different sources (see Planque et al., 2011).  This 
session underscored the importance of:  1) quantifying sensitivity of model estimates to changes in both 
biological parameters (behaviour, growth physiology) and aspects of physical models such as their spatial and 
temporal resolution, 2) developing consensus on techniques to use to assess the sensitivity of coupled models, 
3) utilizing-model ensembles to display uncertainty in future projections.  With regard to the latter point, it is 
important to recognize that future ecosystem states may not be adequately described by historical patterns, 
particularly when populations and/or ecosystems display hysteresis (e.g., Fauchald, 2010). 
 
A second topic that emerged from the final discussion was the importance of continuing to develop end-to-end 
models.  Models such as Atlantis (Fulton, 2011) are being adapted for use in many European regional seas 
based upon goals of EU FP7 projects (e.g., VECTORS, http://www.marine-vectors.eu/) and national funding 
initiatives.  These complex, coupled models are the only tools that allow one to simulate the response of 
complex systems to changes in both biological (trophodynamic, physical forcing), economic (fishing fleet 
dynamics) and policy/governance drivers.  The recognition that multiple drivers are acting to change marine 
resources across the globe (Halpern et al., 2008) fuels the development and application of end-to-end models 
within marine systems. 
 
 
  
Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS Appendix 3 
124  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
List of papers 
 
L:01 Rodrigo H. Bustamante, Cathy M. Dichmont, Nick Ellis, Shane P. Griffiths, Wayne A. Rochester, and Aijun R. 
Deng 
Biophysical assessments and adaptive spatial management for tropical trawling 
L:02  H.-H. Hinrichsen, K. Hüssy, and B. Huwer 
The impact of hydrodynamics and hydrography on western Baltic cod early life stage survival 
L:03  Meng Xia 
The response of a Gulf estuary plume and hypoxia to wind forcing 
L:04  Ulf Bergström, Göran Sundblad, Anna-Leena Downie, Martin Snickars, and Mats Lindegarth 
Evaluating management scenarios using predictive habitat modelling – effects of eutrophication mitigation in the Baltic Sea 
L:05  D.V Politikos, G. Triantafyllou, K. Tsiaras, M. Giannoulaki, A. Machias, C. Maravelias, and S. Somarakis 
The application of a biophysical model to the north Aegean anchovy fishery: its implication for spatial management 
L:06  Wolfgang Fennel and Hagen Radtke 
Modelling nutrient to fish model – an Eulerian approach 
L:07  Isobel Bloor, Charlotte Marshall, Emma Jackson, Jean-Paul Robin, and Martin Attrill 
Sepia officinalis: spawning habitat modelling in the English Channel and its potential for fisheries management 
L:08  T. Schulze, V. Stelzenmüller, A. Sell, J. Berkenhagen, and K. Schulte 
Spatial management scenarios for the brown shrimp fisheries in the German Bight: Possible influences of product prices, TAC 
for plaice and sole, and Nature 2000 management plans 
L:09  Patrick Lehodey and Inna Senina 
Near real time prediction and spatial management of Pacific skipjack tuna 
L:10  Frank Janssen, Tian Tian, Zhenwen Wan, and Karen Edwards 
The potential use of operational biochemical models in marine spatial management 
L:11  Robert Bauer, Daniel Stepputtis, and Ulf Gräwe 
Retention of western Baltic herring larvae within the main spawning area 
L:12  Myron A. Peck and Marc Hufnagl 
Can biophysical individual-based models reliably tell us why most larvae die in the sea? 
  
Appendix 3 Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  125 
ICES/PICES Theme Session Q  
Atmospheric forcing of the Northern Hemisphere ocean gyres,  
and subsequent impact on adjacent marine ecosystems 
 
Convenors: Jürgen Alheit (ICES/Germany), Hjálmar Hátún (ICES/Faroe Islands), Emanuele Di Lorenzo 
(PICES/USA) and Ichiro Yasuda (PICES/Japan) 
 
It has recently become apparent that the dynamics of the North Pacific and Atlantic subpolar and subtropical 
gyres have considerable impacts on adjacent marine ecosystems.  As this theme has been neglected so far in 
the ICES community, it seemed appropriate to organize this joint ICES/PICES Theme Session to make the 
ICES community aware of this promising theme.  The session consisted of nine oral presentations, of which 
seven were given by PICES scientists and, unfortunately, only two by ICES scientists.  This probably reflects 
the weak relation of ICES with the physical oceanography community in ICES countries. 
 
Q:04. In his presentation on “Climatically induced impact of gyre dynamics on coastal ecosystems: a 
comparison of different oceans“, J. Alheit pointed out that changes in the strength and extent of gyres in the 
Atlantic and Pacific cause changes in offshore, shelf, and coastal ecosystems.  Changes in the dynamics of the 
Atlantic Sub polar Gyre, related to the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) and Atlantic Multi‐ decadal 
Oscillation (AMO), cause reactions in the fauna of a large number of North Atlantic ecosystems affecting 
plankton, fish, and whales.  Changes in ocean circulation associated with the Pacific Decadal Oscillation 
(PDO) affect zooplankton and fish in the California Current.  Dynamics of the Kuroshio and Oyashio Currents 
affect population size of Japanese sardine.  Alternations of anchovies and sardines in the Humboldt Current 
seem to be driven by the approach and retreat of oceanic offshore waters, probably associated with gyre 
dynamics. 
 
Q:05. H. Hátún et al. presented a paper on the “The North Atlantic Subpolar Gyre and blue whiting stock 
dynamics”.  The subpolar gyre can influence stock size and shifts in migration patterns of blue whiting directly 
by regulating environmental conditions that influence behaviour and migration routes and indirectly via 
trophodynamics.  Since the late 1970s, large shifts in climate and spatial distribution of blue whiting have been 
observed.  Temporal variability in east-west spatial shifts of the blue whiting resembles the dynamics of the 
gyre index.  The pronounced mid-1990s decline of the subpolar gyre from a strong to a weak state impacted 
the blue whiting stock and its food sources.  During periods of a weak gyre, catches in the western distribution 
area, in Icelandic and Faroe waters, are relatively large. 
 
Q:08. In their presentation on “Exploring mechanisms for coherent variations between ocean gyres of the 
Northern Hemisphere”, E. Di Lorenzo and N. Schneider explored a possible mechanism underlying coherent 
changes in the North Pacific and North Atlantic Gyre.  Decadal modulations of the North Pacific gyre-
circulation are captured by the North Pacific Gyre Oscillation (NPGO; Di Lorenzo et al., 2008).  The NPGO is 
the oceanic response to atmospheric variability of the North Pacific Oscillation (NPO) (Chhack et al., 2009) – 
a pattern of sea level pressure variability that captures changes in the strength of the mean atmospheric 
circulation over the North Pacific.  The low frequency variability of the NPO that drives the decadal variations 
of the NPGO is linked to decadal variability in the central tropical Pacific associated with the central Pacific 
warming pattern (CPW) (Di Lorenzo et al., 2010).  This link from the CPW to the NPO is established through 
the excitation of large-scale atmospheric Rossby waves or teleconnections to the extra-tropics that project onto 
the NPO (Furtado et al., 2011).  Recent studies show that the extra-tropical teleconnection of the CPW can 
affect also the Arctic Oscillation (AO) (Hegyi and Deng, 2011).  To the extent that some of the AO variability 
has a surface expression into the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) pattern, which is known to drive changes in 
the North Atlantic gyre-scale circulation (Curry and McCartney, 2001), the CPW atmospheric teleconnections 
provide a possible mechanism to force coherent changes of the North Pacific and North Atlantic gyres.  This 
mechanism needs further investigation and is now considered mostly as a working hypothesis. Figure A3.11 
summarizes this hypothesis. 
 
 
Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS Appendix 3 
126  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
 
 
Fig. A3.11 Schematic of the hypothesized climate connections governing climate variability in the northern hemisphere  
(from Di Lorenzo and Schneider, Q:08). 
 
 
Q:10. S. McKinnell talked about “A PICES-ICES Climate Mode”. Overland et al. (2010) noted that “Climate 
variables such as temperatures and winds can have strong large scale covariability within individual ocean 
basins, but between-basin teleconnections [...] are usually much weaker and a highly intermittent function of 
the conditions prevailing at the time within the adjoining basins.”  The Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO) has 
a large-scale pattern of inverse correlation in SST across the Pacific.  The Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation 
(AMO) has a large-scale pattern of, for the most part, common sign in the Atlantic.  Only along the coast of the 
Carolinas and Florida is there a hint of inverse correlation in the North Atlantic.  Both results are based on 
EOF analysis of SST and both are dominated by lower frequency variability.  When combined into a single 
analysis, the Northern Hemisphere oceans exhibit a correlation pattern which suggests that the PDO and the 
AMO are part of a hemispheric mode.  Its temporal pattern is dominated by a shift in sign in the spring of 1998 
that had a strong global effect rather than the weak between-basin teleconnection described above.  
 
Q:07. W. Peterson et al. reported on the impact of basin-scale gyres in the North Pacific on the coast of 
Oregon, USA, (“The Pacific Decadal Oscillation and gyre-ecosystem linkages in the northern California 
Current (NCC): source waters which feed on the NCC determine food web structure”).  This project has 
identified important relationships among basin-scale physical processes, local physical processes, community 
structure and abundance of copepods, and survival and growth of commercially important salmon species. 
Evidence suggests that major biological changes in the local ecosystem are forced by changes in alongshore 
advection which is related to the Pacific Decadal Oscillation.  When the Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO) is 
in a negative phase, cold subarctic waters from the Gulf of Alaska feed into the NCC and transport large, lipid-
rich copepods into the NCC.  When the PDO is positive, warm, subtropical waters from offshore and south of 
Oregon feed the NCC transporting small, oceanic, lipid-poor copepods to the coastal upwelling zone.  So, the 
basin-scale changes in wind that drive the PDO result in changes in transport that, in turn, control foodchain 
structure.  These changes in food chain structure correlate with (and predict) salmon return to the Columbia 
River.  
 
Appendix 3 Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  127 
R. Rykaczewski presented his work relating to changes in the nutrient supply to the Northeast Pacific in 
response to anthropogenic forcing (Changes in source water properties of the California Current in response to 
future basin-scale climate processes”).  Through analysis of global atmosphere-ocean general circulation 
models, he suggested that future increases in stratification associated with global warming will reduce the 
ventilation of subsurface water masses in the central North Pacific.  When these deep water layers are 
upwelled in the California Current, they carry increased nutrient concentrations due to the greater period of 
time over which these deep waters have accumulated organic matter.  
 
Q:02. I. Yasuda et al. contributed to the understanding of the dynamics of the Japanese sardine with their 
presentation on “Oceanic and atmospheric forcing of recruitment of Japanese sardine (Sardinops 
melanostictus)”.  They concluded that recruitment variability of the sardine is mainly governed by the 
Kuroshio Current velocity and winter cooling which is related to the East Asian Winter Monsoon.  A slow 
Kuroshio Current and cold temperature are related to deep MLD and enhanced food production for larvae.  In 
contrast, a stronger Kuroshio Current and warmer temperature are related to a shallow MLD and low food 
production, a situation which has led to the collapse of the Japanese sardine stock in the late 1980s.  
 
Q:03. S. Jung et al. studied the influence of climate-driven oceanographic changes on Korean fisheries 
(“Climate-driven shifts in fish communities in Korean waters detected by application of multivariate analysis 
and Bayesian markov switching models”).  By applying canonical correspondence analysis to a number of 
abiotic and biotic variables, including volume transport of the Tsushima Warm Current (TWC), an offspring of 
the subtropical gyre system.  A regime shift was observed in the Japan/East Sea in the late 1980s, but a relation 
between the volume transport of the TWC, the dynamics of main fish populations or the regime shift in the late 
1980s could not be detected. 
 
List of papers 
 
Q:02  Ichiro Yasuda, Haruka Nishikawa, Sachihiko Itoh, and Kosei Komatsu 
Oceanic and atmospheric forcing for the recruitment of Japanese sardine (Sardinops melanstictus) 
Q:03  Sukgeun Jung, Il Su Choi, and Suam Kim 
Climate‐ driven shifts in fish communities in Korean waters detected by application of multivariate analyses and Bayesian 
Markov switching models 
Q:04  Jürgen Alheit 
Climatically induced impact of gyre dynamics on coastal ecosystems: a comparison of different oceans 
Q:05  Hjálmar Hátún 
Atmospheric forcing of the North Atlantic Subpolar gyre 
Q:06  Anne Hollowed, Megan Stachura, Nate Mantua, and Ray Hilborn 
Regime shift effects on fish and fisheries in the Northeast Pacific 
Q:07  William T. Peterson, Hongsheng Bi, Cheryl A. Morgan, Jennifer Fisher, Jay Peterson, and Ryan Rykaczewski 
The Pacific Decadal Oscillation and gyre–ecosystem linkages in the northern California Current (NCC): source waters which 
feed the NCC determine foodweb structure 
Q:08  Emanuele Di Lorenzo and Niklas Schneider 
Exploring mechanisms for coherent variations between ocean gyres of the Northern Hemisphere 
Q:09  Catherine L. Johnson 
Influence of circulation variability on Scotian Shelf (Northwest Atlantic) zooplankton communities 
Q:10  Skip McKinnell 
A PICES–ICES climate mode 
  
Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS Appendix 3 
128  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
2011 PICES Annual Meeting 
October 14–23, 2011  
Khabarovsk, Russia  
 
 
BIO/POC Topic Session (S2)  
Mechanisms of physical-biological coupling forcing biological “hotspots” 
 
Co-sponsored by:  ICES 
 
Co-Convenors: Jürgen Alheit (ICES/Germany), Elliott Hazen (PICES/USA), Oleg Katugin (PICES/Russia), 
Robert Suryan (PICES/USA), Yutaka Watanuki (PICES/Japan) and Ichiro Yasuda (PICES/Japan)  
 
Background  
 
This session examined the physical and oceanographic factors that correspond to ecological or economic 
“hotspots” in the North Pacific and North Atlantic and their marginal seas.   “Hotspots” can broadly be defined 
as areas encompassing high species diversity, high abundance of individuals, especially of important indicator 
species, or areas of high economic value.  Interdisciplinary contributions on physical-biological coupling and 
resulting seasonal or year-round “hotspots” in primary to tertiary productivity were invited.  This included data 
on physics, phyto- and zooplankton, forage fish, and upper trophic level predators (e.g., fish, seabirds, 
mammals, humans).   
 
Summary of presentations  
 
Session 2 at PICES 2011 had a total of 14 talks and with no fewer than 40 attendees in the audience. Some 
talks focused on the physical oceanography at known marine hotspots (4 papers), while others considered 
seabirds (4), fish (3), and marine mammal (3) hotspots, multispecies hotspots, and also overlaps between 
hotspots and human impacts.  A common theme was the issue of scale underlying identification or formation 
of hotspots, from those formed by ocean currents spanning 5000 km
2
 to tidally driven hotspots in the wakes of 
headlands at the scale of 100 km
2
.  Scale differences highlight a range in biophysical factors affecting hotspot 
formation and persistence.  
 
We discussed interest in assembling a special journal issue stemming from the theme session and at least half 
of the presenters were prepared to contribute a paper to a special issue.  Our impression was that by reaching 
out to the broader community there will be sufficient interest for a full volume. Further interest and potential 
journals will be considered during the coming months.  The audience felt that by focusing on mechanisms of 
hotspot formation in addition to other questions noted below, this volume would be sufficiently distinguished 
from the 2006 Deep-Sea Research II volume stemming from a 2004 PICES hotspot session.  From the 
discussion session, we identified which questions about hotspots were most important to answer as a focus of 
the theme issue and came up with the following:  
 
1)  How do the two broad classes of hotspots differ, specifically what are the mechanisms of hotspot 
formation for both 1) aggregative and 2) bottom-up forced hotspots?  How do the mechanisms allow the 
hotspot to persist or re-occur predictably?  
2)  How do we prioritize hotspots, e.g. does a certain percentage of the population have to visit a hotspot for it 
to be a hotspot, or are hotspots that support high biodiversity and strong ecological interactions the most 
important hotspots?  
3)  How might species interactions affect the use of hotspots by certain species?  
4)  What hotspots are at greatest risk? Which hotspots have greatest threat from human uses (e.g. fisheries, 
shipping lanes).  For persistent or predictable hotspots, how persistent are they over decadal or multi-
decadal time scales, e.g. which hotspots are likely to change under broad scale forcing such as regime 
shifts or climate change?  
Appendix 3 Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  129 
List of papers  
 
Oral presentations  
Sei-Ichi Saitoh, Robinson M. Mugo, Mukti Zainuddin and Fumihiro Takahashi (Invited)  
Potential fishing zones as “hotspots” of skipjack tuna (Katsuwonus pelamis) and albacore (Thunnus alalunga) in the western 
North Pacific  
Shin-ichi Ito, Yugo Shimizu, Shigeho Kakehi, Taku Wagawa, Masatoshi Satoh, Daisuke Ambe, Takeshi Okunishi and 
Kazuyuki Uehara  
A quasi-steady warm water jet and an ecological hotspot in the western North Pacific  
David G. Foley  
Constructing oceanographic data sets and delivery systems to meet the needs of biologgers  
Robert Suryan, Kathy Kuletz, Martin Renner, Patrick Ressler, Shannon Fitzgerald, Kiyoaki Ozaki, Fumio Sato, 
Tomohiro Deguchi and Elizabeth Labunski (Invited)  
Mechanisms affecting seabird-prey associations over submarine canyons in the northwestern Bering Sea  
Igor M. Belkin (Invited)  
Satellite oceanography of fronts as biological hotspots  
Robinson M. Mugo, Sei-Ichi Saitoh, Fumihiro Takahashi, Akira Nihira and Tadaaki Kuroyama  
When, where and why skipjack tuna, red flying squid and pacific saury potential fishing zones are likely to overlap in the western 
North Pacific: A proof of concept  
Takashi Yamamoto, Akinori Takahashi, Nariko Oka, Takahiro Iida, Nobuhiro Katsumata, Katsufumi Sato and Philip N. 
Trathan  
Foraging areas of streaked shearwaters in relation to seasonal changes in the marine environment of the Northwestern Pacific  
Jürgen Alheit (Invited)  
Climate variability impact on North Sea ecosystem  
Elliott L. Hazen, Scott A. Shaffer, Michelle A. Kappes, Ryan R. Rykaczewski, David G. Foley, Steven J. Bograd and 
Daniel P. Costa  
Oceanographic habitat segregation among postbreeding Hawaiian albatrosses and potential changes from 2001-2100  
Mary-Anne Lea, Jeremy T. Sterling, Nicholas A. Bond, Sharon Melin, Rolf Ream and Tom Gelatt  
Habitat use of Alaskan northern fur seal pups in the western North Pacific Ocean  
Kaoru Hattori, Takeomi Isono and Orio Yamamura  
Wintering aggregations of Steller sea lions in Ishikari-Bay, Sea of Japan  
Haruka Nishikawa, Ichiro Yasuda, Sachihiko Itoh, Yoshikazu Sasai and Hideharu Sasaki  
Impacts of climatic regime shift on Japanese sardine stock collapse  
Konstantin Rogachev  
Satellite and direct observations of circulations features associated with bowhead feeding hotspots in the Sea of Okhotsk  
 
Poster presentations  
Tomoko Harada, Kentaro Kazama, Tomohiro Deguchi, Hajime Suzuki and Yutaka Watanuki  
Foraging behavior of subtropical black-footed albatross Phoebastria nigripes and the marine environment around Bonin Islands  
Igor M. Belkin and S. Kalei Shotwell  
Propagation of SST anomalies along the North Pacific 
 
 
 
  
Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS Appendix 3 
130  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
POC/FIS Topic Session (S8)  
Linking migratory fish behavior to end-to-end models 
 
 
Co-sponsored by:  ICES 
 
Co-Convenors: Enrique Curchitser (PICES/USA), Geir Huse (ICES/Norway), Shin-ichi Ito (PICES/Japan), 
Michio Kishi (PICES/Japan) and Skip McKinnell (PICES) 
 
Background 
 
In order to understand ecosystem response to climate impacts, End-to-End modeling (E2E) approaches are 
essential. One of the most difficult parts for E2E is the modeling of fish behavior migration.  Fish behavior can 
be very complex; it is a consequence of genetics, physical, chemical and biological environments and their 
interaction.  Learned behavior may also be a factor.  Recently, new technology has been introduced to tagging 
equipment, and as a consequence data availability is vastly improved.  Additionally, new technologies are used 
to investigate fish movements in laboratory settings. This new information is expected to improve our 
understanding of fish migration mechanism and contribute to the development of fish migration models. 
Furthermore, the development of high-resolution ecosystem models coupled to circulation models makes it 
possible to simulate fish migration in the context of realistic environmental fields.  The purpose of this session 
was to understand the current state of development in modeling fish behavior and discuss future potential 
collaborations to improve fish migration models.   
 
Summary of presentations 
  
Dr. Shin-ichi Ito and Dr. McKinnell chaired the session and introduced the history of this difficult topic. 
Invited speaker, Prof. Kenneth Rose of Louisiana State University, described why there is a growing increase 
in migration modelling.  He noted that traditional modelling methods are perceived as unsuccessful, how many 
management issues involve space, how climate change is expected to affect distributions and behaviours, that 
data collection is becoming very spatially-detailed, how computing power continues to increase, and that 
significant advances in hydrodynamics and upper trophic level modeling have been made recently.  He 
described an approach that is being used with doctoral candidate Kate Shepard to validate fish behaviour. 
Movement algorithms (kinesis, neighbourhood search, event-based) were evaluated.  They concluded that the 
results were encouraging, that the three methods successfully trained with the Genetic Algorithm produced 
realistic movement, and that total egg production was fairly constant across methods and grids. Jerome 
Fieschter, the second invited speaker, described the performance of their end-to-end model efforts directed at 
sardine and anchovy.  He is using a 3-D ROMS for ocean circulation, NEMUROMS for NPZ, a multi-species 
IBM for fish, and a fishing fleet dynamics model.  To date, they have solved many numerical and bookkeeping 
issues, implemented different behavioral cues for movement, and next is to add more realistic biology.  They 
found that balancing food/dietary factors when compared with balancing SST gave different results. In future, 
they intend to increase biological realism, and investigate the causes of low-frequency cycles. Yu-Heng Tseng 
described a modelling study of Japanese anchovy in the East China Sea.  Little is known about the oceanic 
migration of the adults but spawning is known to occur in Taiwan Strait.  The ability of the adults to reach 
southern spawning grounds may depend on Changjiang River discharge.  He described that when coastal 
discharge from the Chiangjiang is included in the model, its variability is expected to affect migration routes 
(and availability) of anchovy to local fishermen.  Skip McKinnell speculated on how the factors responsible for 
contemporary fish behaviour may have been determined by selective forces affecting the species centuries ago. 
Migration timing in sockeye salmon is relatively invariant compared to other behavioural traits.  At the 
southern extreme of their range in North America, they have much earlier run timing than is expected from 
their spawning dates. Arriving at the “normal” time for their relatively late spawning date appears to have been 
selected against in earlier times.  Kjell Utne and Geir Huse discussed how they are using individual-based 
models (IBM), genetic optimization algorithms, and observational data in their migration models of herring, 
blue whiting and mackerel in the northern North Atlantic Ocean.  It is embedded within the NORWECOM 
Appendix 3 Session/workshop summaries related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  131 
coupled model system to provide access to daily physical and prey fields.  The additional complexity is 
increasing the demand for computational resources.  Shin-ichi Ito and his colleagues ended the session with an 
interesting presentation showing how they had evaluated both Euler-type and an IBM of saury migration. 
Euler-type models are computationally efficient because they simply move biomass from place to place on a 
fixed grid, but there is no information about the migration pathways of individuals that is possible with IBMs. 
Scaling IBMs to represent biomass has huge computational costs.  The Euler-type model was able to capture 
the general features of saury feeding migration, egg production, and body size, but was unable to capture the 
westward spawning migration and required a somewhat artificial mixture of body sizes.  The convenors were 
encouraged by the better-than-expected turnout of attendees to the topic session, so a repeat session is planned 
for PICES-2012 in Hiroshima. 
 
 
List of papers 
 
Oral presentations 
Kenneth A. Rose, Katherine Shepard, Haosheng Huang, Sean Creekmore, Paul Venturelli, Jerome Fiechter, Enrique N. 
Curchitser, Kate Hedstrom, Matthew Campbell and Dubravko Justic (Invited) 
Modeling movement of fish over spatial and temporal scales: If fish were dumber and people were smarter  
Jerome Fiechter, Kenneth A. Rose, Enrique N. Curchitser, Kate Hedstrom, Miguel Bernal and Alan Haynie (Invited) 
Behavioral cues for small coastal pelagic species in the California Current: Results from a fully-coupled end-to-end ecosystem 
model  
Shin-ichi Ito and Takeshi Okunishi 
Comparison of migration algorithms for Japanese sardine (Sardinops melanostictus) in the western North Pacific  
Chen-Yi Tu, Yu-Heng Tseng, Tai-Sheng Chiu, Mao-Lin Shen and Chih-Hao Hsieh 
Using coupled fish behavior-hydrodynamic model to investigate spawning migration of Japanese anchovy, Engraulis japonicus, 
from Taiwan to the East China Sea  
Skip McKinnell 
Evolution’s challenge to modeling sockeye salmon spawning migration  
Kjell Rong Utne and Geir Huse 
Towards end-to-end modeling with a special focus on planktivorous fish 
Shin-ichi Ito, Masatoshi Sato, Takeshi Terui, Michio J. Kishi, Daisuke Ambe, Takahiko Kameda, Satoshi Suyama, 
Masayasu Nakagami and Yasuhiro Ueno 
Euler-type and Individual Based modeling approaches for fish migration: An example of Pacific saury  
 
New expert group proposal Appendix 4 
132  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Appendix 4 
Proposal for a Section on Climate Change Effects on Marine Ecosystems  
(S-CCME) 
(joint expert group with ICES Strategic Initiative on Climate Change Effects on Marine Ecosystems) 
 
Parent Committees: BIO, FIS and POC  
Duration: lifetime of FUTURE  
 
S-CCME Goals (approved at PICES-2011)  
• Define, coordinate and integrate the research activities needed to understand, assess and project climate 
change impacts on marine ecosystems;  
• Plan strategies for sustaining the delivery of ecosystem goods and services, and when possible predictions 
should include quantifying estimations of uncertainty;  
• Define and quantify the vulnerability and sustainability of marine ecosystems to climate change, including 
the cumulative impacts and synergetic effects of climate and marine resource use;  
• Build global ocean prediction frameworks, through international collaborations and research, building on 
ICES and PICES monitoring programs.  
 
Core Elements of S-CCME Implementation Plan Phases (3 years in duration)  
• Synthesis of existing knowledge;  
• Advancement of new science and methodology;  
• Communication of research findings.  
 
Phase 1: 2012–2014  
• Synthesis of existing knowledge:  
o Complete synthesis papers from the 2010 Sendai Symposium and 2012 Yeosu Symposium;  
o Interpret the vulnerabilities of marine ecosystems to changing climate.  
• Advancement of new science and methodology: 
o Identify techniques for predicting climate change impacts in systems impacted by decadal variability;  
o Define the vulnerability of commercial species to climate change and identify which species would be 
most likely to experience shifts in spatial distributions;  
o Engage the global earth system modelling community in modelling climate change effects on marine 
ecosystems and identify opportunities for collaborations;  
o Build response scenarios for how the human community will respond to climate change.  
• Communication and integration of science through international symposiums:  
o Publish results in peer reviewed literature;  
o Serve as symposium/session co-convenors;  
o Assist in preparing and convening the PICES/ICES/IOC Symposium on “Effects of climate change on 
the world’s oceans” (May 2012, Yeosu, Korea).  
 
  
Appendix 4 New expert group proposal 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  133 
Phase 2: 2015–2017  
• Continue to advance new science focused on climate change effects on marine ecosystems through 
theme/topic sessions and workshops;  
• Update and improve forecasts with IPCC AR5 scenarios;  
• Convene an international symposium in 2016;  
• Develop regional synthesis reports;  
• Initiate inter-sessional training for projecting climate change impacts on marine ecosystems;  
• Continue collaboration with global climate change research community.  
 
Phase 3: 2018–2020  
• Continue to advance new science focused on climate change effects on marine ecosystems through 
theme/topic sessions and workshops;  
• Update and improve predictions with IPCC AR6 scenarios;  
• Develop regional synthesis reports;  
• Convene an international symposium in 2018.  
 
 
Science Plan Appendix 4 
134  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Science Plan for ICES/PICES Strategic Initiative (Section) on Climate Change 
Effects on Marine Ecosystems  
 
Vision 
 
ICES and PICES will become the leading international organizations providing science and advice related to 
the effects of climate change and variability on marine resources and ecosystems.   
 
ICES and PICES will develop the scientific basis for evaluating the vulnerability, status and sustainability of 
marine systems under changing climate conditions.  Collaborative research within ICES and PICES will 
facilitate the development, maintenance and evolution of a network of regional interdisciplinary research 
teams that will share research approaches on a global scale to foster laboratory, field and modeling activities 
that will provide data at the spatial and temporal scales needed to monitor, assess and project climate change 
impacts on marine ecosystems. 
 
 
Background 
 
Recent reviews have provided compelling evidence that global warming is occurring and greenhouse gasses 
are very likely contributing to this trend (Arctic Climate Impacts Assessment, ACIA 2005; 4
th
 report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, IPCC AR4 Report 2007).  Since then, the marine science 
community has endeavoured to address the paucity of information regarding impacts on marine ecosystems 
and to provide new science in time for consideration by the future IPCC review panels.   
 
New studies show that climate change will impact marine ecosystem productivity, habitat quality and quantity 
(Arrigo et al., 2008; Cheung et al., 2009; Durner et al., 2009; Nye et al., 2009; Philippart et al., 2011).  These 
changes will affect biodiversity, and the phenology, spatial distribution, interactions, and vital rates of marine 
biota resulting in changes in the quantity, quality and availability of marine resources for human use (Mueter 
and Litzow, 2008; Sundby and Nakken, 2008; A’mar et al., 2009; Hunt et al., 2011).  The ripple effect of these 
changes will be felt around the world (Barange et al., 2011).  The timeline for projections (20–100 years) 
requires the development of mechanistic scenarios of future bio-physical couplings as well as scenarios for 
expected changes in anthropogenic trends in marine resource use including fishing technology, markets, 
demand, and consumption in light of trends in marine policy (Allison et al., 2009; Kim, 2010; Merino et al., 
2010; Fulton, 2011; Stock et al., 2011).  Interdisciplinary research teams will be required to develop science-
based advice to decision makers (Plagányi et al., 2011; Rice and Garcia, 2011).   
 
Although the IPCC reports provide concise assessments of the evidence for and projections of the impacts of 
climate change on the planet, there remains a need for coordinated research to understand climate change 
effects on specific regions of the globe.  Research coordination is especially needed to understand climate 
change effects on regional marine ecosystems.  The North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES) and 
the International Commission for Exploration of the Sea (ICES) have emerged as the leading organizations 
responsible for scientific advice on marine issues in the Northern Hemisphere. 
 
In the early 2000s, ICES and PICES independently initiated efforts to develop frameworks for assessing and 
projecting climate change impacts on marine resources and the ecosystems that support those resources.  In 
2007, ICES formed the Steering Group on Climate Change [SGCC] to overview the research, services and 
operational issues related to Climate Change supported by ICES expert groups, to assess the quality and 
Appendix 4 Science Plan 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  135 
adequacy of the assessment process, and to manage the start-up transit of ICES toward the establishment of a 
program in Climate Change.  The life time of the group was 3 years, ending in December 2010.  The group 
was renamed as the Strategic Initiative on Climate Change [SICC] in 2009 (Res 2009/2/SSGEF01).  The final 
report of that group (“Report of the Science Strategic Initiative on Climate Change”, SCICOM May 2010 Doc 
15) described international collaborative efforts (listed later under ICES/PICES joint activities) and the 
following activities:  
• The coordination and production of a multi-authored, peer-reviewed ICES CRR report on Climate Change 
in the North Atlantic; 
• The drafting of an ICES position paper on Climate Change in the North Atlantic; 
• The steering and promotion of theme sessions and workshops on climate change topics during the recent 
ICES ASC. 
 
During the same period PICES initiated a series of workshops and topic sessions at Annual Meetings focused 
on forecasting the implications of climate change on marine ecosystems including: 
• 2004 POC Topic Session: The impacts of climate change on the carbon cycle of the North Pacific; 
• 2004 CCCC Topic Session: The impacts of large-scale climate change on North Pacific marine 
ecosystems; 
• 2005 CCCC/MODEL Topic Session: Modeling climate and fishing impacts on fish recruitment; 
• 2006 CCCC Symposium: Climate variability and ecosystem impacts in the North Pacific; 
• 2006 FIS Workshop: Linking climate to trends in productivity of key commercial species in the subarctic 
Pacific; 
• 2006 POC Workshop: Evaluation of climate change projections; 
• 2007 POC/CCCC/MONITOR Topic Session: Operational forecasts of oceans and ecosystems; 
• 2007 BIO/FIS/POC Topic Session:  Phenology and climate change in the North Pacific: Implications of 
variability in the zooplankton production to fish, seabirds, marine mammals and fisheries (humans); 
• 2007 POC/CCCC Workshop: Climate scenarios for ecosystem modeling; 
• 2007 CCCC/CFAME Workshop: Climate forcing and marine ecosystems; 
• 2008 CCCC/POC Topic Session: Marine system forecast models: Moving forward to the FUTURE; 
• 2008 CCCC/POC/FIS Workshop: Climate scenarios for ecosystem modeling (II); 
• 2009 POC/BIO Topic Session:  Anthropogenic perturbations of the carbon cycle and their impacts in the 
North Pacific; 
• 2009 POC/FUTURE Topic Session:  Outlooks and forecasts of marine ecosystems from an earth system 
science perspective:  Challenges and opportunities; 
• 2009 POC Workshop: Exploring the predictability and mechanisms of Pacific low frequency variability 
beyond inter-annual time scales. 
 
ICES and PICES collaboratively sponsored joint scientific workshops, theme/topic sessions and symposia 
focused on forecasting the implications of climate change on marine ecosystems including: 
• 2008 PICES/ICES/IOC Symposium: Effects of climate change on the world’s oceans (Gijón, Spain); 
• 2009 ICES/PICES Theme Session: Climate impacts on marine fish: Discovering centennial patterns and 
disentangling current processes (ICES ASC, Berlin, Germany); 
• 2010 PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium: Climate change effects on fish and fisheries (Sendai, Japan);   
• 2010 ICES/PICES Theme Session: Responses to climate variability: Comparison of Northern Hemisphere 
marine ecosystems (ICES ASC, Nantes, France); 
• 2010 PICES/ICES Topic Session: Impact of climate variability on marine ecosystems: Understanding 
functional responses to facilitate forecasting (PICES-2010, Portland, USA); 
Science Plan Appendix 4 
136  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
• 2011 ICES/PICES Workshop: Reaction of Northern Hemisphere ecosystems to climate events: A 
comparison (Hamburg, Germany); 
• 2011 ICES/PICES Workshop: Biological consequences of a decrease in sea ice in Arctic and Sub-Arctic 
Seas (Seattle, USA); 
• 2011 ICES/PICES Theme Session: Atmospheric forcing of Northern Hemisphere ocean gyres and their 
subsequent impact on adjacent marine climate and ecosystems  (ICES ASC, Gdańsk, Poland); 
• 2011 PICES/ICES Topic Session: Mechanisms of physical-biological coupling forcing biological 
“hotspots” (PICES-2011, Khaborovsk, Russia); 
• 2011 PICES/ICES Topic Session: Linking migratory fish behaviour to end-to-end models (PICES-2011, 
Khaborovsk, Russia); 
• 2011–2012 Organization, planning and implementation of the 2012 PICES/ICES/IOC Symposium: Effects 
of climate change on the world’s oceans (Yeosu, Korea). 
 
These meetings revealed that the scale and complexity of climate change issues required a more formal 
partnership between the ICES and PICES organizations.  Soon after the PICES/ICES/IOC symposium in 2008, 
the governing bodies of both PICES and ICES formally recognized the benefits of collaboration with respect to 
climate change research and approved the formation of the first joint ICES/PICES Working Group on 
Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish (WG-FCCIFS).  That group was jointly chaired by 
two members from each organization and was responsible for organizing the PICES/ICES/FAO symposium in 
Sendai and a forthcoming special volume of the ICES Journal of Marine Science. 
 
The life time of the ICES SICC ended in December 2010, and WG-FCCIFS’s term will end December 2011.  
Both PICES and ICES recognize that great strides in new science have emerged from collaborative work 
between their two organizations.  Therefore, they requested the formation of a science plan that outlines a 
structure for continued collaborations focused on climate change.  The terminology for longer-term research 
efforts differs between the two organizations.  Within ICES, our plan would be consistent with a Strategic 
Initiative.  Within PICES, our plan would be to create a Section on Climate Change Effects on Marine 
Ecosystems.  To avoid confusion with the previous ICES SICC, we will refer to this proposal as the 
ICES/PICES Strategic Initiative on Climate Change Effects on Marine Ecosystems (SICCME).  The remainder 
of this document provides a roadmap for long-term continuation of a collaborative research on climate change 
through the formation of an ICES/PICES SICCME.   
 
Goals 
 
Never in the history of PICES or ICES has there been a more serious need for cooperation on a marine science 
issue of global significance.  ICES and PICES must respond to the need for credible, objective and innovative 
science advice on the impacts of climate change on marine ecosystems.  This advice will foster management 
and policies that will preserve these resources and habitats for the benefit of future generations.  To achieve 
this overarching goal, the following actions should be addressed. 
i. Define the research activities needed to understand, assess and project climate change impacts on marine 
ecosystems with sufficient spatial and temporal resolution to plan strategies for sustaining the delivery 
of ecosystem goods and services and the preservation of biodiversity.  When possible predictions should 
include quantifying estimations of uncertainty. 
ii. Define and quantify the vulnerability of marine ecosystems to climate change, including the cumulative 
impacts and synergetic effects of climate and marine resource use. 
iii. Build global ocean prediction frameworks, through international collaborations and research, building 
on ICES and PICES monitoring programs. 
 
As the leading Northern Hemisphere international organizations, ICES and PICES will direct the SICCME to 
draw on the network of marine scientific expertise to make a valuable contribution to advancing science 
towards resolving these challenges.   
Appendix 4 Science Plan 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  137 
Objectives 
 
The success of this strategic initiative rests on:  
i. Advancing the scientific capacity on the three main challenges identified above by engaging the PICES 
and ICES scientific community in focused workshops, theme/topic sessions and symposia that target key 
uncertainties and technical barriers that impact the predictive skill of ocean models used to project the 
impacts of climate change. 
ii. Effectively communicating this capacity to clients, member countries, stakeholders and the broader 
scientific community. 
iii. Facilitating an international effort to design data collection networks at the spatial and temporal scales 
needed to monitor, assess and project climate change impacts on marine ecosystems. 
iv. Facilitating international collaboration to design and implement comparative analysis of marine 
ecosystem responses to climate change through modeling and coordinated process studies. 
 
Key questions 
 
The overarching goal of the initiative will be to answer the following linked questions: 
i. How will the physical, chemical and biological components of regional marine ecosystems of the 
Northern Hemisphere change under future climate scenarios? 
ii. How will marine biodiversity change (and thus biodiversity conservation objectives) as a result of 
pressures on the physiology, behavior and ecology of individuals, populations and ecosystems within the 
PICES and ICES regions?  
iii. How will the demand for, and delivery of, ecosystem services change in response to anthropogenic and 
climate change driven changes to ecosystems? 
iv. How will societies that depend on ecosystems services respond to climate-driven changes in ecosystem 
services, and which responses are consistent with an ecosystem approach to management? 
v. What are the most significant key sources of uncertainty in projections of climate-ecosystem 
projections? Is it possible to design monitoring, process-oriented or laboratory studies to reduce this 
uncertainty? 
vi. What research is needed to understand the interactive nature of climate and resource exploitation on 
marine ecosystem functioning?  
 
Relation of the initiative to ICES and PICES strategic plans 
 
The Science Plan for an ICES/PICES SICCME is responsive to both PICES and ICES Missions.  In the case of 
PICES, a strategic plan for climate change research would respond to all aspects of the new FUTURE research 
plan by evaluating current and future assessments for the Status, Outlooks, Forecasts and Engagement (SOFE) 
Advisory Panel (AP).  Members of the SICCME would conduct research that would advance our 
understanding of climate change impacts on marine ecosystems which is consistent with the mandate for the 
Climate, Oceanographic Variability and Ecosystems (COVE) AP.  With respect to the Anthropogenic 
Influences on Coastal Ecosystems (AICE) AP, the SICCME would draw from, and contribute to, new science.  
Members of the SICCME would utilize information on expected trends in anthropogenic forcing on coastal 
ecosystems to develop scenarios for use in projecting the implications of climate change on marine 
ecosystems.  Likewise, the output from projection models could be used by others to address issues such as 
placement of marine protected areas and marine spatial planning.  Modelers attempting to project the future 
food production from sea ranching and aquaculture could utilize products from the SICCME.  Thus, the 
SICCME research would sit at the intersection of all three of the FUTURE Advisory Panels (Fig. A4.1).  The 
SICCME would also be directly responsible to the standing committees of PICES through its focus on climate 
change impacts on physical oceanography (POC), fish and shellfish (FIS), marine ecosystems (BIO), and in a 
more limited regional aspect on marine environmental quality (MEQ).  Clearly, the SICCME serves as a cross-
cutting research effort that aligns the different aspects of the PICES community around a highly visible 
research issue that is of crucial importance to decision makers and the public.   
 
Science Plan Appendix 4 
138  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
This SICCME Science Plan is also responsive to the ICES overarching goal “To advance the scientific 
capacity to give advice on human activities affecting, and affected by, marine ecosystems”.  Members of the 
SICCME will oversee the development and testing of projection models. No single modeling approach has 
emerged as the best for forecasting.  Therefore, we will follow the example of the IPCC and encourage the 
formation of model ensembles that apply different approaches to project the future status of marine ecosystems 
under different management strategies.  As such, the SICCME will integrate climate change research and 
fishery science within the wider ecosystem context to provide advice on the Principles of Sustainable 
Development under a changing climate.  The talents and creativity of all scientists within the ICES community 
will be needed to develop current and future projections of the implications of climate change on marine 
resources and to develop strategies to respond to these changes.  The ICES/PICES SICCME is particularly 
responsive to the SICOM Steering Groups on: Ecosystem Function (SSGEF), Human Interactions on the 
Ecosystem (SSGHIE), and the Sustainable Use of the Ecosystem (SSGSUE).  The SICCME will draw from 
and contribute to the ICES PICES Initiative to Review Recent Advances in Stock Assessment Models 
Worldwide (SISAM). 
 
The proposed SICCME will work closely with emerging expert groups that are tasked with providing research 
products to address focused tactical or strategic issues related to climate change.  Members of the SICCME 
will include scientists who are experts in climate change related research, therefore, it is likely that some 
members of the SICCME will also serve as members of expert groups proposed to address a specific issue 
relevant to climate change research.  This type of cross-cutting research is encouraged because it provides an 
opportunity for members of the SICCME to share the larger vision for climate change related research in a 
more focused setting.  Joint membership will allow the SICCME to stay abreast of current science, methods 
and techniques related to climate change.  The recent relationship between WG-FCCIFS and PICES Working 
Group on Evaluations of Climate Change Projections (WG 20) serves as an excellent example of how this 
cross-cutting activity would occur.  The WG-FCCIFS was established to improve our understanding of and our 
capability to forecast the implications of climate change on marine fish and shellfish populations.  WG 20 was 
established to review techniques for downscaling IPCC-class models for use in predicting impacts on ocean 
ecosystems.  The two groups worked closely together to produce two papers for the Sendai symposium volume 
that applied an interdisciplinary approach to forecasting (e.g., King et al., 2011; Mueter et al., 2011).  We 
expect that similar partnerships and collaborations will emerge on issues related to impacts on coastal 
communities and other human dimensions.  If approved, ICES and PICES will task the SICCME to establish a 
longer term and ongoing research activities related to improving our understanding of, and our ability to 
predict, climate change impacts on marine ecosystems.  We will continue to work closely with ICES and 
PICES expert groups to ensure a smooth exchange of information between groups. 
 
The SICCME proposes an ambitious new research effort that will focus on an issue that is of global 
significance.  The world needs our advice, and we stand ready to devote our time and energy to provide 
answers to the pressing societal questions of future food security, sustainable management strategies under a 
changing climate.  To provide these answers ICES and PICES must improve their understanding of the 
mechanisms linking climate and physics to marine ecosystem vulnerability, status, trends and function. 
Improving understanding must include sustained monitoring and targeted field studies to assess model skill 
and validate key parameters and functional relationships.  This will require strong partnerships with national 
and international research organizations. The SICCME will assist ICES and PICES and their member countries 
by communicating and integrating PICES and ICES research into national and international research 
organizations that could contribute to a coordinated global research effort on climate change. Potential research 
partner organizations include: the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the Intergovernmental Ocean 
Commission (IOC), the Integrated Marine Biogeochemstry and Ecosystem Research program (IMBER), the 
Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR), and the World Bank.  In the near term, the SICCME 
activities will help to identify opportunities to coordinate field and modeling research to maximize the 
opportunity for regional comparisons and testing responses of living marine resources to climate change.  
Scientific collaborations will be facilitated through expert group meetings, workshops, and topic/theme 
sessions at annual meetings or symposia.  Members of the SICCME will strive to identify and respond to 
funding opportunities to leverage funding to maximize the utility of the research. 
Appendix 4 Science Plan 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  139 
Structural issues 
 
The SICCME will be jointly managed by ICES SCICOM and PICES Science Board (Fig. A4.1).  The Co-
Chairs of the SICCME will make annual reports to the ICES Steering Groups, SSGEF and SSGHIE, and the 
PICES standing committees, FIS, POC and BIO.  The SICCME will also report to PICES FUTURE’s 
Advisory Panels, SOFE, COVE and AICE.  The initiative will facilitate new interest and thinking, at all 
ecosystem levels from physics to fish and fish to markets. It is not intended to set up new structures, rather it 
will work within the structural framework of ICES and PICES to engage and inspire the scientific community 
to direct their intellect to improving our ability to predict climate change impacts, to communicate these 
impacts to decision makers and to assess the performance of management strategies under a changing climate. 
 
 
Virtual Meetings
Workshops 
Inter-
Sessional
Meetings
Coordinated 
Proposal 
Writing
Develop 
Scenarios
Post 
Results 
on Intra-
Net
Topic 
Sessions 
Annual 
Meetings
Biennial
Symposium
SSGHIE
SSGEF
SSGSUE
SOFE
COVE
AICE
POC
FIS
BIO
Science Board
SCICOM
 
Fig. A4.1 A conceptual model of the Strategic Initiative on Climate Change and Marine Ecosystems showing 
concentric circles that represent how members of the initiative will conduct their research and report to ICES and PICES. 
 
 
The SICCME will identify approaches and operational practices that will facilitate and encourage development 
of integrated scenarios of climate impacts on marine systems by engaging scientists from diverse backgrounds, 
including: climatology, oceanography, ecology, fisheries, technology, social-science, and markets.  Members 
of the SICCME will include representatives with expertise in each of these areas.  The SICCME will strive to 
co-convene a major international symposium that will showcase the accomplishments of ICES and PICES 
scientists working on climate change related activities on a biennial basis (Fig. A4.1).  Selected papers from 
the symposium will be published in scientific journals such as the ICES Journal of Marine Science.  This will 
have the dual impact of providing a venue for scientists from other regions to share results and ideas and of 
raising the visibility of the ICES Journal.  By scheduling the symposium on a regular basis, scientists will be 
able to plan collaborative research to take advantage of the opportunity to meet.  Ideally, the venue for the 
symposium will rotate between locations on the Atlantic and locations on the Pacific.  This will maximize the 
opportunity for participation by young scientists who might otherwise be unable to attend.  The biennial time-
step for symposia is responsive to the IPCC reporting schedule.  The IPCC publishes reports on approximately 
a 5-year time-step.  We expect that the new science published in symposium volumes will be cited by the 
IPCC, and that the new scenarios provided by the IPCC will be used by members of the SICCME to force 
regional ocean circulation models.  The proposed biennial time-step for the ICES/PICES SICCME symposia 
ensures this complementary relationship is preserved. 
Science Plan Appendix 4 
140  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
In the intervening period between symposiums, members of the SICCME will conduct semi-annual virtual 
meetings that utilize the internet meeting software.  If a sufficient number of members plan to attend an inter-
sessional meeting, an in-person meeting of the SICCME may be scheduled as well.  During virtual or in-
person meetings, members will plan inter-sessional workshops, and topic/theme sessions for the PICES 
Annual Meetings and ICES Annual Science Conferences.  Inter-sessional workshops and topic/theme sessions 
will provide venues to plan, discuss, and coordinate international collaborative research that will advance our 
understanding of climate change effects on marine ecosystems.   
 
Members of the SICCME will be drawn from PICES and ICES. The travel costs associated with sending large 
numbers of scientists to two meetings each autumn can be high.  Therefore, the SICCME will strive to rotate 
their sponsored theme/topic sessions between the the PICES Annual Meetings and ICES Annual Science 
Conferences.  This would not limit co-sponsorship of a theme/topic session during an “off-cycle” year.   
 
It is expected that selected members of the SICCME will report to the PICES and ICES scientific steering 
bodies annually by summarizing the activities of the expert group and submitting proposals for topic/theme, 
inter-sessional or biennial symposiums.   
 
Sound science necessitates collaborative integrative research on a global scale.  The framework shown above 
will facilitate opportunities for this type of work and will lead to regular publications of results in the peer-
reviewed literature.  
 
As scientists develop scenarios and models to project the implications of climate change they will inevitably 
identify key sources of uncertainty.  Left unaddressed this uncertainty will propagate through the projections. 
We anticipate that the activities of the SICCME will raise awareness of the need for long-term spatially 
resolved ocean monitoring data and focused field and laboratory studies to address these issues.  These 
recommendations will be communicated to PICES Technical Committee on Data Exchange (TCODE) and 
other interested steering groups within ICES and PICES.  
 
There is a long list of potential clients who would be interested in the SICCME products. The SICCME will 
develop a strategy to ensure that new findings are communicated to the governing bodies of ICES and PICES 
to keep the organizations updated on findings, initiatives and opportunities.  The SICCME will work with the 
FUTURE SOFE AP to develop a strategy to ensure that national and international science organizations are 
aware of opportunities for global collaboration.   
 
All indications at present suggest that there will be an increasing demand for marine resources as the 
population continues to grow through 2050.  Understanding the limits of marine ecosystem extraction will 
necessitate simulations of climate impacts on marine systems and scenarios for resource extraction. Successful 
implementation of this initiative will position PICES and ICES to be the leading organizations to respond to 
this demand.  Following the IPCC model, we anticipate that once the projection models have been fully 
reviewed, and properly tested, the scenarios for ecosystem change under different climate scenarios will be 
made available through PICES and ICES websites. 
 
Benefits 
 
The proposed ICES/PICES SICCME will have the following anticipated benefits: 
• Increased understanding of physical, chemical and biological linkages and ecosystem responses to 
anthropogenic and climate forcing; 
• Coordinated monitoring and descriptions of the current state of ecosystems; 
• Projections of future states of Northern Hemisphere marine ecosystems and their associated uncertainty; 
• More robust quantitative and qualitative forecasts, with specified uncertainty, of ecosystem responses to 
climate change and increasing human influence; 
• IPCC-like reports on responses of Northern Hemisphere marine ecosystems to climate change; 
• Quantification of the benefits and risks associated with different management strategies; 
• Increased marine science capabilities in ICES and PICES member countries. 
Appendix 4 Science Plan 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  141 
These benefits were also listed in the PICES FUTURE Science Plan.  While the FUTURE program established 
the vision and the plan for climate change research, the SICCME provides the foundation of working scientists 
that will ensure that work is completed and delivered in a manner consistent with the goals and objectives of 
SICOM and PICES Science Board.  The pace of discovery, innovation and progress will be accelerated 
through adoption of this initiative that will facilitate rapid exchange of information between ICES and PICES 
scientists.  The formation of the ICES/PICES SICCME will expand opportunities for use of the comparative 
approach by extending our partners to other regions in the Northern Hemisphere.  
 
Timeline 
 
• Second Quarter 2011: Submit proposal (the present document); 
• May and April 2011: Present proposal to ICES and PICES governing bodies; 
• May 2011: First planning meeting in conjunction with the ESSAS Open Science Meeting; 
• Summer 2011: Develop draft Implementation Plan;  
• September  2011: Second planning meeting in conjunction with the ICES ASC; 
• October 2011:  Third planning meeting in conjunction with the PICES Annual Meeting; 
• Fourth Quarter 2011: Finalize the membership; 
• Last Quarter 2011: Start-up; 
• May 2012: Co-convene a Theme Session on “Climate change effects on living marine resources: From 
physics to fish, marine mammals, and seabirds, to fishermen and fishery-dependent communities” at the 
PICES/ICES/IOC Symposium on “Effects of climate change on the world’s oceans” (Yeosu, Korea); 
• September 2012: Finalize Implementation Plan. 
 
 
 
Implementation Plan Appendix 4 
142  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Implementation Plan for the ICES/PICES Strategic Initiative (Section) on 
Climate Change Effects on Marine Ecosystems
 
Vision 
 
ICES and PICES will become the leading international organizations providing science and advice related to 
the effects of climate change and variability on marine resources and ecosystems.   
 
ICES and PICES will develop the scientific basis for evaluating the vulnerability, status and sustainability of 
marine systems under changing climate conditions.  Collaborative research within ICES and PICES will 
facilitate the development, maintenance and evolution of a network of regional interdisciplinary research 
teams that will share research approaches on a global scale to foster laboratory, field and modeling activities 
that will provide data and understanding at the spatial and temporal scales needed to monitor, assess and 
project climate change impacts on marine ecosystems. 
 
 
Background 
 
In the spring of 2011, ICES and PICES agreed in principle to move forward on the Science Plan for an 
ICES/PICES Strategic Initiative on Climate Change Effects on Marine Ecosystems (SICCME).  As stated in 
the Science Plan the goal of SICCME will be to: 
 
i. Define the research activities needed to understand, assess and project climate change impacts on marine 
ecosystems with sufficient spatial and temporal resolution to plan strategies for sustaining the delivery 
of ecosystem goods and services and the preservation of biodiversity. When possible predictions should 
include quantifying estimations of uncertainty. 
ii. Define and quantify the vulnerability of marine ecosystems to climate change, including the cumulative 
impacts and synergetic effects of climate and marine resource use. 
iii. Build global ocean prediction frameworks, through international collaborations and research, building 
on ICES and PICES monitoring programs. 
 
In support of this effort, ICES and PICES requested the co-chairs to work in conjunction with members of 
ICES and PICES to develop an implementation plan for this initiative.  The Science Plan outlines the goals and 
objectives of the initiative and the framework for how members of SICCME will work with other science 
advisory bodies within ICES and PICES.  This Implementation Plan focuses on the specific research activities 
that members of the SICCME will conduct and will provide a timeline for completion of research products.  
Since the SICCME is designed to provide a roadmap for a long-term effort within ICES and PICES, this 
implementation plan should be considered a guide for future research that is responsive to the changes and new 
science that will emerge over time. 
 
Phased implementation 
 
The SICCME Science Plan envisioned that successful implementation of the initiative would position ICES 
and PICES to be the leading international groups to provide scientific information on the implications of 
climate change on marine ecosystems in the Northern Hemisphere.  The key deliverables for ICES and PICES 
are the development of sufficient knowledge and understanding to successfully predict the future implications 
of climate change on marine ecosystems and the ability to use this information to develop strategies for 
Appendix 4 Implementation Plan 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  143 
managing living marine resources under a changing climate.  The SICCME Implementation Plan is designed to 
facilitate and accelerate the acquisition of new knowledge and to insure that new knowledge is communicated 
and published on a schedule that would allow it to be useful to, and considered by, international scientific 
organizations responsible for providing advice on climate change such as the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) and the United Nations.  To be responsive to the international bodies likely to use our 
research products, the implementation of the SICCME should occur in phases.  These phases address the 
relationship between the SICCME and the IPCC (Fig. A4.2).  While the specific activities may change 
overtime, three elements of the SICCME implementation plan are always present: synthesis of existing 
knowledge, advancement of new science and methodology, and communication of research findings. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. A4.2 Schematic timeline for SICCME research activities and interactions with Earth System research organizations. 
 
 
Phase 1, 2012-2014   
 
During this period members of the IPCC are conducting their assessments.  The SICCME will focus their work 
on the synthesis of existing information acquired during the 2010 international symposium in Sendai, Japan, 
testing of modeling techniques based on IPCC Assessment Report 4, and the facilitation of new 
interdisciplinary research within ICES and PICES.  The key activities of the SICCME that will occur during 
this period are as follows: 
 
1. Synthesis of existing knowledge.  Members of the SICCME plan to write a synthesis paper that will 
provide an overview of the implications of climate change on marine ecosystems.  The paper will draw 
heavily from the results of the recent climate change symposium held in Sendai, Japan, in April 2010 and 
on the position paper developed by the ICES Steering Group on Climate Change.  This synthesis will 
provide a valuable reference for consideration by IPCC writing teams which also are responsible for 
providing concise interpretations of the vulnerabilities of marine ecosystems to changing climate. 
2012
SICCME 
Marine 
Ecosystem 
Modeling & 
Analysis
IPCC 
Synthesis & 
Reporting
IPCC 
Earth System 
Modeling & 
Analysis
Symposium
volume
Symposium
Symposium
Symposium
volume
SICCME 
Synthesis & 
Comparative 
Research
IPCC 
Earth System 
Modeling &
Analysis
2015
SICCME 
Model Update 
& Revision
SICCME 
Synthesis & 
Comparative 
Research
Symposium
volume
2017 2013 2014 2016
Symposium
UN Millennium 
Climate Report
Human 
Dimensions
Regional 
Synthesis
2018
IPCC 
Synthesis & 
Reporting
Workshop
Earth 
Ecosystems
Northern
Hemisphere
Marine 
Ecosystems
Training
Simulation 
Tools and Models
SICCME 
Marine 
Ecosystem 
Modeling & 
Analysis
2019
Ocean Monitoring Program
2021
Implementation Plan Appendix 4 
144  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
2. Advanced science and methodology.  The results from the Sendai symposium revealed that no single 
analytical approach was superior to others when considering tools to predict future climate change impacts 
on marine ecosystems.  Each approach had inherent strengths and weaknesses.  In Phase 1, research will 
focus on four critical issues: 
a. Identifying techniques for predicting climate change impacts in systems impacted by decadal 
variability; 
b. Defining the vulnerability of commercial species to climate change and identifying which species 
would be most likely to  experience shifts in spatial distributions; 
c. Engaging the global earth system modeling community in modeling climate change effects on marine 
ecosystems and identifying opportunities for collaborations;   
d. Building response scenarios for how the human community will respond to climate changes. 
 
3. Communication and integration of science through international symposiums.   In Phase 1, scientists 
will continue to refine methods and scenarios for use in predicting the status of marine ecosystems under 
changing climate conditions.  Therefore, the primary vehicle for communication of results will continue to 
be the development of papers that will be published in the peer-reviewed literature including journals such 
as the ICES Journal of Marine Science.  Members of the SICCME will identify and facilitate new research 
partners by serving as symposium/session co-convenors including the upcoming Symposium on “Effects 
of climate change on the world’s oceans” in Yeosu, Korea, in 2012.  These activities will raise global 
awareness of ICES and PICES as key organizations responsible for advancement of new science on 
climate change related issues in the marine environment.  
 
Advancing science and methodology (2 above) will be the major activity of the SICCME in Phase 1.  The 
SICCME will address this issue through an ambitious suite of international collaborations and integrated 
research.   
 
The SICCME will address the issue of forecasting climate change in systems impacted by decadal variability 
(2a above) through a series of theme/topic sessions at ICES Annual Science Conferences and PICES Annual 
Meetings.  During Phase 1, the SICCME will propose the following theme/topic sessions and inter-sessional 
workshops: 
 
• Theme Session on “Climate change effects on living marine resources: From physics to fish, marine 
mammals, and seabirds, to fishermen and fishery-dependent communities” for the PICES/ICES/IOC 
Symposium on “Effects of climate change on the world’s oceans” in May 2012, in Yeosu, Korea; 
• Theme Session on “Basin-wide impact of Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO)” for the ICES ASC in 
Bergen, Norway in 2012.  This theme session will build on the outcomes of the AMO workshop held in 
June 2011 in Woods Hole, USA; 
• Topic session on “Comparison of impact of multi-decadal climate variability in N. Pacific and N. Atlantic 
ecosystems and corresponding teleconnection patterns” for the 2012 PICES Annual Meeting in 
Hiroshima, Japan; 
• The SICCME will work with the newly formed PICES Working Group on North Pacific Climate 
Variability and Change (WG 27) to foster integration and synthesis of ideas between SICCME and  
WG 27 scientists.  The SICCME anticipates that PICES and ICES will work together to promote an inter-
sessional workshop on comparison of impact of multi-decadal climate variability in the North Pacific and 
North Atlantic.  It is possible that this workshop will be proposed to be held in conjunction with the 
Symposium on “Effects of climate change on the world’s oceans” in May 2012 in Yeosu, Korea.  
 
These workshops and theme sessions will address the first part of Key Question v in the SICCME Science 
Plan: v) What are the most significant key sources of uncertainty in projections of climate-ecosystem 
projections?  The outcome of the proposed SCCIME activities will be particularly relevant to the ICES 
Steering Group on Ecosystem Function (SSGEF), and the Steering Group on Human Interactions on the 
Ecosystem (SSGHIE), PICES FUTURE Advisory Panel on Climate, Ocean Variability and Ecosystems 
(COVE), and PICES FIS, POC and BIO standing committees. 
Appendix 4 Implementation Plan 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  145 
The SICCME will address issues of criteria for successful colonization and vulnerability assessment under 
climate change (2b above) through a combination of science sessions during ICES Annual Science 
Conferences and PICES Annual Meetings, and through planned inter-sessional symposiums.  In 2012, the 
SICCME will contribute to the following theme sessions and workshops on this subject:    
 
• Collaborate with ESSAS on Theme Session on “Climate change effects on spatial distributions and 
interactions of Arctic and Sub-Arctic fish and their implications for future fisheries” (ICES ASC, 
September, Bergen, Norway);  
• ICES and EU project Forage Fish Interactions (FACTS) symposium on “Forage fish interactions: creating 
tools for ecosystem based management of marine resources” (November, Nantes, France). 
 
We expect that issues of fish vulnerability and susceptibility to climate change will be discussed during these 
meetings.  This effort will address SICCME Goal ii (see above) and Key Question ii in the SICCME Science 
Plan: ii) How will marine biodiversity change (and thus biodiversity conservation objectives) as a result of 
pressures on the physiology, behaviour, and ecology of individuals, populations and ecosystems in the PICES 
and ICES regions?  It is expected that the outcomes of SICCME activities will be particularly relevant to the 
ICES SSGEF, the SSGHIE and the Steering Group on Sustainable Use of the Ecosystem (SSGSUE), PICES 
FUTURE Advisory Panels COVE, and Status, Outlooks, Forecasts and Engagement (SOFE), and PICES FIS, 
POC and BIO standing committees. 
 
The SICCME will provide a forum to address the gap in science and methodology (2c) by convening an inter-
sessional workshop with the Earth System modeling community in 2013.  This timing is selected to avoid key 
production periods associated with the activities of Working Group 1 of the IPCC.  This workshop would bring 
together representatives of each of the major earth system modeling centers and members of the climate 
change research community within ICES and PICES.  The goal of this meeting will be to foster 
communication of what capabilities and analytical constraints each group has and to design efficient ways to 
exchange or integrate information.  We expect that members of the newly formed ICES/PICES modeling 
working group will participate as well as members of the new PICES Working Group on North Pacific 
Climate Variability and Change (WG 27).  This effort will address Key Question i in the SICCME Science 
Plan: i) How will the physical, chemical and biological components of regional marine ecosystems in the 
Northern Hemisphere change under future climate scenarios?  The outcome of this workshop will be 
particularly relevant to ICES SSGEF and SSGHIE, PICES FUTURE Advisory Panels COVE and SOFE, and 
PICES FIS, POC and BIO standing committees. 
 
SICCME will address gaps in knowledge of the human dimension (2d) by holding an inter-sessional workshop 
in 2013/2014 comprised of key experts on trends in human populations, marine resource economics, natural 
resource management, seafood markets (needed to forecast future shifts in demand for seafood), aquaculture, 
marine ranching, and commercial fishing with members of the ICES and PICES climate change research 
community.  The goal of this meeting will be to develop regional scenarios for future use of marine resources.  
These regional scenarios will be used to address time trends in marine resource extraction to develop strategic 
advice on the trade-offs of different management approaches.  We anticipate that members of the ICES 
SSGHIE and the potential PICES human dimensions expert group will be interested in participating in this 
workshop.  This effort will address Key Questions iii, and iv in the SICCME Science Plan:  iii) How will the 
demand for, and delivery of, ecosystem services change in response to anthropogenic and climate driven 
changes to ecosystems?  iv) How will societies that depend on ecosystem services respond to climate-driven 
changes in ecosystem services, and which responses are consistent with an ecosystem approach to 
management?  This effort will also help ICES and PICES to engage stakeholders and the broader scientific 
community in our effort to predict the implications of future climate change on marine ecosystems in the 
Northern Hemisphere.  It is expected that the outcome of this SICCME activity will be particularly relevant to 
the ICES SSGHIE and SSGSUE, PICES FUTURE Advisory Panels COVE, SOFE, and Anthropogenic 
Influences on Coastal Ecosystems (AICE), and PICES FIS, POC and BIO standing committees. 
 
 
Implementation Plan Appendix 4 
146  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Phase 2, 2015–2017   
 
During Phase 2, members of SICCME will explore the implications of the IPCC’s 5
th
 Assessment Report 
(AR5).  The primary activity of the SICCME will be to update and evaluate models to assess the implications 
of the revised climate change scenarios with respect to marine ecosystems.  The SICCME will work to 
advance this effort in a manner similar to that recently completed by the ICES/PICES Working Group on 
Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish (WG-FCCIFS) and PICES Working Group on 
Evaluations of Climate Change Projections (WG 20).   
 
 
 
Fig. A4.3 Potential partitions for regional summaries based on the QUEST-fish program modeling effort. 
 
1. Synthesis of existing knowledge.  During Phase 2, the SICCME will work with ICES and PICES to 
develop a synthesis of the effects of climate change on regional marine ecosystems of the Northern 
Hemisphere.  Planning for this report will be done in conjunction with PICES SOFE Advisory Panel and 
the ICES Publications Committee.  The SICCME envisions that these regional syntheses will serve as a 
useful reference to scientists within and outside of ICES and PICES.  These regional summaries will draw 
on the work performed in Phase 1 and on previous work completed by the PICES and ICES communities 
(e.g., the ICES Steering Group on Climate Change position paper).  As a starting point for discussion, the 
SICCME suggests that boundaries for regional synthesis reports should consider the Quantifying and 
Understanding the Earth System (QUEST) Fish program regional partitions (Fig. A4.3).  Using these 
boundaries would have the distinct advantage of aligning impacts assessments with the location of existing 
modeling groups.  We note that it may be useful to consider the Arctic ecosystem as a single system 
because of the connections between regions and the relative paucity of information.  Furthermore, the 
regional partitions shown in Figure A4.3 roughly align with existing reporting regions for the PICES 
ecosystem status report.  Publication of these regional summaries should be timed to allow their 
consideration by the IPCC in the formation of the AR6 report (for 2018).  This effort will facilitate 
international collaboration and will provide a vehicle to communicate our current knowledge to 
stakeholders and the broader scientific community. 
Appendix 4 Implementation Plan 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  147 
2. Advanced science and methodology.  Phase 2 will be a busy period for scientists with the SICCME as 
they work with the information release from the IPCC AR5.  As was the case with the release of the IPCC 
AR4 report, considerable effort will be required to interpret and integrate the results of the new IPCC 
scenarios into regional assessment models of marine ecosystems.  The SICCME will encourage this work 
through collaborations with ICES and PICES standing committees.  The research conducted in Phase 1 
will guide these updates and collaborations.  Further guidance will be provided by the conclusions and 
advice of the ICES/PICES ecological modeling working group.  The SICCME will consider these results 
to inform the selection of different modeling approaches.  
  
3. Communication and integration of science through international symposiums. Members of the 
SICCME will serve on the symposium steering committee and as co-convenors of scientific sessions for 
an international symposium on effects of climate change on fish and fisheries that will be held in Europe 
in 2014.  The format for this symposium will be similar to that of the symposium held by the WG-FCCIFS 
in Sendai, Japan in 2011.  One possible option would be to hold the meeting in conjunction with FAO to 
foster collaboration and integration of the research on the UN Millennium project.   
 
 
Phase 3, 2018–2020  
 
In Phase 3, the SICCME will conduct activities similar to those described in Phase 1.  In addition, the 
SICCME will strive to share the knowledge gained through Phases 1 and 2 with all members within ICES and 
PICES by introducing a training program and will work to define a climate change impacts monitoring 
program to help build capacity within ICES and PICES and to support the scientists involved in providing 
strategic advice on climate change effects on marine ecosystems.  Two types of courses will be considered: 
  
Course 1.  Fisheries oceanographers and fisheries management.  This course will provide training in the 
use of statistical techniques for detecting biological responses to environmental change and attributing change 
to anthropogenic or natural causes.  The course will review the strengths and weakness of different modeling 
approaches and will provide a guide for what type of simulation tool would be best suited for addressing a 
particular type of ecological impacts question or strategy evaluation.  Students will be exposed to case studies 
where they will learn how to adapt simulation tools for applications for their region. 
 
Course 2. Advanced ecosystem modeling and model development.  This course will be designed for 
advanced ecosystem modelers.  The background for participants will be a working knowledge of the Regional 
Ocean Modeling System, Automatic Differentiation Model Builder, and the R statistical package.  Teachers 
will provide a series of lectures and presentations on the functional relationships used in different simulation 
modeling approaches.  Downscaling techniques for coupling models developed at different temporal and 
spatial scales will be discussed.  Students will work through case studies to learn how to modify existing 
models for use in their region.     
 
The SICCME Science Plan envisions that ICES and PICES will “Build global ocean prediction frameworks 
through collaborations and research, building on ICES and PICES monitoring programs”.  In Phase 3, the 
SICCME will have sufficient information to design a climate monitoring program that addresses key sources 
of uncertainty in earth system models or regional marine ecosystem models.  The SICCME will hold a 
workshop with the earth modeling and ocean modeling communities to identify what type of monitoring is 
needed to assess the temporal and spatial signature of climate change and to monitor responses of marine 
organisms to this change.  This activity will be conducted in conjunction with the PICES Technical Committee 
on Monitoring (MONITOR) and related groups within ICES.  This activity will address Key Question vi of the 
SICCME Science Plan: vi) What research is needed to understand the interactive nature of climate and 
resource exploitation on marine ecosystem functioning? 
 
  
Implementation Plan Appendix 4 
148  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Conclusion   
 
The goals and objectives of the SICCME are ambitious and will require that scientists within ICES and PICES 
engage in collaborative interdisciplinary research.  The Implementation Plan illustrates how the SICCME will 
work within the ICES and PICES governance structures to accelerate advancements in our understanding of 
climate change effects on marine ecosystems.  The plan outlines a suite of linked inter-sessional workshops, 
international symposiums, topic/theme sessions that will engage the collective knowledge and expertise of 
ICES and PICES scientists.  By enlisting the minds and energy of scientists throughout the Northern 
Hemisphere, ICES and PICES will be able to deliver credible scientific advice regarding climate change 
effects on marine ecosystems in the near future. 
  
Appendix 5  PICES annual reports related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  149 
Appendix 5   
Meeting reports from past PICES Annual Meetings related to WG-FCCIFS 
activities 
 
PICES Sixteenth Annual Meeting, October 26–November 5, 2007, Victoria, Canada .................................... 150 
PICES Seventeenth Annual Meeting, October 24–November 2, 2008, Dalian, China .................................... 152 
PICES Eighteenth Annual Meeting, October 23–November 1, 2009, Jeju, Korea ........................................... 157 
PICES Nineteenth Annual Meeting, October 22–31, 2010, Portland, USA ..................................................... 159 
PICES Twentieth Annual Meeting, October 14–23, 2011, Khabarovsk, Russia .............................................. 161 
  
PICES annual reports related to WG-FCCIFS   Appendix 5 
150  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
PICES Sixteenth Annual Meeting (PICES XVI) 
October 26–November 5, 2007 
Victoria, Canada 
 
 
Extracted from: 
2007 Report of the Fishery Science Committee 
 
 
Workshops on “Forecasting climate impacts on future production of commercially exploited fish and 
shellfish” (FIS Agenda Item 5a) 
 
Dr. Hollowed reported on two FIS workshops on “Forecasting climate impacts on future production of 
commercially exploited fish and shellfish”, co-sponsored by PICES and NPRB.  The first workshop was held 
July 19–20, 2007, in Seattle, USA, and the second follow-up workshop was convened on October 30, 2007, at 
PICES XVI.  The proceedings of both workshops will be combined into one report to be published by PICES. 
 
Proposals for new FIS subsidiary bodies (FIS Agenda Item 11) 
 
…..The proposal to form a Working Group on Implications of Climate Variability and Climate Change on 
Trends in Commercially Important Fish and Shellfish (FIS Endnote 6) received strong support from the 
Committee.  It was indicated that this effort is consistent with the activities envisioned under FUTURE and 
that PICES-sponsored work in this area would provide a good start to this line of research that is likely to 
become an ongoing effort in FUTURE.  It was noted that the title of the Working Group could be shortened to 
reflect emphasis on commercially exploited species (so the title reported here is tentative).  It was also 
suggested that a phased approach to initially implement forecasts for those species with the most complete 
information on climate linkages would be best.  For other species with incomplete information, a scenario 
approach may be best until research confirms the nature of climate linkages for those species.  Dr. Hollowed 
proposed that if the Working Group is approved, its first meeting should be held in conjunction with PICES 
XVII in Dalian. 
 
FIS Endnote 6 
Proposal for a Working Group on Implications of Climate Variability and Climate Change 
on Trends in Commercially Important Fish and Shellfish 
 
An interdisciplinary Working Group to facilitate a coordinated international research effort to forecast climate 
change impacts on the distribution and production of major fisheries in the Northern Hemisphere is proposed. 
The objectives of the Working Group are to: 
 review the activities of existing programs within each nation; 
 examine the evidence for climate impacts on production of commercial fish species; 
 develop medium-term to long-term forecasts of climate impacts on fish production; and 
 assess the performance of management strategies to respond to these changes in production. 
 
An interdisciplinary team of scientists representing the fields of climatology (global climate modeling), 
oceanography (physical and biological oceanography, and coupled biophysical models), fisheries 
oceanography, fish population dynamics, fisheries assessment, fisheries economics and ecosystem modeling 
will be assembled.  This team would identify climate scenarios for use in forecasting and then develop tools for 
predicting climate impacts on commercial fish production.  These tools will be used to develop quantitative 
forecasts of fish production around the Pacific Rim.  The Working Group will provide a forum for discussion 
of four components needed to complete the forecasts in a timely and coordinated fashion including: (1) IPCC 
scenarios, (2) predictions of oceanographic impacts, (3) modeling approaches, and (4) scenarios for natural 
resource use and enhancement. 
Appendix 5  PICES annual reports related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  151 
This Working Group builds on the work of the Climate Forcing and Marine Ecosystems Task Team (CFAME) 
and continues collaboration between FIS and POC via interactions with the Working Group 20 on Evaluations 
of Climate Change Projections. This effort is directly responsive to FUTURE and will encourage timely 
completion of early forecasts and associated management implications that can be used by FUTURE Task 
Teams to formulate cooperative research programs focused on improving forecasting skill through knowledge 
of processes influencing marine fish production. Expected benefits from this effort are as follows: 
 International consensus could be reached on new directions for fisheries modeling and techniques for 
incorporation of ecosystem indicators and climate forcing in stock assessments. 
 It is anticipated that the results of the coordinated research effort will be utilized by a broad spectrum of 
individuals outside of the research community.  Stakeholders who rely on fish and shellfish resources will 
utilize the forecasts to anticipate changes that would influence their businesses and communities.  
Fisheries managers will utilize the forecasts to evaluate whether actions are needed to sustain fisheries in 
their regions.  Conservation groups will be interested to better understand the regional and species-specific 
risks and challenges that climate change poses for species of interest. 
 
The life span of the Working Group is 3 years and its milestones are: 
 October 2008 – Convene an inter-sessional workshop to present forecasting results and to introduce 
techniques for evaluating management strategy evaluations; 
 October 2009 – Report on implications of climate change and climate variability on commercial fish 
species (a contribution to the North Pacific Ecosystem Status Report); 
 December 2009 – Finalize manuscript for publication in peer-reviewed literature. 
 
Proposal proponents:  Anne B. Hollowed and Michael Schirripa (USA) and Richard J. Beamish (Canada). 
 
 
  
PICES annual reports related to WG-FCCIFS   Appendix 5 
152  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
PICES Seventeenth Annual Meeting (PICES XVII) 
October 24–November 2, 2008 
Dalian, China 
 
 
Extracted from: 
2008 Report of the Fishery Science Committee 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 7  
Status reports of FIS-sponsored groups 
 
Dr. Hollowed provided a report of workshop W4 on “Climate scenarios for ecosystem modeling” sponsored by 
CCCC/POC/FIS.  A written summary was provided and can be found in the Session Summaries chapter of the 
PICES 2008 Annual Report.  The workshop discussion revolved around how to provide the climate scenarios 
for modeling of ecosystem effects.  The proposal for a PICES/ICES Working Group on Forecasting Climate 
Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish was introduced.  As this is a global issue, the proposed co-chairs would 
include both ICES and PICES members.  The issues are well defined and several working group meetings are 
proposed; some would be virtual meetings.  The proposal included a symposium to be held in early 2010 with 
the proceedings to be published in peer-reviewed literature by 2011.  This time-critical deadline was chosen in 
light of the timetable for developing the 2013 IPCC report. In addition to a 2010 symposium, the proposal also 
included a request for a working group meeting at the GLOBEC Open Science Meeting (June 22–26, 2009, 
Victoria, Canada).  It was noted that the proposed working group was already approved by ICES. FIS actions 
on the proposed new working group are reported under Agenda Item 10. 
 
AGENDA ITEM 10  
Proposals for new FIS Working Groups and Study Groups 
 
FIS recommended approval of the PICES/ICES Working Group on Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on 
Fish and Shellfish (WG-FCCIFS).  It was approved last year by FIS, but the proposal was deferred by Science 
Board until 2008 in order to involve PICES Working Group on Evaluations of Climate Change Projections. 
FIS noted that this proposed Working Group is in line with FUTURE goals.  A question was raised about the 
relationship between this Working Group and a possible task team of FUTURE.  It was premature for a 
definitive answer, but the Working Group could possibly evolve into a task team.  However, FIS urges that this 
work needs to proceed and cannot wait for FUTURE to be finalized.  Dr. Hollowed recommended a meeting of 
the proposed Working Group to take place immediately prior to PICES-2009 in Korea. 
 
 
 
Extracted from: 
2008 Report of the Physical Oceanography and Climate Committee 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 5 
Reports of existing subsidiary bodies and plans for new ones 
 
Proposed new ICES/PICES (FIS/POC) Working Group on Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish and 
Shellfish  
Dr. Foreman presented the background and Terms of Reference (see POC Endnote 3) for a proposed new 
ICES/PICES Working Group on Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish.  It was resolved 
that POC would support the creation of this group. 
  
Appendix 5  PICES annual reports related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  153 
POC Endnote 3 
Proposal for a new PICES/ICES Working Group on Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish and 
Shellfish (WG-FCCIFS)  
 
Proposed Parent Committees  
 
ICES approved the formation of WG-FCCIFS as a permanent working group. FIS will serve as the parent 
committee for WG-FCCIFS with support from POC.  The activities of WG-FCCIFS may be integrated into the 
PICES FUTURE program as a task team.  WG-FCCIFS will report to the ICES Climate Change Steering 
Group, ICES Oceanography Committee, and the PICES FIS and POC Committees.  
 
Suggested Co-Chairmen  
 
Anne Hollowed (USA), Manuel Barange (United Kingdom), Suam Kim (Korea), Harald Loeng (Norway).  
 
[Suggested Working Group members: James Overland – USA (ESSAS, PICES POC) , Shin-ichi Ito – Japan 
(ESSAS, PICES POC), Michael Foreman – Canada (PICES POC), Sang-Wook Yeh – Korea, Thomas Okey – 
Canada (PEW Trust), Richard Beamish – Canada (NPAFC, PICES FIS), Daniel Duplisea – Canada (ICES), 
Jason Holt – United Kingdom (QUESTFISH, ICES), Keith Brander – Denmark (ICES, IPCC ecosystem 
writing team), Jürgen Alheit – Germany (ICES, GLOBEC SPACC)]  
 
Rationale  
 
The work of the FCCIFS Working Group is essential to ensure that ICES and PICES will be able to provide 
guidance on the potential impacts of climate change on marine ecosystems and the response of commercial 
fish and shellfish resources to these changes.  
 
The work done within ICES and PICES on climate change and fisheries has been diverse and has included:  
a) guidance on methods for selection of IPCC scenarios for use in projections; b) techniques for downscaling 
IPCC scenarios to local regions, c) development of coupled ecosystem models for use in evaluating climate- 
induced shifts in environmental conditions, d) literature documenting relationships between climate forcing 
and marine fish and shellfish distribution and production, and e) stock assessment techniques for evaluating 
management strategies to mitigate the impacts of change.  A challenge facing ICES and PICES is the need to 
integrate all of this research to provide stakeholders with quantitative estimates of the potential impact of 
climate change on marine life throughout the world.  This challenge calls for the establishment of an 
interdisciplinary research team composed of experts from around the world who will focus attention on the 
development of common and standardized frameworks for forecasting climate change impacts on marine life 
with particular emphasis on commercially important fish and shellfish.  ICES and PICES should act now to 
ensure that our research communities develop the capibilities to provide quantitative contributions to the next 
IPCC reports and to provide guidance for management under climate change scenarios.  
 
Several case studies will be identified by the Steering Group based on their potential for contributing to 
methodological development and the opportunity for comparison of marine species and community responses 
to climate forcing in different ecosystems.  Members of the Working Group will be responsible for 
encouraging the development of regional interdisciplinary teams responsible for the production of forecasts. 
Members of the working group will provide guidance to the regional teams by providing a framework for the 
development of the forecasts and communication of new advances in analytical tools.  The culmination of the 
Working Group’s effort will be presentation and discussion of results at an inter-sessional meeting and 
publication of results in a peer reviewed journal by 2011.  The timing for the publication is critical because the 
future IPCC AR5 report is slated for release in 2013 and the IPCC only allows references to published papers.  
 
  
PICES annual reports related to WG-FCCIFS   Appendix 5 
154  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Proposed Terms of Reference  
 
We recommend that WG-FCCIFS be established to promote and coordinate research on the potential impacts 
of climate change on marine fish and shellfish around the world.  
The working group will:  
1. Promote research on climate change impacts on fish and shellfish by scientists in ICES and PICES 
member nations through coordinated communication, exchange of methodology, and organization of 
meetings to provide a venue for discussion and publication of results.  
2. Develop frameworks and methodologies for forecasting the impacts of climate change on the growth, 
distribution and abundance of marine life with particular emphasis on commercial fish and shellfish;  
3. Review the results of designated case studies to test methods;  
4. Hold an inter-sessional symposium in early 2010 where scientists can present, discuss and publish 
forecasts of climate change impacts on the world’s commercial fish and shellfish resources;  
5. Establish techniques for estimating and communicating uncertainty in forecasts;  
6. Evaluate strategies for research and management under climate change scenarios, given the limitations of 
our forecasts;  
7. Produce publications that could be considered for the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change in 2013;  
8. Publish a final report summarizing work.  
 
The Working Group will utilize web technology to hold several virtual working group meetings. They will 
hold an inter-sessional Working Group meeting on June 21, 2009, one day prior to the GLOBEC Open Science 
meeting in Victoria, Canada.  At that meeting members will review the results of designated case studies and 
discuss the symposium for 2010.  The WG-FCCIFS will report by September 2009 for the attention of the 
ICES Climate Change Steering Group, ICES Oceanography Committee, and the PICES FIS and POC 
Committees.  The WG-FCCIFS will provide the several case studies that will contribute to the PICES 
FUTURE program.  
 
Working Group members will seek widened participation for this group, including contact with relevant 
academic and intergovernmental organizations such as fisheries managers, the North Pacific Anadromous Fish 
Commission, the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, and FAO for the inter-symposium in 2010. 
 
  
Appendix 5  PICES annual reports related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  155 
Extracted from: 
2008 Summary of Scientific Sessions and Workshops at PICES XVII 
 
 
CCCC/POC/FIS Workshop (W4)  
Climate scenarios for ecosystem modeling (II)  
 
Co-Convenors: Michael G. Foreman (Canada), Anne B. Hollowed (USA), Suam Kim (Korea) and Gordon 
McFarlane (Canada)  
 
Background  
 
Members of the Climate Forcing and Marine Ecosystem Task Team (CFAME), the Working Group on 
Evaluations of Climate Change Projections (WG 20), and the FIS Committee presented the results of their 
research on developing and applying the output of regional and global climate scenarios to ecosystem and fish 
stock forecasts.  These groups have been developing conceptual and empirical models of the mechanisms that 
link climate variation to the dynamics of marine ecosystems and their commercially important species.  Their 
work has focused on comparisons among a diversity of North Pacific ecosystems with differing dominant 
physical processes.  WG 20 is developing higher resolution regional coupled atmosphere–ocean models forced 
by IPCC global or regional models to provide forecasts of regional parameters (such as SST, sea ice cover, and 
river discharge) that are relevant to ecosystem processes.  This workshop provided an opportunity to discuss 
the results, present them to the PICES community, and describe their potential for the FUTURE Program.  
 
List of papers  
 
Oral presentations  
Thomas A. Okey, Anne B. Hollowed, Michael J. Schirripa and Richard J. Beamish (Invited)  
The 2035 modeling challenge for forecasting climate impacts on marine biota and fisheries: A collaboration emerging from an 
international workshop  
James E. Overland, Muyin Wang and Nicholas A. Bond  
Utility of climate models for regional ecosystem projections  
Young Shil Kang and Sukgeun Jung  
Regional differences in responses of meso-zooplankton to long-term oceanographic changes in Korean sea waters  
Yasuhiro Yamanaka et al.  
(WG 20 update): Recent results connecting climate change to fish resources using the high resolution model, COCO-NEMURO  
Emanuele Di Lorenzo, N. Schneider, K.M. Cobb, K. Chhak, P.J.S. Franks, A.J. Miller, J.C. McWilliams, S.J. Bograd, 
W.J. Arango, H. Sydeman, E. Curchister, T.M. Powell and P. Rivere  
(WG 20 update): North Pacific Decadal Variability in the FUTURE  
James Christian  
(WG 20 update): Canadian Earth System Model scenarios for the North Pacific  
Qigeng Zhao, Qingquan Li, Jianglong Li and Fanghua Wu  
A simulation of acidification in the Pacific Ocean  
Enrique Curchitser, William Large, Jon Wolfe and Kate Hedstrom  
(WG 20 update): Downscaling climate scenarios with a fully coupled global-to-regional model  
Michael G. Foreman, William J. Merryfield, Badal Pal and Eric Salathé  
An update of regional climate modeling along the British Columbia Shelf  
Vadim Navrotsky  
(WG20 update): On the role of ocean and land living matter in Global Climate Change  
Anne B. Hollowed, Teresa A’mar, Richard J. Beamish, Nicholas A. Bond, James E. Overland, Michael Schirripa and 
Tom Wilderbuer  
Fish population response to future climate drivers: A next step forward  
Gordon H. Kruse, Jie Zheng and James E. Overland  
A scenario approach to forecast potential impacts of climate change on red king crabs in the Eastern Bering Sea  
  
PICES annual reports related to WG-FCCIFS   Appendix 5 
156  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Sukyung Kang, Jae Bong Lee, Anne B. Hollowed, Nicholas A. Bond and Suam Kim  
Techniques for forecasting climate-induced variation in the distribution and abundance of mackerels in the northwestern Pacific  
Michio J. Kishi, Yasunori Sakurai and Masahide Kaeriyama  
What affects on the growth and stock of chum salmon, walleye pollack, and common squid in the Northern Pacific  
Richard J. Beamish  
A tail of two sockeyes  
Richard J. Beamish  
Evidence that the carrying capacity of local marine ecosystems can regulate the productivity of chinook salmon  
 
Poster  
Leonid Klyashtorin and Alexey Lyubushin  
Cyclic climate changes and salmon production in the North Pacific 
 
  
Appendix 5  PICES annual reports related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  157 
PICES Eighteenth Annual Meeting (PICES-2009) 
October 23–November 1, 2009 
Jeju, Korea 
 
 
Extracted from: 
2009 Report of the Fishery Science Committee 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 5 
Reports of FIS-sponsored groups 
 
Joint PICES/ICES Working Group on Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish (WG-FCCIFS) 
Co-Chairman, Dr. Suam Kim, provided a summary of the activities of WG-FCCIFS. The Working Group had 
met previously at the GLOBEC Open Science Meeting in Victoria, Canada (June 2009), and at the ICES 
Annual Science Conference in Berlin, Germany (September 2009).  The third meeting of this Working Group 
took place in Jeju, Korea, during PICES-2009 and another will occur for 1½ days immediately after the 
International Symposium on “Climate change effects on fish and fisheries” in Sendai, Japan, April 26–29, 
2010.  The Working Group plans to develop web meetings. 
 
WG-FCCIFS finalized the organization of the Sendai symposium, including scientific sessions, invited 
speakers list, expected results of the conference, finances, and other logistical issues.  The Working Group 
noted that many of their Terms of Reference cannot be achieved until after the symposium.  It will provide a 
forum for discussing frameworks and methodologies for forecasting impacts of climate change on the growth, 
distribution and abundance of marine life.  Dr. Kim noted that the proceedings of the Sendai symposium will 
be published as a special issue of the ICES Journal of Marine Science.  However, he noted the Working 
Group’s desire to produce a second publication, likely to be a synthesis of the Sendai workshops. FIS 
discussed and supported this proposal.  Finally, WG-FCCIFS proposed a Topic Session for PICES-2010 on 
“Impact of climate variability on marine ecosystems: Understanding functional responses to facilitate 
forecasting”.  (See POC Endnote 5, below.) 
 
 
Extracted from: 
2009 Report of the Physical Oceanography and Climate Committee 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 4 
Reports of existing subsidiary bodies and plans for ones 
 
PICES/ICES Working Group on Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish (WG-FCCIFS) 
Dr. Shin-ichi Ito gave a brief report summarizing activities of WG-FCCIFS over the past year and an update on 
the status of the Group’s upcoming Symposium on “Climate change effects on fish and fisheries: Forecasting 
impacts, assessing ecosystem responses, and evaluating management strategies” in Sendai, Japan, April 26–
29, 2010. 
 
POC  Endnote 5 
(4.) a 1-day POC/FIS/BIO/FUTURE Topic Session on “Impact of climate variability on marine 
ecosystems: Understanding functional responses to facilitate forecasting” 
[sponsorship later changed to POC/FIS/BIO] 
 
Understanding the role of natural variability, occurring over a variety of temporal and spatial scales is essential 
for effective management of marine ecosystems in the wake of predicted global change.  Evidence suggests 
PICES annual reports related to WG-FCCIFS   Appendix 5 
158  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
that climate variability can trigger regime shifts in marine ecosystems.  Regime shifts are characterized by a 
reorganization of marine communities, species dominance, and tropho-dynamic relationships. Often, 
synchronous shifts occur in aquatic ecosystems that are separated by thousands of kilometers.  This finding 
suggests that atmospheric teleconnections are mediating regional system changes.  We postulate that 
comparative studies of ecosystems that have experienced regime shifts will provide insights into the expected 
responses of marine organisms to climate change.  We seek papers that go beyond simple pattern matching. 
Contributions to this Theme Session should provide statistical evidence of the functional responses and 
relationships that underlie regime shifts and/or statistical or modeling studies that successfully simulate 
observed shifts.  Studies that utilize these relationships to forecast of future climate change impacts are 
especially welcome.  The primary focus of this session will be on understanding shifts in the pelagic realm 
including phytoplankton, zooplankton and pelagic species (for example, small pelagic fish, squids and gadids). 
 
Co-Convenors:  Suam Kim, Jurgen Alheit, Harald Loeng, James Overland, Yasunori Sakurai 
 
Request funding for 2 invited speakers. (ICES will be asked to co-sponsor 1 speaker). Possible European 
candidates are Martin Edwards/Gregory Beaugrand, Svein Sundby 
  
Appendix 5  PICES annual reports related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  159 
PICES Nineteenth Annual Meeting (PICES-2010) 
October 22–31, 2010 
Portland, USA 
 
 
Extracted from: 
2010 Report of the Fishery Science Committee 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 5 
Status reports of FIS-sanctioned groups 
 
Joint PICES/ICES Working Group on Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish (WG-FCCIFS) 
Co-Chairman of ICES/PICES Working Group on Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish 
(WG-FCCIFS), Dr. Suam Kim, provided a summary of the Working Group’s activities.  This Working Group 
was extremely active in 2010. Highlights included the International Symposium on “Climate change effects on 
fish and fisheries: Forecasting impacts, evaluating ecosystem responses, and evaluating management 
strategies” (Sendai, Japan, April 26–29, 2010).  The symposium and a subsequent publication will advance 
understanding within the scientific community of the potential effects of climate change on fish and fisheries. 
Key findings from the meeting were summarized in PICES Press: (http://pices.int/publications/ 
pices_press/volume18/v18_n2/PICES_Press18_FULL.pdf).  Another major highlight included the 1-day 
FIS/POC/BIO Topic Session at PICES-2010 on “Impact of climate variability on marine ecosystems: 
Understanding functional responses to facilitate forecasting” (S8). 
 
WG-FCCIFS requested several actions of the FIS Committee: 
1.  Funding for two PICES scientists from Asian countries to attend a workshop on “Biological consequences 
of decrease in sea ice in Arctic and Sub-Arctic Seas” at the 2nd ESSAS Open Science Meeting in Seattle 
(May 22–26, 2011).  Convenors: Harald Loeng (ICES/Norway) and Anne Hollowed (PICES/USA). 
2.  Funding for two scientists to attend the ICES 2011 ASC Theme Session on “Atmospheric forcing of the 
Northern Hemisphere ocean gyres, and the subsequent impact on the adjacent marine climate and 
ecosystems” to be convened by Emanuele Di Lorenzo (PICES/USA), Ichiro Yasuda (PICES/Japan), 
Hjálmar Hátún (ICES/Faroe Islands) and Jürgen Alheit (ICES/Germany). 
3.  PICES’ support and endorsement for a 1-day theme session during the International Symposium on 
“Effects of climate change on the world’s oceans” in Yeosu, Korea (May 15–19, 2012). 
4.  PICES’ support for an ICES Symposium on “Forage fish interactions and ecosystem approach to fisheries 
management” to be held in Nantes, France, from September 10–14, 2012. 
 
WG-FCCIFS may consider an endorsement by ICES and PICES of the addition of 1–2 new working group 
members who would represent an emerging new South Pacific marine science organization. 
 
It was proposed to merge ICES SSICC (term ends December 2010) and ICES/PICES WG-FCCIFS (term ends 
December 2011) to address a joint ICES/PICES Strategic Initiative on Climate Change Effects on Marine 
Ecosystems. 
 
 
  
PICES annual reports related to WG-FCCIFS   Appendix 5 
160  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Extracted from: 
2010 Report of the Physical Oceanography and Climate Committee 
 
 
PICES/ICES Working Group on Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish (WG-FCCIFS) 
Dr. Anne Hollowed, Co-Chair of WG-FCCIFS, gave a brief report summarizing activities of the Group over 
the past year, the highlight of which was the very successful symposium on “Climate change effects on fish 
and fisheries” organized in Sendai, Japan, April 26–29, 2010.  There was some discussion on the future of this 
Working Group after its term ends in 2011 and how it might be linked to the new working group proposed by 
WG 20.  ICES plans to create a Strategic Initiative on Climate Change (SSICC) as the next step to succeed 
WG-FCCIFS and was seeking to align its activities with PICES.  POC Committee members agreed that the 
present ICES “Initiative” has a mandate that is too broad for a Working Group.  Joint activities with PICES 
should be considered by POC after more concrete TORs are available.  Travel support requests were made for 
a workshop on “Biological consequences of a decrease in sea ice in Arctic and Sub-Arctic Seas” at the ESSAS 
Open Science Meeting in Seattle, USA, on May 22, 2011; a session on “Atmospheric forcing of Northern 
Hemisphere ocean gyres and their subsequent impact on the adjacent marine climate and ecosystems” at the 
ICES Annual Science Meeting in Gdańsk, Poland, and a workshop on “Reaction of Northern Hemisphere 
ecosystems to climate events: A comparison” in Hamburg, Germany, in May 2011. 
 
 
  
Appendix 5  PICES annual reports related to WG-FCCIFS 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  161 
PICES Twentieth Annual Meeting (PICES-2011) 
October 14–23, 2011 
Khabarovsk, Russia 
 
 
Extracted from: 
2011 Report of the Biological Oceanography Committee  
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 11 
Report from joint PICES/ICES Working Group on Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish and 
Shellfish 
 
A report summarizing the actions and requests related to PICES/ICES WG-FCCIFS was presented by Juergen 
Alheit.  PICES (BIO) approval is being requested for continuation/renewal.  BIO was concerned about being 
asked to endorse and approve this Working Group when the Committee had not previously reviewed the 
Implementation Plan or received other information such as the Terms of Reference, although detailed 
information had been presented to the FUTURE APs.  BIO recommended that mechanisms for communication 
from the FUTURE APs to the parent Committees be improved.  BIO recognized the importance of WG-FCCIFS 
for FUTURE and for PICES/ICES collaboration, but BIO had only a limited interest about participation on 
working group that focuses on fish and shellfish issues. 
 
 
Extracted from: 
2011 Report of the Fishery Science Committee 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 8 
Reports of FIS-sanctioned Groups 
 
Joint PICES/ICES WG on Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish (WG-FCCIFS) 
Co-Chair of WG-FCCIFS, Dr. Anne Hollowed, provided a summary of the activities of the joint Working 
Group in 2010–2011.   
 
This Working Group was extremely active in 2011. WG-FCCIFS held four Working Group meetings, 
produced two reports, and held three inter-sessional workshops.  WG-FCCIFS members co-convened  
5 Topic/Theme Sessions at PICES Annual Meetings and ICES Annual Science Conferences. 
 
The 3 workshops convened by WG-FCCIFS in 2011 were: Reaction of Northern Hemisphere ecosystems to 
climate events: A comparison, in Hamburg, Germany in May; Biological consequences of a decrease in sea ice 
in Arctic and Sub-Arctic seas in Seattle, USA in May, and Basin-wide impact of Atlantic Multidecadal 
Oscillation, Woods Hole, USA, in June. 
 
In 2011, a major milestone was the ICES/PICES WG-FCCIFS publication of the special issue on “Climate 
change effects on fish and fisheries: Forecasting impacts, assessing ecosystem responses, and evaluation 
management strategies” in the July issue of the ICES Journal of Marine Science, volume 68(6).  The special 
issue provides a valuable assessment of current knowledge of the effects of climate change on fish and 
fisheries. 
 
Members of the WG-FCCIFS met in October 2010 in Portland and in May 2011 in Seattle to discuss on-going 
activities of the group.  During these meetings, the WG discussed the need to develop a long-term Strategic 
Initiative on Climate Change Effects on Marine Ecosystems (SICCME).  The WG-FCCIFS term ends in 
PICES annual reports related to WG-FCCIFS   Appendix 5 
162  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
December 2011. PICES and ICES recognized that great strides in new sciences have emerged from 
collaborative work between two organizations and requested the development of a Science Plan that outlines a 
structure for continued collaboration focused on climate change.  A Science Plan for SICCME was delivered to 
ICES and PICES in the spring of 2011.  ICES agreed to the formation of SICCME, and PICES and ICES asked 
WG members to develop an Implementation Plan.  These documents were provided to FIS members in 
advance of the meeting. 
 
Planning of the upcoming PICES/ICES/IOC Symposium on “Effects of climate change on the world’s oceans” 
(May 15–19, 2012, Yeosu, Korea) is proceeding as planned. 
 
Dr. Hollowed described WG-FCCIFS’s request to form a new PICES Section on Climate Change Effects on 
Marine Ecosystems (S-CCME).  She described their desire for FIS co-sponsorship of this activity. In making 
this request, she noted that the current co-sponsorship by FIS has worked extremely well. 
 
FIS congratulated Dr. Hollowed and her colleagues for the outstanding work of WG-FCCIFS.  FIS strongly 
supports the proposal for FIS committee co-sponsorship of SICCME, given the strong direct ties of this work 
to FIS and the need to maintain past excellent levels of communication with FIS. 
 
 
Extracted from: 
2011 Report of the Physical Oceanography and Climate Committee 
 
 
AGENDA ITEM 5 
Reports of existing subsidiary bodies and plans for new ones 
 
Dr. Michael Foreman, a member of WG-FCCIFS, gave a brief report summarizing activities of the Working 
Group in 2011, including those during 2011 ICES Annual Science Conference and 2011 PICES Annual 
Meeting.  The Working Group had business meetings in May and September in 2011, and co-chaired and 
convened several sessions and workshops.  The Group’s term ends in December 2011, and its major TORs 
culminated in the publication of a special issue of ICES Journal of Marine Science based on 35 scientific 
papers from the 2010 PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium on “Climate change effects on fish and fisheries: 
Forecasting impacts, assessing ecosystem responses and evaluating management strategies” held April 26–29, 
2011, in Sendai, Japan.  The volume will serve as a key reference for scientists developing international or 
national climate change impact assessments.  The Working Group proposed establishing a new PICES/ICES 
Section on Climate Change Effects on Marine Ecosystems (S-CCME) as a successor.  The draft plan was 
reviewed by the POC Committee at PICES-2010 before submitting the proposal for approval at PICES-2011. 
According to its plan for Phase 1 during 2012–2014, S-CCME will work with newly formed WG 27 to foster 
integration and synthesis of ideas between those two expert groups.  It is also anticipated S-CCME will 
collaborate closely with a new Working Group on Regional Climate Modeling that POC proposed at PICES- 
2011 to address one of S-CCME’s key questions, How will the physical, chemical and biological components 
of regional marine ecosystems of the Northern Hemisphere change under future climate scenarios?  The POC 
Committee decided to support the S-CCME Science Plan.  The Group requested support for a FIS/POC/S-
CCME/WG27 Topic Session on “Comparison of impact of multi-decadal climate variability in North Pacific 
and North Atlantic ecosystems and corresponding teleconnection patterns” at PICES-2012. POC decided to 
support the request with high priority and submit the request at the Science Board Meeting. 
 
 
Appendix 6  PICES Press articles  
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  163 
Appendix 6   
PICES Press articles related to WG-FCCIFS 
 
PICES Fishery Science Committee Workshop in Gijón 
         PICES Press, Vol. 16, No. 2, July 2008 ............................................................................................................ 164 
2008 PICES Workshop on “Climate Scenarios for Ecosystem Modeling (II)” 
         PICES Press, Vol. 17, No. 1, January 2009 ...................................................................................................... 167 
2010 Symposium on “Effects of Climate Change on Fish and Fisheries” 
         PICES Press, Vol. 18, No. 2, Summer 2010 ..................................................................................................... 169 
2010 Sendai Ocean Acidification Workshop 
         PICES Press, Vol. 18, No. 2, Summer 2010 ..................................................................................................... 177 
2010 Sendai Coupled Climate-to-Fish-to-Fishers Models Workshop 
         PICES Press, Vol. 18, No. 2, Summer 2010 ..................................................................................................... 180 
2010 Sendai Salmon Workshop on Climate Change 
         PICES Press, Vol. 18, No. 2, Summer 2010 ..................................................................................................... 182 
2010 Sendai Workshop on “Networking across Global Marine Hotspots” 
         PICES Press, Vol. 18, No. 2, Summer 2010 ..................................................................................................... 184 
2010 Sendai Zooplankton Workshop 
         PICES Press, Vol. 18, No. 2, Summer 2010 ..................................................................................................... 187 
PICES and ICES on the River Elbe 
         PICES Press, Vol. 19, No. 2, Summer 2011 ..................................................................................................... 190 
 
 
 
 
 
PICES Press articles  Appendix 6 
164  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
PICES Fishery Science Committee Workshop in Gijón 
 
by Thomas A. Okey, Anne B. Hollowed, and Michael J. Schirripa 
 
A workshop entitled “Linking Global Climate Model 
output to (a) trends in commercial species productivity and 
(b) changes in broader biological communities in the 
world’s oceans” was convened on May 18, 2008, at the 
ICES/PICES/IOC International Symposium on the “Effects 
of climate change on the world’s oceans” in Gijón, Spain.  
The workshop had the ultimate goal of facilitating a 
coordinated international research effort to forecast climate 
change impacts on the distribution and production of the 
world’s major fisheries, and on the biological communities 
in which these fisheries are embedded.  It was attended by 
33 people from 13 nations and there was consensus that 
this group could initiate a coordinated international 
collaboration to advance research in marine climate 
impacts.  Originally proposed separate workshops entitled 
“Linking climate to trends in productivity of key 
commercial species in the world’s oceans” and “Screening 
approaches and linking Global Climate Model output with 
ecosystem and population models” were combined by the 
convenors because they were complementary.  In 
retrospect, blending the two “schools” was fortuitous as it 
placed us in a better-than-expected position to initiate an 
effective international collaboration. 
 
The specific objectives were:  (1) to review the activities of 
existing programs within each nation;  (2) to examine 
evidence for climate impacts on production of commercial 
fish species and other marine life;  (3) to discuss the 
feasibility of developing medium- to long-term forecasts of 
climate impacts;  (4) to discuss possible responses of 
commercial fisheries, human communities, and 
governments to climate-driven changes in marine life;  and 
(5) to identify common or standard approaches to 
forecasting climate change impacts on commercial species 
and marine communities and ecosystems. 
 
Workshop participants discussed climate scenarios to use 
in forecasting and the tools required for predicting climate 
impacts on commercial fish production and broader marine 
ecosystems.  The workshop provided a forum to examine 
four components needed to complete the forecasts in a 
timely and coordinated fashion.  These included IPCC 
scenarios, predictions of oceanographic impacts, modeling 
approaches, and regional scenarios for natural resource use 
and enhancement.  The ecosystem component of the 
workshop surveyed a wide variety of approaches, such as 
vulnerability assessments for informing location choices 
for ecosystem modeling efforts and management 
prioritization, trophodynamic fishery ecosystem modeling 
(i.e., Ecopath with Ecosim), climate envelope modeling, 
statistical approaches, and three dimensional high-
resolution biogeochemical ecosystem modeling (i.e., 
CCCC-NEMURO). 
The workshop began with an introduction by Anne 
Hollowed (U.S.A.) who proposed:  (1) an overarching goal 
of producing quantitative estimates of climate change 
effects on the marine ecosystem – biology – in the next 5 
years;  (2) a review of all the related international efforts in 
a paper that would lay out a path for collaboration 
development;  (3) initiation of a coordinated international 
effort—broader than one basin;  and (4) production of a 
special journal issue for showcasing forecasting approaches 
that are available and are being developed.  She discussed 
three broad approaches representing different levels of 
advancement in the science of climate impact forecasting, 
listed in increasing order of sophistication: 
1. IPCC scenarios downscaled to local regions and 
ecosystem indicators used to project future fish 
production using detailed management strategy 
evaluations; 
2. IPCC scenarios downscaled to local regions and 
coupled to bio-physical models with higher trophic 
level feedbacks; 
3. Fully coupled bio-physical models that operate at time 
and space scales relevant to coastal domains. 
 
The main program of the workshop started with a round 
table discussion of existing national or international projects 
developing forecasting initiatives, including Quest-FISH 
(Jason Holt), Fisheries and the Environment (FATE; Anne 
Hollowed), PICES FUTURE (Michael Foreman), North 
Pacific Research Board Bering Sea Integrated Ecosystem 
Research Program (NPRB BSIERP; Clarence Pautzke), 
Climate Impacts on Oceanic Top Predators (CLIOTOP; 
Alistair Hobday), Ecosystem Studies of Sub-Arctic Seas 
(ESSAS; Harald Loeng), Evidencias e Impacto do Cambio 
Climático en Galicia (CLIGAL; Antonio Bode), and 
initiatives by the Ministry of Fisheries New Zealand (Mary 
Livingston).  The rest of the morning was devoted to eight 
presentations of projects that linked Global Climate Model 
(GCM) output to trends in commercial species productivity. 
 
Nicholas Bond (U.S.A.) presented “A method for using 
IPCC model simulations to project changes in marine 
ecosystems”, in which he compared ensembles of 
hindcasted atmosphere–ocean model output to observed 
measurements, and used a tiered statistical approach to 
select a subset of models that performed well in 
representing regional oceanographic projections.  This 
work indicated that different models have different 
strengths, so a particular question should use a tailored 
subset of models. 
 
Mary Livingston (New Zealand) presented “Climate 
change, oceanic response and possible effects on fish 
stocks in New Zealand waters”, in which she described 
Appendix 6  PICES Press articles  
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  165 
how climate change related ecological trends have been 
equivocal in New Zealand during the last 50 years due to 
its oceanographic and ecological uniqueness and 
complexity and the paucity of long time series.  Some of 
New Zealand’s marine life might be quite vulnerable to 
climate and oceanographic changes due to a variety of 
factors, and thus there are plans to integrate climate impact 
studies with marine fisheries research and management. 
 
Jae Bong Lee (Republic of Korea) presented “Forecasting 
climate change impacts on distribution and abundance of 
jack mackerel around Korean waters”, in which he 
illustrated how variations in ocean conditions and warming 
of ocean water around Korea has influenced the 
distributions of jack mackerel in terms of their seasonal 
visitation to Korean waters from the East China Sea, and 
suggested that continued warming by 2100 may have 
considerable effects on these stocks around Korea.  Future 
sea surface temperature (SST), ocean drift and other 
oceanographic variables projected with GCMs will be 
incorporated into a stock projection model to forecast 
future production scenarios. 
 
Sukyung Kang (Republic of Korea) presented “Techniques 
for forecasting climate-induced variation in the 
distribution and abundance of mackerels in the 
northwestern Pacific”, in which she described an 
exploration of the positive relationship between mackerel 
production and warm ocean conditions, and progress in 
forecasting the impact of climate change on mackerel 
production by downscaling forecasts of atmospheric/ocean 
conditions from GCMs to drive stock projection models. 
 
Adriaan Rijnsdorp (The Netherlands) presented “Effects of 
climate change on sole and plaice:  Timing of spawning, 
length of the growth period and rate of growth”, in which 
he reviewed how increased temperatures since 1989 in 
coastal nursery grounds in the southeastern North Sea has 
had a negative impact on plaice and a positive effect on 
sole thus causing a shifting species composition as their 
habitat quality changes.  Implications of physiological 
trade-offs in this changing system will make forecasting 
challenging. 
 
Z. Teresa A’mar (U.S.A.) presented “The impact on 
management performance of including indicators of 
environmental variability in management strategies for the 
Gulf of Alaska walleye pollock fishery”, in which she 
provided her management strategy evaluation (MSE) of the 
Gulf of Alaska walleye pollock fishery, with multiple 
indices of climate forcing incorporated into her overall 
modelling framework.  The best performing management 
strategies were ones that were more responsive to 
fluctuations in productivity due to environmental 
influences. 
 
Michael Schirripa (U.S.A.) presented “Simulation testing 
two methods of including environmental data into stock 
assessments”, in which he described the development of 
environmental indicators of fish stock recruitment and 
provided both modelling and a statistical examples of how 
such indicators could be used in stock assessments and 
forecasting.  Sea surface height (SSH) was the best 
predictor of recruitment in this analysis, as low SSH occurs 
when the California Current and upwelling are both strong, 
and this is associated with high productivity. 
 
Alan Haynie (U.S.A.) presented “Climate change and 
changing fisher behavior in the Bering Sea pollock 
fishery”, in which he discussed how fishermen will respond 
to changes in fish abundance driven by climate change, and 
that this will, in turn, have an impact on the ecosystem.  
The fisheries we observe today result from current stock 
distributions, abundances, and prices—all of these will 
change with climate.  Spatial and market regulations that 
consider the relationship between fishermen and the 
environment will be most effective. 
 
The morning session concluded with a discussion of the 
presentations and the outlook for forecasting commercial 
fisheries. 
 
Thomas Okey, Pew Fellow in Marine Conservation, 
introduced the afternoon session by providing a framework 
highlighting complementary modelling approaches that 
could be used to explore climate impacts on marine biota 
and ecosystems.  He described conceptual and qualitative 
models that are useful for proactive decision-making as a 
segue to the more quantitative approaches to linking GCM 
output to changes in broader marine communities. 
 
Jorge Sarmiento (U.S.A.) presented “Modeling response of 
ocean biology to climate warming using an empirical 
approach”, in which he compared global warming 
simulations from six climate models and the physical 
changes projected for six ocean biomes.  All six models 
indicated increases in primary production at high latitudes, 
but the models did not agree with direction of change at 
mid-latitudes. 
 
Taketo Hashioka (Japan) presented “Future ecosystem 
changes projected by a 3-D high-resolution ecosystem 
model”, in which he described efforts to develop a high-
resolution ecosystem model by linking COCO (CCSR 
Ocean Component Models) to NEMURO and NEMURO–
FISH models.  Projections included a 30% decrease in the 
Kuroshio, 10–30% decreases in Chl-a, a shift from diatoms 
to small phytoplankton, a spring bloom 10 days earlier, 
changes in phytoplankton biomass (i.e., 20% increase in 
the subarctic region and 25% decrease in the subarctic-
subtropical transition region), and a 2° shift in the 
distribution of sardines. 
 
William W.L. Cheung (Canada) presented a “Dynamic bio-
climate envelope model to predict climate-induced changes 
in distribution of marine fishes and invertebrates”, in 
PICES Press articles  Appendix 6 
166  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
which he provided a global assessment of climate-induced 
range shifts of 1066 commercial species throughout the 
world’s oceans from changing temperature, habitat 
characteristics, and other mediators of dispersal and range 
occupation. 
 
Alistair J. Hobday (Australia) presented “Informing 
location choices for ecosystem model development using a 
vulnerability index” as an Australian example of a 
quantitative vulnerability assessment that is used to identify 
the ecosystems, habitats, biological components, and 
human values most vulnerable to projected climate change, 
so that climate impact modelling and monitoring can be 
prioritized and targeted efficiently.  The CSIRO Mk 3.5 
model projections to 2070 provided indicators of climate 
change while non-climate indicators were derived from 
other Australian data sets. 
 
Simone Libralato (Italy) presented “Towards the 
integration of biogeochemical and food web models for a 
comprehensive description of marine ecosystem dynamics”, 
in which he reviewed the progress and outlooks for 
achieving end-to-end modelling (e.g., from viruses to 
fishes, from nutrients to fisheries, including climatic 
changes) by linking biogeochemical models with 
trophodynamic models.  He also summarized outcomes of 
the 2007 Trieste (Italy) workshop on “Biogeochemical 
processes and fish dynamics in food web models for end-to-
end conceptualisation of marine ecosystems:  Theory and 
use of Ecopath with Ecosim”. 
 
Steven Mackinson (UK) presented “Which forcing factors 
fit? Using ecosystem models to investigate the relative 
influence of fishing and primary productivity on the 
dynamics of marine ecosystems”, in which he described 
dynamic fitting with Ecopath with Ecosim models to 
identify the main driving forces of fish stocks and marine 
ecosystems (e.g., fishing mortalities or proxies of primary 
production), to assess the relative importance of these 
factors across regions, and to evaluate whether similar 
groups in different ecosystems respond similarly? 
 
Sheila Heymans (UK) presented “The effects of climate 
change on the northern Benguela ecosystem”, in which she 
simulated the effect of global warming on the northern 
Benguela Current system by fitting a 1956 Ecopath with 
Ecosim model to 2000 conditions, and then simulating 50 
years of SST rise.  The ecological effects were evaluated 
by indices of ecosystem function and commercial gain. 
 
The case studies presented during this workshop indicated 
the variety of approaches (and variations on similar 
approaches) for evaluating the impacts of climate change 
on marine life, biological communities, and ecosystem 
functions.  Although the approaches appeared to be 
coordinated within communities of modellers, coordination 
was lacking at the global level.  Most, if not all, of the 
presenters expressed the need to develop these approaches 
further, and there appeared to be consensus among 
participants that an international collaboration would be a 
good way to do this.  A global coordination of teams and 
collaborators may prove to be a critical vehicle to use the 
increasingly refined physical and chemical projections 
from GCMs and regional models to evaluate impacts of 
climate change on the world’s marine fisheries and 
ecosystems.  The workshop described in this article may 
have been a key first step toward such a global 
collaboration.
 
 
Thomas Okey is a Pew Fellow in Marine Conservation with a focus on assessing the impacts of climate 
change on marine life and ecosystems in the contexts of fisheries and other anthropogenic stressors.  He 
is the Scientist-in-Residence at Bamfield Marine Sciences Centre on Vancouver Island, Canada, and an 
Adjunct Professor in the School of Environmental Studies at the University of Victoria, Canada.  He 
holds a B.S. in Biology and Environmental Studies from Saint Lawrence University in Canton, New 
York; a M.S. in Marine Science from Moss Landing Marine Laboratories; and a Ph.D. in Zoology from 
the University of British Columbia.  He is the founder and Science Director of the Conservation Science 
Institute, which provides conservation science networking and communication. 
 
Anne Hollowed is a Senior Scientist at the NOAA’s Alaska Fisheries Science Center, in Seattle, U.S.A.  
She holds a M.S. in Oceanography from Old Dominion University, and a Ph.D. in Fisheries from the 
University of Washington.  She is an Affiliate Associate Professor at the University of Washington and a 
Fellow of the Cooperative Institute for Arctic Research at the University of Alaska.  Anne has served on 
panels for U.S. GLOBEC, PICES CCCC, the North Pacific Research Board, and Comparative Analysis 
of Marine Ecosystem Organization, and is a member of the Scientific and Statistical Committee of the 
North Pacific Fisheries Management Council. 
 
Michael Schirripa has worked in fisheries science since 1985 for the U.S. Peace Corps, U.S. Forest 
Service, U.S. Fish & Wildlife, U.S. Parks, and NOAA Fisheries.  He earned a B.S. from Michigan State 
University in fisheries and wildlife and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in biology from Florida International 
University.  Michael is a member of PICES Fishery Science Committee and is on the Steering 
Committee of NOAA’s Fisheries and the Environment (FATE) Program.  Michael recently moved from 
the NOAA’s Northwest Fisheries Science Center in Newport, Oregon, to the NOAA’s Southeast 
Fisheries Science Center in Miami, Florida. 
  
Appendix 6  PICES Press articles  
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  167 
2008 PICES Workshop on “Climate Scenarios for Ecosystem Modeling (II)” 
 
by Michael Foreman, Anne Hollowed and Suam Kim 
 
A key component of FUTURE (an acronym for Forecasting 
and Understanding Trends, Uncertainty and Responses of 
North Pacific Marine Ecosystems), the new over-arching 
science program within PICES, is understanding and 
communicating the impacts of climate change on North 
Pacific marine ecosystems.  Whereas FUTURE’s 
predecessor, the Climate Change and Carrying Capacity 
(CCCC) Program, focussed primarily on past climate 
change effects, this new program will have a stronger 
emphasis on future changes, and thus rely heavily on the 
global climate model projections described in the Fourth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC).  Toward that end, the CFAME 
(Climate Forcing and Marine Ecosystems) Task Team of 
the CCCC Program has laid some of the groundwork for 
FUTURE by collaborating with the Working Group on 
Evaluations of Climate Change Projections (WG 20) in 
analysing downscaled atmospheric and physical 
oceanographic projected changes from a suite of global 
climate models to determine their impact on states of three 
North Pacific ecosystems:  the California Current System, 
the Kuroshio/Oyashio System, and the Yellow and East 
China Seas System (see PICES Press, Vol. 16, No. 2, for 
the summary of their April 2008 workshop).  A joint 
workshop of these two groups on “Climate scenarios for 
ecosystem modeling (I)” took place at the 2007 PICES 
Annual Meeting in Victoria, Canada, and a follow-up  
1.5-day workshop, jointly organized by CFAME, WG 20, 
and a prospective new ICES/PICES Working Group on 
Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish and 
Shellfish, was held at the 2008 PICES Annual Meeting in 
Dalian, China.  This article summarizes some highlights of 
this second workshop that was co-convened by Michael 
Foreman, Anne Hollowed, Suam Kim, and Gordon 
McFarlane. 
 
The workshop opened with an invited presentation by 
Thomas Okey (Pew Fellow in Marine Conservation) on the 
challenge of forecasting changes to marine biota and 
fisheries in the year 2035.  He summarized discussions 
from, and collaborations established at, a workshop 
preceding the conference on “The Effects of climate change 
on the world’s oceans” held in Gijón, Spain, in May 2008, 
and outlined the motivation for the new ICES/PICES 
Working Group that is being led by Anne Hollowed.  The 
next two speakers, James Overland and Young-Shil Kang 
gave updates of their work relevant to the CFAME terms of 
reference.  In particular, Jim stressed that among the 22 
global climate models that he and his colleagues Muyin 
Wang and Nicholas Bond investigated, no one model was 
uniformly best in capturing all the important oceanic 
features in the North Pacific.  However, he did show a 
“wall of fame/shame” table rating model relative 
performance and indicated a group of approximately six 
models that gave generally acceptable results over a standard 
evaluation period, and that should be used in future ensemble 
estimates of climate change in the North Pacific. 
 
Five out of the next six presentations were progress updates 
given by WG 20 members.  Yasuhiro Yamanaka described 
recent results received with the COCO-NEMURO coupled 
biophysical climate model for the Kuroshio/Oyashio 
region.  Emanuele Di Lorenzo gave a preview of his 
subsequent award-winning Science Board presentation 
describing his North Pacific Gyre Oscillation (NPGO) 
analysis of variability in North Pacific sea surface 
elevations and its links with ENSO signals.  Jim Christian 
described the development of a carbon cycle component 
within the next generation of the Canadian Global Climate 
Model.  Enrique Curchitser showed preliminary results of 
improved upwelling arising from embedding and fully 
coupling his 10-km regional ROMS model for the 
Northeast Pacific within the NCAR global climate model.  
Michael Foreman described wind downscaling results and 
new regional climate and ecosystem model initiatives in 
Canadian waters.  Within these updates, Qigeng Zhao 
described his simulations of acidification in the Pacific. 
 
The remaining presentations provided information on 
efforts to forecast the implications of climate change on 
fish and shellfish in the North Pacific.  Anne Hollowed 
discussed a framework for making forecasts by using 
statistical methods to select credible IPCC models and 
extract their expected forcing.  This forcing could then be 
incorporated into statistical age-structured models to 
project impacts on commercial fish populations.  Gordon 
Kruse presented a qualitative method that could be used to 
forecast climate change impacts on red king crab stocks in 
the Eastern Bering Sea.  Suam Kim talked about the 
response of Korean chub mackerel populations to climate 
forcing, showing that salinity is significantly correlated to 
year-class strength and suggesting that shifts in transport 
may play a key role in recruitment variability of this stock.  
Michio Kishi examined the role of climate variability on 
the growth of salmon, pollock and squid in the 
northwestern Pacific using a bio-energetic model.  
Preliminary results of this study suggest that chum salmon 
may not survive in waters off Hokkaido in 2100.  Richard 
Beamish gave two talks on the impact of climate change on 
salmon stocks in British Columbia.  His first talk showed 
that poor marine survivial of chinook salmon in the Strait 
of Georgia appears to be related to reduced growth 
resulting from a declining carrying capacity in the area, 
while his second talk compared two sockeye salmon runs 
that exhibited different population trends.  As was the case 
in the first talk, the different trends appear to be related to 
the spatial distribution of food and the behaviour of 
juvenile salmon. 
PICES Press articles  Appendix 6 
168  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
The final half-day of the workshop was devoted to 
discussions on the proposed new ICES/PICES Working 
Group on Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish 
and Shellfish (WGFCCIFS).  Manuel Barange, one of the 
ICES Co-Chairs for this group, provided an overview of 
ICES-community interest in this effort and noted that ICES 
had already approved the formation of WGFCCIFS and its 
terms of reference.  Individuals from PICES member 
countries identified several research programs that would 
contribute to the activities of the working group. 
 
The participants discussed the rationale for start and end 
dates of 2035 and 2100, respectively, for the investigations.  
The former date was selected because it is the projected 
time when the climate change signal will begin to 
overwhelm the interannual and interdecadal signal in the 
North Pacific.  The end date was selected because after it, 
forecasts will be heavily dependent on which particular 
IPCC emission scenario is chosen for predicting the rate of 
greenhouse gas build-up in the atmosphere.  Mikhail 
Stepanenko noted that managers are most interested in 
forecasting future fish populations over short time 
horizons, and therefore, we should not ignore any efforts to 
also improve short-term projections.  A clear linkage 
between short-term and long-term projections will be 
model validation activities.  By examining the performance 
of projections in the short-term, analysts should be able to 
quantify expected inaccuracies associated with the long-
term projections. 
 
Different frameworks for delivering IPCC model output 
were discussed.  It was agreed that the ideal framework 
would be one where oceanographers and climatologists 
from each member nation work with their biologists and 
modellers to develop relevant forecasts.  However, it was 
noted that James Overland, Muyin Wang, and Nicholas 
Bond from the Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory 
would be willing to assist various groups, when necessary 
and as time permits. 
 
The participants had a lively discussion of the topic of 
communicating uncertainty.  George Sugihara mentioned 
that forecasting is a complicated science and that there is a 
variety of analytical tools that have been developed for the 
business community which could be applied here.  Jake Rice 
noted that the issue of communicating uncertainty requires 
that we identify the stakeholders who might be interested in 
our forecasts.  It was noted that the advice of PICES and 
ICES on the future status of marine resources around the 
world could be used to address the following issues: 
 global food security; 
 implications on northward shifts in stocks on 
managing domestic fisheries, including shifts in the 
locations of fishes (e.g., sardines, hake) and rights-
based (communities and businesses) solutions; 
 new fisheries in the north (especially for Canada, 
Russia and U.S.A.); 
 assessing species and populations at risk (what are 
appropriate recovery targets for species in a changing 
world?). 
 
Patricio Bernal (Intergovernmental Oceanographic 
Commission of UNESCO) indicated that his organization 
would be very interested in this new ICES/PICES effort.  It 
was agreed that potential collaborations with IOC, FAO 
and other organizations would be investigated. 
 
 
Dr. Michael Foreman (mike.foreman@dfo-mpo.gc.ca) is a physical oceanographer and numerical modeller for Fisheries and Oceans 
Canada at the Institute of Ocean Sciences in Sidney, British Columbia.  His research interests include coastal circulation and river 
modelling, biological transport, tidal analysis, and climate change.  Within PICES, he has been Chairman of the Physical Oceanography 
and Climate Committee since 2005, and Co-Chairman of Working Group 20 on Evaluations of Climate Change Projections since 2006. 
Dr. Anne Hollowed (anne.hollowed@noaa.gov) is a Senior Scientist at the NOAA’s Alaska Fisheries Science Center, in Seattle, U.S.A.  
She holds a M.S. in Oceanography from Old Dominion University, and a Ph.D. in Fisheries from the University of Washington.  She is 
an Affiliate Associate Professor at the University of Washington and a Fellow of the Cooperative Institute for Arctic Research at the 
University of Alaska.  Anne has served on panels for U.S. GLOBEC, PICES CCCC, the North Pacific Research Board, and Comparative 
Analysis of Marine Ecosystem Organization, and is a member of the Scientific and Statistical Committee of the North Pacific Fisheries 
Management Council. 
Dr. Suam Kim (suamkim@pknu.ac.kr) received his B.Sc. (1976) and M.Sc. (1979) from the Seoul National University and his Ph.D. in 
Fisheries Oceanography from the University of Washington in 1987.  Currently, he is a Professor of the Pukyong National University, 
Busan, Korea.  His areas of interest include fisheries ecology, especially recruitment variability focusing on early life histories of fish in 
relation to oceanic/climate changes.  Suam represented Korea on several international organizations/programs such as PICES, 
GLOBEC, CCAMLR, IGBP, NPAFC and SCAR.  Currently, he serves as President of NPAFC. 
Appendix 6  PICES Press articles  
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  169 
2010 Symposium on “Effects of Climate Change on Fish and Fisheries” 
 
by Anne B. Hollowed, Manuel Barange, Shin-ichi Ito, Suam Kim, and Harald Loeng 
 
The North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES), 
International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES) 
and Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) held an 
international symposium on “Climate change effects on fish 
and fisheries: Forecasting impacts, assessing ecosystem 
responses and evaluating management strategies” from 
April 26–29, 2010, in Sendai, Japan, with co-authors of this 
article serving as symposium convenors.  Unfortunately, 
Drs. Manuel Barange (UK) and Harald Loeng (Norway), as 
well as Dr. Kenneth Drinkwater (Norway; theme session 
convenor), were unable to attend the meeting because of 
the eruption of Mount Eyjafjallajökull in Iceland.  Three 
more (out of 23) theme session convenors were unable to 
participate due to unexpected illnesses.  Even though these 
were notable absences, the symposium was still considered a 
grand success. 
 
The symposium was the culmination of the planning and 
preparation of PICES and ICES.  In recognition that climate 
change impacts on marine ecosystems will not be limited to 
one region of the globe, these two organizations formed in 
2009 the first joint Working Group on Forecasting Climate 
Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish (WG-FCCIFS).  One 
of the priority tasks for WG-FCCIFS was to convene a 
symposium to provide a venue for the exchange of scientific 
information and the discussion of the issues and challenges 
related to predicting the future impacts of climate change 
on the world’s marine ecosystems.  The symposium in 
Sendai was the product of this effort. 
 
The symposium was designed to provide an opportunity for 
scientists and policymakers to discuss the potential impacts 
of climate change on marine ecosystems, and our use of the 
resources provided by these ecosystems.  During the 
meeting, we considered strategies that society can take to 
be prepared for anticipated impacts on fish and fisheries.  A 
key element was the desire to publish selected papers from 
the symposium, with sufficient time for them to be 
considered by review panels responsible for the Fifth 
Assessment Report (AR5) of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC) and by other review bodies, 
such as the Millennium Report of the United Nations 
Development Program. 
 
The response to this symposium exceeded our expectations, 
with more than 350 abstracts submitted by scientists from 
over 40 countries.  After the final tally, 337 scientists from 
37 countries were in attendance.  A total of 208 oral 
presentations and 105 posters were presented. 
 
During the symposium, the global significance of the issues 
was highlighted in many discussions and presentations.  It 
was a great satisfaction for the convenors to see scientists 
from around the world debating the issues stemming from 
climate change impacts on marine ecosystems.  Sound 
scientific advice on the expected impacts of climate change 
requires the international research community to work 
together in an interdisciplinary research setting to identify, 
forecast, and assess strategies to respond to the impacts of 
climate change on fish and fisheries.  The symposium provided 
this type of interdisciplinary exchange of information. 
 
 
President of the Fisheries Research Agency of Japan, Dr. Toshihiko 
Matsusato, preparing to register for the symposium. 
 
The symposium was arranged around 10 theme sessions, 
with 6 workshops preceding the meeting (summary reports 
from 5 workshops are included elsewhere in this issue of 
PICES Press).  These sessions and workshops encompassed 
a broad range of topics that provided a global perspective on 
climate change and the future of the world’s fish and fisheries. 
 
Day 1 started with presentations by four plenary speakers:  
Drs. Kevin Trenberth (National Center for Atmospheric 
Research, U.S.A.), Akihiko Yatsu (Seikai National Fisheries 
Research Institute, Japan), Eddie Allison (WorldFish 
Center, Malaysia) and Ussif Rashid Sumaila (University of 
British Columbia, Canada). 
 
The themes for Day 1 included: 
 Forecasting impacts: From climate to fish (co-chaired 
by Kenneth Drinkwater, Harald Loeng, Franz Mueter, 
Carl O’Brien, Graham Philling and Yashuhiro Yamanaka); 
 Forecasting impacts: From fish to markets (co-chaired 
by Manuel Barange, Jacquelynne King, Ian Perry and 
Adolf Kellermann); 
 Species-specific responses: Changes in growth, 
reproductive success, mortality, spatial distribution 
and adaptation (co-chaired by Richard Beamish, Myron 
Peck and Motomitsu Takahashi). 
PICES Press articles  Appendix 6 
170  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
 
Symposium in session. 
 
The themes for Day 2 were: 
 Downscaling variables from global models (co-chaired 
by Michael Foreman and Jason Holt); 
 Assessing ecosystem responses: Impacts on community 
structure, biodiversity, energy flow and carrying capacity 
(co-chaired by Thomas Okey and Akihiko Yatsu); 
 Species-specific responses: Changes in growth, 
reproductive success, mortality, spatial distribution 
and adaptation (continued from the previous day); 
 
The themes for Day 3 focused on: 
 Comparing responses of climate variability among 
nearshore, shelf and oceanic regions (co-chaired by 
Jurgen Alheit, Jae Bong Lee and Vladimir Radchenko); 
 Impacts on fisheries and coastal communities (co-
chaired by Eddie Allison, Keith Brander and Suam Kim); 
 Evaluating human responses, management strategies 
and economic implications (co-chaired by Tarub 
Bahri, Kevern Cochrane and Jake Rice); 
 Contemporary and next generation climate and 
oceanographic models, technical advances and new 
approaches (co-chaired by Jonathan Hare and Shin-
ichi Ito). 
 
The final half-day session on “Sustainable strategies in a 
warming climate” (co-chaired by Anne Hollowed and Michael 
Schirripa) was held in plenary.  Dr. Steve Murawski provided 
a summary of first impressions from the symposium.  He 
identified many issues for participants to consider (Fig. 1). 
 
It is impossible to summarize all of the exciting outcomes 
and research findings that were revealed during the 
symposium in a short article for the PICES Press.  Thus, 
Table 1 includes the selection of key outcomes from the 
plenary and theme sessions that provide a glimpse of the 
broad scope of issues discussed during the meeting. 
43
GHG-CO
2
Enrichment
Ocean
Acidification
Warming
Sea Ice
Sea Level
Rise
Fresh
Water
Habitat
Loss
Other
Coastal
Sectors
Resiliency of
Ecosystems and
Coastal Communities
Estuarine
Dependent
Fisheries
productivity
distribution
phenology
productivity
Climate-Related
Issues for Fisheries
 
Fig. 1 Summary of climate-related issues for fisheries: smiling symbol 
indicates that substantial research is currently underway on this 
issue, open red circle indicates some research has been initiated 
on this subject, crossed red circles indicate that additional work 
is needed on this subject area (prepared by Dr. Steve Murawski). 
 
Dr. Steve Murawski, Director of Scientific Programs and Chief Science 
Advisor for NOAA Fisheries, offering his impressions from the symposium. 
 
Appendix 6  PICES Press articles  
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  171 
 Table 1.  Summary of key outcomes from the symposium 
1 Long-term ocean monitoring programs are needed to track and understand ecosystem and climate change as they 
occur. 
2 Networks of shelf-seas ecosystem models have already been developed within several of the world’s LMEs.  
These models provide a basis for examining structural uncertainty within shelf sea ecosystem models (Fig. 2). 
3 Three sources of uncertainty in Global Ocean Models (GOMs) are under investigation: (1) parameter uncertainty, 
(2) structural uncertainty, and (3) scenario uncertainty.  Parameter uncertainty is being addressed to some degree 
with sensitivity tests; structural uncertainly is being explored via comparison of different coupled physical-
biological models; and scenario uncertainty related to greenhouse gas emissions and economics can only be dealt 
with by using ensemble model sets. 
4 There are five approaches to predicting the effects of climate change on fish and fisheries: (a) conceptual 
predictions, (b) inferences from laboratory studies, (c) statistical downscaling from GOM to the regional scale;  
(d) dynamic downscaling to regional ocean models; (e) whole earth system models.  Each approach has strengths 
and weaknesses. 
5 Fisheries oceanography and laboratory studies are critical to integrating biological and oceanographic models, 
evaluating species environmental tolerances and adaptation, and tracking species responses to long-term ecosystem 
and climate change as it occurs. 
6 Models that couple marine social and economic responses are needed to evaluate management strategies; however, 
few examples exist (Fig. 3). 
7 Issues of food security and marine conservation may require new approaches to satisfy the growing demand for 
marine resources. 
8 Two-way communication is needed between scientists and stakeholders to develop meaningful scenarios on 
human responses to the impact of ecosystem and climate change. 
 
 
Fig. 2 The QUEST_FISH regional modeling domains (resolution 0.1 
deg) defined by the 800 m contour plus 200 km of open ocean.  
The colors indicate that the models are regional and are only 
coupled through boundary conditions (Barange et al.; In: Ommer 
et al., Coping with climate change in marine socio-ecological 
systems. Blackwell FAR Series, in press). 
 
The session on “Forecasting impacts: From climate to 
fish” consisted of 20 oral presentations and 19 posters, 
including invited talks by Drs. Kevin Trenberth, Akihiko 
Yatsu and Randall Peterman (Simon Fraser University, 
Canada).  Dr. Trenberth provided an overview of the 
Earth’s climate system and presented unequivocal evidence 
that humans are warming the world’s atmosphere and 
oceans.  He emphasized the importance of changes in the 
extremes rather than in mean climate states.  Dr. Yatsu 
noted the need for interdisciplinary collaboration to 
incorporate the effects of climate forcing at different life stages 
when modeling impacts on marine fishes.  Dr. Peterman  
 
discussed the major sources of uncertainty when 
forecasting climate effects, highlighting the importance of 
structural model uncertainty, which can only be addressed 
by considering multiple alternative models.  He emphasized 
that inadequate communication among scientists, decision 
makers, and stakeholders can be a potentially important 
and poorly understood source of uncertainty.  A key 
contribution of this session was the review of a variety of 
frameworks and methodologies employed for forecasting 
the effects of climate change on fish and fisheries.  The 
majority of papers generated quantitative forecasts of 
future productivity or distribution of selected species based 
on the output of one or more global circulation models 
(GCMs).  Based on GCMs, the approaches can be divided 
into global-scale static models, global-scale dynamic models, 
dynamic downscaling approaches, and statistical downscaling 
approaches.  Other approaches did not produce quantitative 
forecasts but aimed at predicting the likely direction of 
future changes under global warming based on 
understanding the mechanisms that relate productivity of 
key species to climate variability.  The comparative 
approach was similarly employed to better understand the 
mechanisms that favor different species during warm and 
cold periods.  Statistical time series analyses were used to 
better assess past variability in climate and biological 
populations as an aid in understanding future variability, 
but forecasting future responses based on past patterns of 
variability is fraught with difficulties.  Finally, some 
presentations highlighted the importance of field and 
laboratory studies to help estimate vital rates for fishes, 
which are needed to elucidate and quantify important 
mechanisms and to support modeling efforts. 
PICES Press articles  Appendix 6 
172  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
The session on “Forecasting impacts: From fish to markets” 
consisted of 8 oral presentations, including invited talks by 
Drs. Eddie Allison and Rashid Sumaila.  A key outcome of 
this session was the recognition that climate–fish–people 
models are beginning to be constructed, but are still in their 
early stages.  Simpler (statistical) models which identify 
present fishing habitats and use of these to project fishing 
locations with future climate conditions are more common, 
and were included as the bases in most of the presentations 
in this session.  This type of model often uses simple 
parameters such as SST.  Future developments are needed 
to incorporate at least oxygen and temperatures at depth.  
Models of societal responses have many uncertainties, 
including how information is transferred within communities, 
and how human behavior responds to changing pressures. 
 
The session on “Downscaling variables from global 
models” consisted of 13 oral presentations and 1 poster, 
including invited talks by Drs. J. Icarus Allen (Plymouth 
Marine Laboratory, UK) and Muyin Wang (Joint Institute 
for the Study of Atmosphere and Ocean, University of 
Washington, U.S.A.).  This session focused on the 
techniques for estimating and communicating uncertainty 
in forecasts.  Dr. Wang presented a framework for selecting 
scenarios for the Arctic and showed the importance of 
using models that address seasonal changes.  Dr. Allen 
reviewed the different sources of uncertainty in climate 
models and outlined methods for estimating these 
uncertainties.  He decomposed uncertainty into three 
categories: parameter uncertainty, structural uncertainty, 
and scenario uncertainty.  The first one can be addressed by 
series of sensitivity tests that alter parameter values through 
a reasonable range.  The second refers to the specific nature 
of the model, particularly the biogeochemical component, 
and could be explored, for example, by coupling biological 
models with differing complexity to the same physical 
model and examining the range and accuracy of the results.  
In the context of climate projections, the third refers to 
uncertainties in greenhouse gas emissions and can only be 
dealt with by computing ensembles that cover a range of 
plausible states. 
 
The session on “Species-specific responses: Changes in 
growth, reproductive success, mortality, spatial distribution 
and adaptation” consisted of 28 oral presentations and 40 
posters, including invited talks by Drs. Hans-Otto Pörtner 
(Alfred-Wegener-Institute, Germany) and John Pinnegar 
(Centre for Environment, Fisheries, and Aquaculture 
Science, UK).  This session focused on the response of key 
fish species and fisheries worldwide to climate change.  
Presentations documented historical, often long-term 
fluctuations in abundance and distribution, discussed 
processes underlying current changes, and/or projected 
future impacts in light of adaptive capacity using a number 
of approaches.  The research utilized a variety of 
methodological approaches.  Most studies included topics 
such as observed and/or projected changes in distribution 
and/or productivity.  A key outcome was the observation 
that quantitative evidence linking physiological responses 
to ecosystem change in various climate scenarios is scarce.  
Patterns identified in long-term field data or via macro-
physiology and meta-analyses using various statistical tools 
are not sufficient to understand climate effects because the 
fundamental, underlying physical mechanisms are lacking.  
The session also revealed that additional research is needed 
to improve our understanding of the adaptive capacity of 
species to environmental change.  Dr. Pörtner provided one 
example of the study type required.  He reviewed the 
physiologically underpinnings that define tolerable marine 
habitats in fish and invertebrates, including expected 
cellular-level changes in metabolic scope via changes in 
oxygen and capacity-limited thermal tolerance.  He also 
highlighted changes in ocean pH and the need to examine 
interactive effects of multiple stressors on vital rates. 
 
The session on “Assessing ecosystem responses: Impacts 
on community structure, biodiversity, energy flow and 
carrying capacity” included 27 oral presentations and 15 
posters.  The invited speakers were Drs. Beth Fulton 
(CSIRO Marine and Atmospheric Research, Australia) and 
Jeffery Polovina (NOAA’s Pacific Island Fisheries Science 
Center, U.S.A.).  This session addressed the challenges 
involved in assessing the effects of climate change on 
marine ecosystems.  A key outcome was the recognition 
that ecosystem models have been developed for many of 
the shelf-sea systems around the globe, and this network of 
models provides a foundation for examining shifts in the 
boundaries and structure of marine ecosystems. 
 
The session on “Comparing responses to climate variability 
among nearshore, shelf and oceanic regions” included 15 
oral presentations and 14 posters.  The invited speakers 
were Drs. Nicholas Dulvy (Simon Fraser University, 
Canada) and Svein Sundby (Institute of Marine Research, 
Norway).  Unfortunately, Dr. Sundby was unable to attend 
due to the eruption of the volcano in Iceland.  Dr. Dulvy 
discussed climate impacts on Caribbean coral reefs and 
North Sea fishes.  He demonstrated that Caribbean coral 
reef cover is at an all time low, and that the associated 
collapse in architectural complexity has led to severe 
habitat loss for coral reef fishes and resulted in declines in 
fish abundance.  Warming of the North Sea has affected 
fish distribution and has led to range extensions of southern 
and range contractions of northern species.  This session 
provided several case studies, showing the implications of 
climate change on near shore and oceanic regions. 
 
The session on “Impacts on fisheries and coastal communities” 
consisted of 13 oral presentations and 11 posters.  The 
invited speakers were Drs. Ian Perry (Pacific Biological 
Station, Canada) and Tarub Bahri (Food and Agriculture 
Organization).  Dr. Perry reviewed the bio-physical, as well 
as human, drivers of changes in marine social-ecological 
systems and noted that we need to promote capabilities for 
Appendix 6  PICES Press articles  
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  173 
observing, assessing, and adapting marine social-ecological 
systems to environmental changes to improve our ability to 
forecast the future impacts of climate change (Fig. 3). 
 
 
Fig. 3 Coupled marine social-ecological systems (Perry et al., 2010; In: 
Barange et al., Marine ecosystems and global change. OUP). 
 
The session on “Evaluating human responses, management 
strategies and economic implications” included 13 oral 
presentations and 7 posters.  The invited speakers were 
Drs. Johann Bell (Secretariat of the Pacific Community, 
New Caledonia) and Bonnie McCay (Rutgers University, 
U.S.A.).  This session addressed a broad spectrum of studies 
that demonstrated how communities were influenced and 
adapted to change in the ecosystem.  An important theme 
in many talks was underlined by Dr. McCay that despite 
rhetoric, people have not been treated as truly part of 
marine ecosystems in much research and policy. 
 
The session on “Contemporary and next generation climate 
and oceanographic models, technical advances and new 
approaches” consisted of 13 oral presentations and 6 posters, 
including invited talks by Drs. Anand Gnanadesikan 
(NOAA’s Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory, U.S.A.) 
and Michio Kawamiya (JAMSTEC’s Frontier Research 
Center for Global Change, Japan).  Dr. Kawamiya outlined 
the IPCC AR5 modeling plan and challenges to reduce 
uncertainty of future prediction, which arises from the 
initial condition, by applying data assimilation for the 
ocean part of the climate models.  Dr. Gnanadesikan 
showed, as an example, a state-of-the-art earth system 
modeling which covers from climate to biochemical 
systems.  This session provided an overview of the new 
modeling approaches currently under development and 
many of the presentations pointed out the difficulty of 
evaluation of complex state-of-the-art models.  Continuing 
efforts to develop observational networks were 
emphasized. 
 
The session on “Sustainable strategies in a warming climate” 
consisted of 9 oral presentations and 1 poster, including 
invited talks by Drs. Éva Plagányi (CSIRO Marine and 
Atmospheric Research, Australia) and Chang- Ik Zhang 
(Pukyong National University, Korea).  This session focused 
on examples of management strategies that could be applied 
to sustain fisheries under a changing climate and techniques 
for assessing and forecasting the performance of harvest 
policies under changing climate.  A key outcome was the 
need for two-way communication between scientists and 
stakeholders to develop meaningful scenarios on human 
responses to the impact of ecosystem and climate change. 
 
The poster session, held over 2 evenings in the beautiful 
Sakura Hall, generated a lot of interest and resulted in 
many fruitful interactions. 
 
 
 
Bottom left to right: Drs. Chang-Ik Zhang, Brian Rothschild and 
Takashige Sugimoto. 
PICES Press articles  Appendix 6 
174  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
  
  
Early career scientists, (top left) Jörn Schmidt (Germany), (top right) Mega Laksmini Syamsuddin (Indonesia), (bottom left) Felipe Hurtado-Ferro 
(Columbia) accepting best poster award certificates from the symposium convenors; (bottom right) Dr. Yasuhiro Yamanaka accepting a certificate for 
Taketo Hashioka (Japan). 
 
Posters, prepared by early career scientists, were evaluated 
during the symposium for excellence, and the recipients of 
these awards were: 
 Jörn O. Schmidt (IFM-GEOMAR, Germany) for his 
paper on “The rise and fall of snake pipefish (Entelurus 
aequoreus L.) off North Scotland”; 
 Taketo Hashioka (JAMSTEC, Japan) for his paper on 
“Potential impact of global warming on North Pacific 
spring blooms projected by an eddy-permitting 3-D 
ocean ecosystem model”; 
 Mega Laksmini Syamsuddin (Hokkaido University, 
Japan/Indonesia) for her paper on “Regional climate 
change impacts on bigeye tuna (Thunnus obesus) catch 
in the Indonesian Seas”; 
 Felipe Hurtado-Ferro (University of Tokyo, Japan/ 
Columbia) for his paper titled “Could management 
react to a changing climate? The case of the Japanese 
small pelagic fishes”. 
 
During the symposium, a press interview booth was set up 
and selected experts had an opportunity to directly communicate 
their findings and thoughts at daily press conferences with 
the regional and national media (press and TV) on how 
climate change affects fish and fisheries.  For the press 
conferences, an English/Japanese brochure was prepared 
which included summaries of the experts’ presentations 
and selected figures.  This brochure helped to encourage 
the communication with the public.  An enlarged poster of 
the brochure pages was also displayed at the booth.  The 
symposium was covered on two TV media outlets and by 
six newspapers. 
 
On the day after the symposium, Drs. Anne Hollowed, Shin-
ichi Ito and Akihiko Yatsu reported on the outcomes from 
the symposium at a public seminar held at the Sendai City 
Information and Industrial Plaza located next to the Sendai 
Station.  A 4-page Japanese leaflet which contained a brief 
summary of the symposium was provided to the attendees.  
This leaflet was also distributed to policy-makers, members 
of Japan Fisheries Cooperatives and Japan Fisheries Industry 
Cooperatives. 
 
The symposium was made possible by the hard work of the 
local organizers and professionals at the PICES and ICES 
Secretariats, by the hospitality of the people of Sendai, and 
by the generous financial support from our sponsors.  In 
addition to primary international (PICES, ICES and FAO) 
and local (Fisheries Research Agency of Japan and Hokkaido  
Appendix 6  PICES Press articles  
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  175 
 
 
 
Drs. Akinori Takasuka (top), Michio Kawamiya (middle) and Icarus Allen 
(bottom) briefing reporters on science matters at a daily press conference 
conducted by Japanese media. 
 
Grouped, left to right: Drs. Akihiko Yatsu, Anne Hollowed and Shin-ichi 
Ito describing the outcomes of the symposium to the audience at a public 
seminar, with moderator, Dr. Katsumi Yokouchi (far left), looking on. 
University Global Center of Excellence Program) sponsors, 
the following agencies and organizations made financial 
contributions to the symposium: 
• Fisheries and Oceans Canada (DFO) 
• Integrated Climate System Analysis and Prediction, 
Germany (CLISAP) 
• Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) 
• International Pacific Halibut Commission (IPHC) 
• Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) 
• Korea Ocean Research and Development Institute 
(KORDI) 
• Australia National Climate Change Adaptation 
Research Facility (NCCARF) 
• Japan National Institute of Environmental Studies (NIES) 
• National Marine Fisheries Service of NOAA (NMFS) 
• North Pacific Anadromous Fish Commission (NPAFC) 
• North Pacific Research Board (NPRB) 
• Pacific Salmon Foundation (PSF) 
• Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research (SCOR) 
• Sendai Tourism and Convention Bureau (STCB) 
• World Bank (WB) 
 
 
Without the funds these organizations provided, it would 
have been impossible to achieve the aim of convening a 
symposium of global scope.  These funds allowed the 
support of 67 early career scientists and scientists from 
developing countries. 
 
Immediately after the symposium, WG-FCCIFS members 
met to develop a report that will summarize the outcomes 
of the symposium.  This report will be finalized over the 
summer and presented to ICES and PICES this fall.  At this 
meeting, an agreement was reached to propose a Theme 
Session, tentatively titled “Climate change effects on fisheries: 
Physics-fish-markets”, to be convened at the Second 
PICES/ICES/IOC Symposium on “Effects of climate change 
on the world’s oceans”.  This symposium will be held from 
May 14–18, 2012, in Yeosu (Korea), as one of the official 
events related to the World Ocean Expo-2012.  If accepted, 
we will strive to ensure that the PICES and ICES 
communities remain engaged in studies on the effects of 
climate change on fish and fisheries well into the future. 
PICES Press articles  Appendix 6 
176  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
 
Dr. Anne Hollowed (Anne.Hollowed@noaa.gov) is a Senior Scientist with the U.S. National 
Marine Fisheries Service’s Alaska Fisheries Science Center.  She conducts research on the effects 
of climate and ecosystem change on fish and fisheries and leads the Status of Stocks and 
Multispecies Assessment (SSMA) program (http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/REFM/Stocks/default.php).  
Anne serves as Co-Chairman of the ICES/PICES Working Group on Forecasting Climate Change 
Impacts on Fish and Shellfish.  She is also a lead author of Chapter 28, Polar Regions, of the 
Working Group II contribution to the Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).  Anne is an Affiliate Professor with the School of Fisheries and 
Aquatic Sciences at the University of Washington.  She is a member of the NPFMC Scientific and 
Statistical Committee and the Fisheries and the Environment (FATE) Steering Committee. 
 
Dr. Manuel Barange (m.barange@pml.ac.uk) is Director of Science at the Plymouth Marine 
Laboratory (UK), and Chairman of the Scientific Committee of the International Council for the 
Exploration of the Sea (ICES).  His research interests are on the assessment of climate and 
anthropogenic impacts on marine ecosystems and their services, and on the interactions between 
natural and social sciences in fisheries, ecosystems and climate change.  Manuel is the Principal 
Investigator of the QUEST_Fish research programme (http://web.pml.ac.uk/quest-
fish/default.htm), and is particularly involved in the development of bioeconomic models of global 
fishmeal and fish oil, investigating the dual exposure of marine-based commodities to global 
environmental change and market developments.  Until recently, he was Director of the 
International Project Office of the IOC-SCOR-IGBP core project GLOBEC (Global Ocean 
Ecosystem Dynamics).  Manuel co-chairs the ICES/PICES Working Group on Forecasting Climate 
Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish and is a founding member of the Global Partnership for 
Climate, Fisheries and Aquaculture (PaCFA). 
 
Dr. Shin-ichi Ito (goito@affrc.go.jp) is Chief Scientist of the Physical Oceanography Section at the 
Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute of the Fisheries Research Agency of Japan.  Shin-
ichi completed his graduate work in physical oceanography at Hokkaido University and became an 
observational physical oceanographer at the institute.  His main field is the Oyashio Current and 
the mixed water region.  He has deployed more than 30 moorings and is handling a water glider.  
His research includes development of a fish growth model coupled to the lower trophic level 
ecosystem model NEMURO.FISH (North Pacific Ecosystem Model for Understanding Regional 
Oceanography.For Including Saury and Herring).  Shin-ichi co-chairs the ESSAS (Ecosystem 
Studies of Sub-Arctic Seas) Working Group on Modeling Ecosystem Response.  Within PICES, he 
serves on the Physical Oceanography and Climate Committee (POC), FUTURE Advisory Panel on 
Status, Outlooks, Forecasts, and Engagement (SOFE-AP), and ICES/PICES Working Group on 
Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish. 
 
Dr. Suam Kim (suamkim@pknu.ac.kr) received his B.Sc. (1976) and M.Sc. (1979) in 
Oceanography from Seoul National University and his Ph.D. (1987) in Fisheries Oceanography 
from the University of Washington. Currently, he is a Professor of the Pukyong National 
University, Busan, Korea.  His areas of interest include fisheries ecology, especially recruitment 
variability focusing on early life histories of fish in relation to oceanic/climate changes.  Suam has 
represented Korea in several international organizations and programs, such as PICES, GLOBEC, 
CCAMLR, IGBP, NPAFC and SCOR.  In PICES, he serves as Co-Chairman of the ICES/ICES 
Working Group on Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish. 
 
Dr. Harald Loeng (harald.loeng@imr.no) has been at the Institute of Marine Science, Norway, 
since 1976 and has been involved mainly in projects related to physical oceanographic processes 
in the Northern Seas, and relations between climate and fish population parameters.  Presently, 
Harald is responsible for the “Management and research programme on the Norwegian Sea 
ecosystem”.  He has been involved in several national and international organizations and 
committees.  He just left the position as Chairman of the Norwegian National Polar Research 
Committee.  Harald has been Vice-Chairman and Chairman of the Arctic Ocean Science Board 
and is the Norwegian member of the European Polar Board under the European Science 
Foundation where he is a member of the Executive Committee.  Within ICES, he is chairing both 
the Hydrography and Oceanography Committees.  He was Chairman of the Consultative 
Committee (2005–2008) and presently is Co-Chairman of the ICES/PICES Working Group on 
Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish. 
  
Appendix 6  PICES Press articles  
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  177 
2010 Sendai Ocean Acidification Workshop 
 
by Kenneth Denman, Yukihiro Nojiri and Hans-Otto Pörtner 
 
The oceans are becoming acidified as carbon dioxide from 
fossil fuel emissions enters surface ocean waters from the 
atmosphere.  Global surface pH has already decreased by 
more than 0.1 units, (IPCC WG1 AR4 Report, Chapter 5, 
2007), and may decrease by another 0.4 units by the end of 
this century under the high CO
2
 emission scenario.  Some 
regions of the ocean may have a significant decrease in the 
CaCO
3
 saturation state even with the same atmospheric 
CO
2
 change.  The key question that should be addressed in 
future studies on the effects of increasing PCO 2 in the ocean 
may be stated as:  What will be the responses and adaptive 
capacities of individual species and whole ecosystems to a 
multi-decadal decrease in pH of 0.1–0.5 units (Fig. 1)? 
 
A 1-day workshop on “Potential impacts of ocean acidification 
on marine ecosystems and fisheries”, co-convened by the 
authors of this article, was held immediately prior (April 
25, 2010) to the International Symposium on “Climate 
change effects on fish and fisheries” in Sendai, Japan.  
Talks and posters presented at the workshop reported on 
manipulation experiments and observations on the effects 
of elevated CO
2 
on organisms at all trophic levels of 
fisheries foodwebs, and modelling approaches to predict 
the impact of continuing increases in atmospheric CO
2
. 
 
The first talk (Denman et al.) presented observational 
evidence of open ocean increases in PCO 2 and decreases in 
pH, followed by model projections of global mean and 
spatial patterns of the decrease in pH until the end of this 
century.  Several talks and posters reported on studies of 
organisms with calcium carbonate skeletal structures subjected 
to various experimental exposures to low pH (high PCO 2) 
waters in controlled laboratory or field situations.  Other 
talks and posters described physiological and behavioural 
responses of animals to elevated CO
2
 conditions.  One poster 
evaluated the adequacy of a number of ecosystem models to 
simulate adaptation over long time scales to changes in 
CO
2
 (and other related variables) associated with climate 
change.  
 
Nakamura et al. reported on a depression of metabolism 
and growth in coral larvae with elevated CO
2
 levels.  
Similiary, Lartey-Antwi and Anderson found decreased 
growth rates of flat-tree oysters.  Suwa and Shirayama 
presented data obtained with a system precisely mimicking 
constant and fluctuating CO
2
 levels, where the fluctuating 
levels showed less impact on the growth and skeletal 
structures of echinoderm larvae than CO
2
 levels set 
permanently high.  Kurihara provided an overview on 
different levels of CO
2
 sensitivities according to taxon and 
in early life stages.  Ishimatsu et al., Munday et al. and 
Dissanayake et al. reported on changes in various processes 
indicating tolerance limits, decreased aerobic scope and 
behavioural changes in shrimp and young fish in response 
to elevated CO
2
 levels, with species-specific differences 
even among closely related fish species.  Salau introduced 
a model of reduced carrying capacity for pteropods as pH 
decreases, and the feedback effects on pink salmon: as a 
result, even and odd year differences in salmon stock size 
will increase over time with management implications for 
repeating strong and weak returns in alternating years.  
Rumrill et al. (poster) presented long term observations of 
an estuary showing decreasing pH and effects on oysters in 
the outer saline estuary and increasing pH probably 
resulting from changes in precipitation and freshwater 
runoff.  Takami et al. demonstrated how elevated CO
2
 
levels 
 
 
Fig. 1 Animal physiology and climate change showing (left panel) how the ‘thermal window’ for normal activity by marine animals may shrink with 
decreasing oxygen concentrations and increasing CO 2 concentrations, and (right panel) how the thermal window changes with life stage (from 
Pörtner and Farrell, 2008, Science, 322, 690–692). 
 
PICES Press articles  Appendix 6 
178  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
slow and disturb development in abalone, and Sugie et al. 
(poster) found enhanced drawdown in Si/N by Bering Sea 
phytoplankton as pH fell and Fe was limited.  Kim and 
Kim (poster) used brine shrimp as a model for identifying 
changes in the expression of individual genes during 
exposure to low pH.  Finally, Le Quesne and Pinnegar 
(poster) analyzed several ecosystem models, emphasizing 
that parameterizations of various physiological processes 
would be needed to support the evaluation of responses to 
changing pH. 
 
Noteworthy findings can be summarized as follows: 
 Overall, investigators are observing different 
sensitivity levels among investigated organisms (some 
closely related), ranging from calcification and growth 
to development, behaviours and ecosystem level 
responses.  The consideration and introduction of 
environmental variability changes the pattern and level 
of response.  In light of the complexity and diversity of 
responses observed, it is thus too early to draw general 
conclusions regarding the responses of ecosystems to 
elevated CO
2
. 
 The inclusion of pre-industrial levels (around 280 ppm 
CO
2
) in experimental protocols, as well as the precise 
control of diel CO
2
 cycling, was considered highly 
valuable in studying the impact of ocean acidification.  
In fact, one study reported improvement in calcified 
structures in echinoderm larvae under pre-industrial 
compared with present-day levels of ambient CO
2
.  
Investigations of mechanisms under high PCO 2 need be 
complemented by testing the role of such responses 
under expectable PCO 2 according to ocean acidification 
scenarios. 
 Studies of behavioural and physiological responses to 
elevated CO
2
 levels for organisms that are not 
necessarily calcifiers are less mature, but are exciting 
because so little is known. 
 
Recommendations and Key Questions from the workshop 
include: 
 Pre-industrial control runs should be done more often, 
since organisms have already adapted from that point. 
 Experiments often include current day PCO 2 (~380 ppm) 
and an elevated CO
2
 level of ~1000 ppm.  If emissions 
are controlled to try to achieve <3°C global warming, 
then intermediate levels of, say, 450, 550, and 700 ppm, 
have to be considered.  Both these recommendations 
require precise PCO 2 (pH) control. 
 
 Long period culture experiments/multi-generation 
studies are both needed to try to obtain information on 
long term adaptive capacity and evolutionary change, 
but are usually restricted to species with generation 
times of less than 1 year.  Comparisons of species from 
various climate regimes and CO
2
 environments may 
help to circumvent these constraints in long-lived species. 
 In experimental studies diel, seasonal and inter-annual 
variability of CO
2
 levels should be simulated, if 
relevant for the respective ecosystem.  Such experiments 
would be required to identify slow trends embedded in 
highly variable environments. 
 Population genetic and functional genomic analyses 
need to be applied more widely. 
 Models have to be examined as to whether they formulate 
physiological and behavioural processes that are 
dependent on changing environmental drivers such as 
PCO 2 or temperature. 
 Some aquaculture species respond differently than 
their “wild” counterparts.  Have they already become 
adapted to higher PCO 2, for example by being cultured 
in water supplied from depths below the mixed layer 
that already has elevated PCO 2 relative to the depths at 
which the wild populations live? 
 Can we learn from species already experiencing higher 
PCO 2 naturally?  For example some species of copepods 
and euphausiids migrate several hundreds of meters 
vertically on diel and seasonal timescales (diapause), 
where at depth they are exposed to PCO 2 levels of 500 
to 1000 ppm. 
 Very importantly, experimental protocols must include 
behavioural and physiological dependencies on 
multiple variables that we expect to change with the 
climate: PCO 2, dissolved oxygen, temperature, micro-
nutrients (Fe), etc. [e.g., see Fig. 1 showing a shrinking 
“thermal window” (aerobic scope – difference between 
maximal and resting metabolic rates) with decreasing 
O
2
 and increasing PCO 2 (and temperature?)]. 
 Sensitivities need to be systematically identified across 
taxa and in between species comparisons. 
 Through a combined experimental and modeling 
approach, can we start to evaluate possible changes in 
whole ecosystem structure resulting from the possible 
disappearance and replacement of key species? 
 
Appendix 6  PICES Press articles  
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  179 
   
Dr. Kenneth Denman (ken.denman@ec.gc.ca) is a Senior Scientist at the Institute of Ocean Sciences, Fisheries and Oceans Canada, 
Sidney, BC, Canada and at the Canadian Centre for Climate Modelling and Analysis, Environment Canada, c/o University of Victoria, 
Victoria, BC, Canada.  His research focuses on modeling the responses and adaptation of marine planktonic ecosystems and 
biogeochemical cycles to climate change.  He has been a Coordinating Lead Author in the IPCC Working Group 1 Second (1996) and 
Fourth (2007) Assessment Reports, a member of the Joint Scientific Committee of the World Climate Research Programme, and a 
member of the Scientific Steering Committees of SOLAS (Surface Ocean and Lower Atmosphere Study), GOOS (Global Ocean Observing 
System) and JGOFS (Joint Global Ocean Flux Study). 
Dr. Yukihiro Nojiri (nojiri@nies.go.jp) is a Vice-Director of the Center for Global Environmental Research at the National Institute for 
Environmental Studies, Japan, and also a manager at the Greenhouse Gas Inventory Office of Japan.  Since 1995, his major research 
has focused on ocean carbon studies, including ocean surface pCO
2
 observation by commercial ships over the Pacific, mesoscale iron 
fertilization and ocean acidification manipulation experiments.  Yukihiro serves as a member of the Scientific Steering Committees of 
IOCCP (International Ocean Carbon Coordination Project) and SOLAS. 
Dr. Hans-Otto Pörtner (hans.poertner@awi.de) is a Professor of integrative ecophysiology at the Alfred-Wegener-Institute of Polar and 
Marine Research in Bremerhaven, Germany.  His research focuses on the mechanisms regulating the specialization of marine animals 
and their ecosystems on climate regimes.  He has shaped the development of the concept of oxygen and capacity limited thermal 
tolerance as a matrix integrating temperature, oxygen and CO
2
 effects on marine animals and ecosystems.  He has been a Lead Author in 
the IPCC Special Report on carbon capture and storage.  Presently, he co-chairs the German program on ocean acidification, and 
serves as a work package leader of the European program on ocean acidification as well as a steering group member of the conference 
series on “Oceans in a High CO
2
 World”. 
  
PICES Press articles  Appendix 6 
180  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
2010 Sendai Coupled Climate-to-Fish-to-Fishers Models Workshop 
 
by Salvador E. Lluch-Cota, Enrique N. Curchitser and Shin-ichi Ito 
 
A 1-day workshop on “Coupled climate-to-fish-to-fishers 
models for understanding mechanisms underlying low 
frequency fluctuations in small pelagic fish and projecting its 
future”, co-convened by the authors of this article, was held 
immediately prior (April 25, 2010) to the International 
Symposium on “Climate change effects on fish and fisheries” 
in Sendai, Japan.  Low-frequency variability of abundance of 
small pelagic fish is one of the most emblematic and best-
documented cases of population fluctuations not wholly 
explained by fishing effort.  Over the last 25 years, diverse 
observations have led to several hypotheses.  However, 
because of limited-duration time series, testing hypotheses has 
proven extremely difficult with available statistical and 
empirical tools.  As a result, the mechanistic basis for how 
physical, biogeochemical, and biological factors interact to 
produce the various patterns of synchronous variability across 
widely separated systems remains unknown.  Identification of 
these mechanisms is necessary for exploring projections and 
building scenarios of the amplitude and timing of stock 
fluctuations and their responses to human interactions 
(fisheries) and climate change.  The workshop was intended to 
compare state-of-the-art modeling tools and discuss what 
expertise is necessary to tackle this important scientific and 
environmental problem. 
 
The workshop, attended by about 50 scientists, started with 
an opening address by the convenors.  Six oral presentations 
were given.  Ryan Rykaczewski used bioenergetic models 
to compare anchovy and sardine growth potential in the 
California Current region and suggested that anchovy 
growth is dependent on the community structure of near-
shore eutrophic waters, and that sardine growth is possible 
under offshore oligotrophic conditions.  Additionally, he 
discussed the importance of accurate representation of 
plankton size structure for mechanistic models of sardine 
and anchovy populations. 
 
Wolfgang Fennel introduced a NPZDF (nutrient, 
phytoplankton, zooplankton, detritus and fish production) 
model with two-way coupling between prey and predators, 
hence, mass balance between NPZD and fish or prey fish 
and predator fish are conserved.  The model was applied to 
the Baltic Sea, where the fish dynamics is dominated by 
two prey (sprat and herring) and one predator (cod).  To 
demonstrate performance of the model, the effects of 
eutrophication and fishery scenarios were addressed (Fig. 1). 
 
Three 3-D NPZDF models were presented by George 
Triantafyllou, Shin-ichi Ito and Kate Hedström.  Triantafyllou 
et al. introduced a super Individual-Based Model (IBM) of 
the European anchovy in which particles representing fish 
have information of fish population, adding to those of age,  
 
Fig. 1 The variation of total abundance of cod, sprat, and herring 
(upper, per km
3
) and the variations of the total biomass of cod, 
sprat, herring, and zooplankton (lower, per km
3
) derived from 
hindcast by Fennel’s NPZDF model (W. Fennel, Journal of 
Marine Systems, 2010,  81, 184–195). 
 
Fig. 2 Seasonally mean spatial weight distributions of Japanese sardine 
(0-year-old) in autumn simulated by a super-IBM model.  The 
contours show climatological seasonal sea surface temperature 
from the World Ocean Atlas 2005 (Okunishi et al., Ecological 
Modelling, 2009, 220, 462–479). 
 
position, length, and weight of the fish.  This Lagrangian 
model is coupled to a biophysical model based on the 
Princeton Ocean Model (POM) and the European Regional 
Seas Model (ERSEM).  Moreover, the ERSEM was 
assimilated to satellite-derived phytoplankton density.  Ito 
et al. introduced a super-IBM of the Japanese sardine (Fig. 2) 
and clearly showed the significance of the density-
dependence effect on fish distribution and growth.  They 
Appendix 6  PICES Press articles  
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  181 
also demonstrated the importance of predators on migration 
of prey fish.  Hedströme et al. used a community biophysical 
model; the Regional Ocean Modeling System (ROMS) for 
the physical circulation model and NEMURO (North Pacific 
Ecosystem Model for Understanding Regional 
Oceanography) for the NPZD model.  They intend to include 
a fishery effect in their model and extend it to an end-to-end 
model.  They noted difficulties of such a state-of-art NPZDF 
model, including spatially locating eggs after spawning and 
scaling the predator–prey interactions among fish species. 
 
In the final talk, Kenneth Rose addressed issues that arise 
with developing complicated models in general, and new 
issues specific to the development of end-to-end models. 
 
Open discussion was held in the afternoon session.  Based 
on the presentation by Rose, participants discussed end-to-
end models and how they deal with different issues, 
particularly zooplankton dynamics and linkages with upper 
and lower trophic levels.  Several attendees expressed concern 
over the uncertainty and increasing error derived from 
coupling different models, especially when outcomes from 
one model are used as input for a chain of other models.  
Also, strong concern was expressed on how to evaluate 
performance or validate the models because of the multi-
scale nature of these models.  No single data set seems to 
be sufficient.  After recognizing the valuable review by 
Plagányi (FAO Fish. Tech. Paper 477, 2007), the group 
discussed the need to quantitatively compare performance 
of models for different processes and promote the use of the 
best modeling approach option for each question.  In this 
sense, keeping modeling approaches diverse was considered 
a better strategy than agreeing to a single model.  
Assemblages of models, as done by the climate community, 
does not seem to be a feasible approach for end-to-end 
models.  However, the group believed it would be useful for 
small pelagic fish and climate change research to compile 
and/or develop different models for at least some of the major 
small pelagic fishing regions, specifically the Benguela, 
California, Humboldt, and Kuroshio/Oyashio Currents. 
 
   
Dr. Salvador E. Lluch-Cota (slluch@cibnor.mx) works in the Fisheries Ecology Program at Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas del 
Noroeste (CIBNOR) in La Paz, B.C.S., Mexico.  He has studied climate impacts on marine fisheries and ecosystems for more than 15 
years.  Salvador is currently the Principal Investigator for an interdisciplinary project on massive fisheries and climate change in 
Mexican waters and for two other projects dealing with the analysis of coastal ecosystems of the Baja California Peninsula.  He is 
serving as International GLOBEC SSC member from 2006 to 2011 and as President of the Mexican Fisheries Society and the Mexican 
Chapter of the American Fisheries Society from 2007 to 2011.  Currently, Salvador is involved in building the scientific plan proposal for 
SPACC II. 
Dr. Enrique Curchitser (enrique@marine.rutgers.edu) is a physical oceanographer at Rutgers University in New Jersey, U.S.A.  In spite 
of living near the Atlantic, most of his work focuses on the Pacific Ocean.  His main interests are the intersection of climate and biology, 
regional climate impacts, and numerical modeling.  His current projects range from downscaling climate scenarios in the northeastern 
Pacific and Bering Sea to trying to understand the low-frequency fluctuations in global sardine populations.  Enrique is a member of 
PICES Working Group on Evaluation of Climate Change Projections. 
Dr. Shin-ichi Ito (goito@affrc.go.jp) is Chief Scientist of the Physical Oceanography Section at the Tohoku National Fisheries Research 
Institute of the Fisheries Research Agency of Japan.  Shin-ichi completed his graduate work in physical oceanography at Hokkaido 
University and became an observational physical oceanographer at the institute.  His main field is the Oyashio Current and the mixed 
water region.  He has deployed more than 30 moorings and is handling a water glider.  His research includes development of a fish 
growth model coupled to the lower trophic level ecosystem model NEMURO.FISH (North Pacific Ecosystem Model for Understanding 
Regional Oceanography.For Including Saury and Herring).  Shin-ichi is Co-Chairman of the ESSAS Working Group on Modeling 
Ecosystem Response.  Within PICES, he serves on the Physical Oceanography and Climate Committee (POC), FUTURE Advisory Panel 
on Status, Outlooks, Forecasts, and Engagement (SOFE-AP), and joint PICES/ICES Working Group on Forecasting Climate Change 
Impacts on Fish and Shellfish (WGFCCIFS). 
 
 
  
PICES Press articles  Appendix 6 
182  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
2010 Sendai Salmon Workshop on Climate Change 
 
by James Irvine 
 
A 1-day workshop examining climate change impacts on 
salmon was organized by scientists working with the North 
Pacific Anadromous Fish Commission (NPAFC) and was 
held immediately prior (April 25, 2010) to the International 
Symposium on “Climate change effects on fish and 
fisheries” in Sendai, Japan.  The NPAFC assembles and 
documents various types of biostatistical information, 
including catch and hatchery release statistics and recently 
published a Long-term Research and Monitoring Plan 
forecasting how salmon will respond to climate change 
(http://www.npafc.org/new/index.html). 
 
The workshop consisted of 9 oral presentations (20 min), 5 
posters (authors were also allowed to give a 10-min oral 
presentation), and 2 discussion sessions.  Presentations 
were diverse and informative.  The majority (12 of 14) 
focused on Pacific salmon (9 on marine aspects, 2 on fresh 
water aspects, and 1 on knowledge/database), while 2 papers 
dealt with Atlantic salmon. 
 
Irvine and Fukuwaka gave an overview of abundance 
trends for Pacific salmon at the scale of the North Pacific, 
Asia, and North America.  All nations commercial catch 
data indicate that marine production of Pacific salmon is at 
all time high levels (Fig. 1), dominated by chum and pink 
salmon, albeit with significant contributions from 
hatcheries.  Focusing on chum and pink salmon, Fukuwaka 
et al. found high levels of synchrony among regions in 
catch, although the response to various climate indices 
varied.  Hyunju Seo, who presented the paper by 
Kaeriyama et al., showed that rising temperatures have 
increased the growth and survival for Hokkaido age-1 
chum salmon.  However, this apparent benefit may 
ultimately lead to population density-dependent effects 
reducing the growth and extending the maturation schedule 
for chum salmon in the Bering Sea.  Farley et al. reported 
results from the eastern Bering Sea that fortuitously 
covered four consecutive warm years (2002–2005) 
followed by four cool years (2006–2009). Warm years 
tended to benefit age-0 walleye pollock, resulting in 
generally higher growth potential for salmon.  Mundy and 
Evenson concluded that the timing of spawning migrations 
of high latitude chinook will become more variable as 
warming continues.  Wainwright and Weitkamp predicted 
that climate change effects on Oregon coho salmon will be 
largely negative, although great uncertainty in biological 
responses remains.  Reed et al. applied an evolutionary 
model to forecast how some Fraser River sockeye salmon 
might respond to predicted changes in river temperature 
resulting from global warming.  They concluded that the 
persistence of some salmon populations will depend on 
their ability to adapt quickly, which will be determined by 
the existence of sufficient genetic variation.  Peterman et al. 
described the development of a new website intended to help 
in designing salmon monitoring programs.  Wasserman 
documented the successful experience of the Skagit Climate 
Science Consortium that is integrating scientific analyses at 
the watershed level in order to manage salmon populations 
experiencing climate change.  Piou and Prévost and Prusov 
et al. described their findings on Atlantic salmon in the 
Scorff River (France) and the White Sea (northwest 
Russia), respectively.  Piou and Prévost’s models project 
climate change-related life history effects, concluding that 
marine conditions and freshwater flow regimes are of 
utmost importance in determining stock abundance.  
Prusov et al. documented changes in Atlantic salmon 
growth and age  
 
 
Fig. 1 All nations commercial Pacific salmon catch. 
Appendix 6  PICES Press articles  
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  183 
compositions during recent years of increasing temperatures 
but concluded that changes in management practices have 
thus far had the greatest impact on the status of northern 
populations of Atlantic salmon.  Miyakoshi et al. 
documented changes in coastal temperatures around 
Hokkaido and described plans to adjust the release timing 
of young chum salmon to take advantage of these changes, 
and thereby increase salmon survivals.  Ishida and 
colleagues’ archeological work showed that the distribution 
of chum salmon in Japan during an earlier warmer period 
was more northerly than it is today, and predicted similar 
northerly shifts in salmon distribution with climate change.  
Jennifer Neilson, presenting the paper by Ruggerone et al., 
showed that chinook salmon growth was related to their 
previous growth history and pink salmon abundance, while 
coho salmon growth was strongly linked with pollock 
abundance, which was linked to temperature. 
 
Following the oral presentations, separate discussion 
sessions considered the broad topics of forecasting impacts 
and long-term research needs.  Although it was not possible 
to thoroughly debate all the above questions in the limited 
time available, there appeared to be consensus on some 
issues: 
 The North Pacific currently produces large amounts of 
salmon, but rates of increase seen during the last 30 
years will not continue. 
 Climate change is already affecting salmon differently 
in northern and southern regions.  There will be 
additional northward shifts in the southern boundary of 
salmon distribution.  There was no consensus on 
whether or not the Arctic will become a more 
important area for salmon production. 
 Marine production of pink and chum salmon is 
increasing, but there was no consensus how much of 
this might be due to ecosystem changes vs. enhancement. 
 A proper understanding of climate effects on salmon 
requires consideration of each life history stage.  Phases 
to focus on include: freshwater residence, early marine 
(first couple of months) and the first winter at sea. 
 Important areas of future research include: improving 
our understanding of effects of interactions between 
hatchery and wild salmon in their early marine 
environment, and linkages between coastal oceanography 
and young salmon growth and survival. 
 Integrated research programs with experts from multiple 
disciplines and countries are most likely to improve our 
knowledge base. 
Acknowledgements:  Many thanks to Drs. Masa-aki Fukuwaka (Japan), Suam Kim (Korea), Vladimir Radchenko (Russia), Loh-Lee Low 
(U.S.A.), and Shigehiko Urawa (NPAFC) for assistance in convening the workshop, with the author of this article, and preparing this 
report; Dr. Skip McKinnell (PICES Deputy Executive Secretary) for encouraging and promoting the workshop, and other participants 
for contributing their findings and ideas at the workshop. 
 
 
 
Dr. James (Jim) Irvine (James.Irvine@dfo-mpo.gc.ca) is a research scientist at the 
Pacific Biological Station in Nanaimo, BC.  He currently chairs the Stock 
Assessment Working Group of the North Pacific Anadromous Fish Commission 
(NPAFC) that recently published an overview of salmon abundance trends in the 
North Pacific, and also co-chairs Canada’s Fisheries and Oceanography Working 
Group that prepares the annual State of the Ocean Report for Canada’s Pacific 
Region and neighbouring waters. 
 
PICES Press articles  Appendix 6 
184  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
2010 Sendai Workshop on “Networking across Global Marine Hotspots” 
 
by Gretta Pecl, Stewart Frusher, Warwick Sauer and Alistair Hobday 
 
A 1-day workshop on “Networking across global marine 
hotspots” was held on April 25, 2010, immediately prior to 
the international symposium on “Climate change effects on 
fish and fisheries” in Sendai, Japan.  The workshop was  
co-convened by the authors of this article and designed to 
(1) highlight where global marine ‘hotspots’ occur throughout 
our oceans, (2) summarize the information currently 
emerging on biological climate change impacts in these 
areas, and (3) discuss the potential for developing a global 
network of scientists, policy makers and managers working 
in marine hotspots.  The workshop attracted considerable 
interest and was attended by approximately 50 scientists, 
including invitees from the identified hotspot regions. 
 
The premise behind the workshop was that areas typified 
by above-average ocean temperature increases, or ocean 
‘hotspots’, are the planet’s early warning system for 
understanding the impacts and adaptation options for 
marine climate change.  Networking and synthesising 
outcomes from across hotspots can facilitate accelerated 
learning and also indicate sensible pathways for maximising 
adaptation and minimising impacts for other global regions.  
Research, development, management and communication 
can all be delivered faster, and with greater certainty, 
through a coordinated network across global hotspots.  In 
these regions: 
 Impacts associated with global warming will be observed 
earlier; 
 Species or ecosystem models developed for prediction 
can be validated earlier than in other slower changing 
regions; and  
 Adaptation options can be developed, implemented 
and tested first. 
 
The workshop was introduced by Gretta Pecl who described 
our approach to defining hotspots, their location, and the 
rationale for the use of sea surface temperature (SST) to 
determine potential hotspots to include in a global network.  
Temperature is the most commonly used variable in marine 
species distribution studies, and as a metric of marine 
climate change.  It is considered to be the major driver of 
distribution, abundance, phenology and life history.  
Temperature was also the most commonly identified metric 
in the presentations at both our workshop and at the main 
symposium in the days following the workshop.  There was 
extensive discussion on the merits of using SST to define 
hotspots and on other potential metrics that are also 
important, such as productivity, acidification, upwelling 
and oxygen depletion zones.  While it was noted that there 
are other metrics, the general consensus was that SST is a 
key factor affecting biological processes, and is also the 
most accessible global data for defining regions that were 
rapidly changing, and thus provides the first opportunity to 
inform society of climate change impacts and adaptation 
options.  It was noted that temperature per se may not be 
the driver as it could be a proxy for wind regime changes 
and/or current shifts. 
 
The intent behind the workshop was not to develop an 
exhaustive list of global hotspots, but rather to provide a 
platform to explore the idea of a network covering fast-
changing areas across the globe.  There was broad agreement 
that the network would welcome participation by other 
areas that are also experiencing significant biological change 
(e.g., areas experiencing noteworthy changes in productivity) 
or large socio-economic impacts (such as developing 
countries highly dependent on fisheries). 
 
Based on historical (last 50 years) and projected (next 50 
years) rates of ocean warming, 24 regional hotspots were 
identified that were warming faster than 90% of the oceans.  
These hotspots covered tropical, temperate, sub-temperate 
and polar regions, developed and developing countries with 
a range of adaptive capacities, a variety of ecosystem types, 
and areas with varying degrees of anthropogenic pressures 
and disturbances. 
 
Fig. 1 Sea surface temperature (SST) anomalies in the eastern Bering 
Sea (from Franz Mueter’s workshop presentation). 
 
Invited presentations covered the following hotspot regions: 
Southeastern Australia, Southern Africa/Benguela system, 
Galapagos archipelago, Mozambique Channel, eastern 
Bering Sea, British Columbia, North Sea, Japan Sea, East 
China Sea/Taiwan Strait, South China Sea, and coastal zone 
of Vietnam.  Most speakers provided details on published 
or unpublished in situ temperature records demonstrating 
significant recent increase in temperatures, ‘validating’ the 
selection of regions as hotspots (e.g., see Fig. 1 from Franz 
Appendix 6  PICES Press articles  
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  185 
Mueter’s talk on the eastern Bering Sea).  However, in 
many cases temperature either was, or was suspected to be, 
a proxy for current and/or wind regime changes.  Common 
themes emerging from across these regions with high rates 
of temperature increase included areas of significant 
deoxygenation, increased frequency of harmful algal 
blooms, shifts in species diversity of phyto/zooplantkon 
communities (mainly from large to small individuals) and 
increased diversity and species richness of fish.  Many 
presenters provided evidence of large-scale range shifts for 
a wide variety of species, including movements to deeper 
waters in some cases.  In several regions, large changes in 
the distribution and abundance of range-shifting species 
resulted in these acting as ‘invasives’ creating negative 
ecosystem impacts (e.g., pipefishes in the North Sea and 
long-spined sea urchins in Tasmania).  Interestingly, regions 
with naturally high climate variability were not less 
sensitive to climate change factors, instead appearing to be 
at least equally vulnerable to change and not necessarily 
‘pre-adapted’.  For example, Kyushu in southern Japan and 
Galapagos archipelago both experience very large seasonal 
variations in temperature (11–28º and 18–30ºC, respectively), 
and yet have, in recent decades, undergone regime changes 
in the inshore areas.  In several hotspots redistribution of 
fisheries effort and associated changes in fleet structure and 
operations has led to current or impending management 
implications for harvesting of ‘shifting biomass’, especially 
across jurisdictional boundaries. 
 
Formal presentations were followed by a series of 
discussion topics.  The first of these identified the value 
and practical functions that a global hotspot network could 
achieve.  These were:  
(1) Providing a mechanism for scientists, managers and 
policy makers to communicate and see how science 
was being translated into policy and practical adaptive 
management measures in those regions of the world 
where impacts were occurring; 
 
 
Dr. Gretta Pecl (Gretta.Pecl@utas.edu.au) is a Fulbright Fellow and a Senior Research Fellow leading several projects within the 
Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Theme at the Tasmanian Aquaculture and Fisheries Institute.  Her current research activity 
spans a range of topics, including range extensions associated with climate change, evaluating adaptation options in socio-ecological 
systems, assessing population and fishery responses to climate change, and using citizen science approaches for ecological monitoring 
and engagement (http://www.REDMAP.org.au).  She was Lead Author of the recent Australian Federal Department of Climate Change 
interdisciplinary report into the impacts and adaptation response options for the Tasmanian Rock Lobster Fishery 
(http://www.climatechange.gov.au/en/publications/coastline/east-coast-rock-lobster.aspx).  Gretta is currently working in Alaska for her 
Fulbright Fellowship, a project developed specifically to facilitate collaboration and knowledge exchange between northern and 
southern hemisphere marine hotspot regions. 
Dr. Stewart Frusher (Stewart.Frusher@utas.edu.au) is Associate Professor at the Tasmanian Aquaculture and Fisheries Institute at the 
University of Tasmania, where he leads the Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation for Marine Resources theme.  He co-convenes the 
bio-physical node of Australia’s Adaptation Network for Marine Biodiversity and Resources with Dr. Hobday.  His interests are in 
providing the research to sustainably manage fisheries resources so that they continue to provide social and economic benefits to society.  
Stewart has extensive experience in crustacean resources and is becoming more involved in the development of interdisciplinary teams to 
address fisheries issues. 
Dr. Warwick Sauer (W.Sauer@ru.ac.za) is Professor and Head of the Department of Ichthyology and Fisheries Science at Rhodes 
University in South Africa.  His interests are in fisheries ecology and management, particularly in the translation of science into 
practical fisheries management.  He serves on a number of management bodies, including the International Cephalopod Advisory 
Council, and has been involved in numerous regional research projects covering Sub Saharan Africa and the western Indian Ocean.  He 
currently is a member of the Project Coordination Unit for the Agulhas and Somali Large Marine Ecosystem Project, and coordinates 
training and capacity building initiatives across the Agulhas region. 
Dr. Alistair Hobday (Alistair.Hobday@csiro.au) is a Principal Research Scientist at CSIRO in Australia, and leads the Marine Climate 
Impacts and Adaptation research area (http://www.cmar.csiro.au/climateimpacts).  His research has focused on the physical drivers and 
impacts of climate change on the distribution of marine species around Australia.  As a result of his work on fisheries, aquaculture and 
biodiversity issues, Alistair has been asked to assist with development on national strategy to respond to climate risks.  With Dr. Frusher, 
he co-convenes the bio-physical node of Australia’s Adaptation Network for Marine Biodiversity and Resources. He also co-chairs of the 
international GLOBEC/IMBER program CLIOTOP (Climate Impacts on Top Ocean Predators). 
PICES Press articles  Appendix 6 
186  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
(2) Facilitating comparative studies through: 
 promotion of consistency in data collection, analysis, 
and reporting, and 
 potential for greater certainty in projection models 
through first opportunities for validation; 
(3) Providing (based on comparisons between regions) 
greater certainty in the understanding of impacts for 
stakeholders (i.e., other stakeholders are experiencing 
similar issues); 
(4) Allowing for shared learning and capacity building 
about adaptation science (successes and failures); 
(5) Providing, as the hotspots regions are at the forefront 
of climate change, valuable insights into the impacts, 
model validation and the success or failures of adaptation 
planning for the broader global community. 
 
The workshop participants agreed that a global network of 
researchers, managers and policy makers working in 
marine hotspot locations was an appropriate action for 
providing the science-to-policy framework that would 
guide climate change adaptation globally. 
 
The final discussion session focused on a path forward and 
identified the following actions: 
(1) A Consensus Statement would be produced to be 
signed by participants.  Participants would be 
encouraged to obtain in principal support from 
their respective research/management institutions 
as further support for the network. 
(2) A summary paper of the physical changes 
documented in last few decades in each region, 
including observed (or predicted) 
biological/ecological/fisheries impacts including 
changes in distribution, abundance and phenology 
at each of the trophic levels and any observed 
ecosystem changes and the flow on effects to 
cultural, social and economic impacts. 
(3) A website would be developed for communication 
of the network and hosting an initial workshop to 
determine a strategic and operational plan for the 
network. 
(4) Funds would be sought to run targeted workshops 
on identified areas of need, such as monitoring 
methodologies, inter-disciplinary approaches for 
linking science to practical management, etc. 
(5) Funds would be sought to establish demonstration 
projects.  Examples of such projects could 
include: 
 identification of key monitoring sites for global 
comparisons; 
 evaluation of tools/approaches for implementing 
adaptation options that identify and balance the 
trade offs in ecological, social and economic indices 
using some of hotspot regions as case studies. 
 
The workshop was sponsored by Australia’s National 
Climate Change Adaptation Research Facility’s Marine 
Biodiversity and Resources Network (MBRN).  The 
MBRN is an interdisciplinary network aimed at building 
adaptive capacity and adaptive response strategies for the 
effective management of Australia’s marine biodiversity 
and natural marine resources under climate change. 
 
 
Appendix 6  PICES Press articles 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  187 
2010 Sendai Zooplankton Workshop 
 
by William Peterson and Kazuaki Tadokoro 
 
The goal of a workshop, co-convened by the authors of this 
article immediately prior (April 25, 2010) to the International 
Symposium on “Climate change effects on fish and fisheries” 
in Sendai, Japan, was to provide an opportunity for those 
keenly interested in “how data on zooplankton and krill 
can be used to better understand and forecast the impacts 
of climate change on fisheries” to discuss the topic in an 
informal workshop atmosphere.  Contributions were requested 
which demonstrated explicitly how information on copepods 
and euphausiids might lead to a better understanding of the 
linkages between physics and fish.  We worked hard to 
invite people, but in the end we received only 8 abstracts, 
and thus decided to have a half-day workshop.  When the 
happy day arrived, we did not know what to expect in 
terms of participation, and we were delighted and very 
pleased to find the room filled to its capacity, with more 
than 50 people in attendance.  This is evidence of great 
interest in learning more about mechanistic linkages between 
physics through the zooplankton to fish. 
 
Fig. 1 PDO (upper panel) and monthly anomalies of the x-axis scores of 
a NMDS of copepod community structure (lower panel). 
 
The meeting was opened by William (Bill) Peterson 
(NOAA Fisheries, U.S.A.), who presented an overview of 
some mechanisms that link physical forcing with 
zooplankton and fisheries response in the North Pacific.  
As one of the examples, he demonstrated a link between 
the Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO) and the copepod 
community structure (Fig. 1).  The positive (negative) 
phase of the PDO results in the advection of warm (cold) 
water to the coast in the northern California Current.  As a 
consequence, “warm” and “cold” water copepod species and 
communities dominate coastal waters; changes in community 
structure lag changes in the PDO by a few months. 
 
Ryan Rykaczewski (Princeton Geophysical Fluid Dynamics 
Laboratory, U.S.A.) gave a Pacific basin-scale perspective 
on how the Kuroshio and California currents might be 
linked.  He examined basin-wide variability in the depth of 
the nutricline across the mid-latitude North Pacific using a 
global, earth system model and found that variability in the 
depth of wintertime convection in the western North 
Pacific stimulates anomalies in the vertical distribution of 
nitrate, and that these anomalies propagate from west to 
east with the North Pacific Current, with a transit time on 
the scale of decades. 
 
Bill Peterson discussed his two favorite hypotheses:  
(1) lipids and cold water copepod species, and (2) source 
water which feeds the northern California Current, and how 
these two are linked with salmon survival. 
 
Jay Peterson (Hatfield Marine Science Center, U.S.A.) 
showed that there have been chronic changes in the 
upwelling ecosystem off Newport over the last 40 years.  
First, there has been an increase in the number of copepod 
species routinely found along the coast (0.11 species per 
year); second, an intensification of oxygen-depleted bottom 
waters on the shelf; and third, a deepening in the depth 
from which water upwells. 
 
Tracy Shaw (Hatfield Marine Science Center) discussed 
relationships between timing and strength of upwelling and 
euphausiid spawning.  She showed that Euphausia pacifica 
spawning is strongly associated with the timing of the onset 
of upwelling, but not with upwelling strength.  Thysanoessa 
spinifera, on the other hand, spawn prior to and during 
upwelling and seem to be more strongly affected by water 
temperature.  Future changes in the timing of the spring 
transition are likely to affect E. pacifica spawning behavior.  
A warmer ocean will likely lead to a decrease in T. spinifera 
abundance and spawning.  Both scenarios will affect the 
availability of euphausiids as a food source for higher 
trophic level predators. 
 
Motomitsu Takahashi (Nagasaki National Fisheries 
Research Institute, Japan), presented his work carried out 
during a short visit at the Peterson’s laboratory.  He looked 
at otoliths of late-larval and juvenile northern anchovy and 
Pacific sardine collected off Oregon in the summer of 
2005, an unusual year in which upwelling began very late, 
in mid-July.  The results suggested that the fish responded 
quickly to the intensification of upwelling after mid-July due  
PICES Press articles  Appendix 6 
188  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
 
Fig. 2 Overview of the zooplankton from viewpoint of food for fish resources in the western North Pacific. 
 
to the development of a bloom of phytoplankton and a 
surge in production of cold water copepod species.  
Increased secondary productivity led quickly to enhance 
the larval growth rate of northern anchovy. 
 
Kazuaki Tadokoro (Tohoku National Fisheries Research 
Institute, Japan) provided an overview of the zooplankton 
from viewpoint of food for fish resources in the western 
North Pacific (Fig. 2).  He reminded us that a great deal of 
work has been done on the large Neocalanus copepod 
species in the Oyashio-Kuroshio region, with relatively 
little work on the small copepods species upon which larval 
and juvenile sardines feed.  More research is needed on 
both food habits of juvenile planktivorous fishes as well as 
on the zooplankton upon which they feed. 
 
 
  
Dr. William (Bill) Peterson (bill.peterson@noaa.gov) is an oceanographer and Senior Scientist with the Northwest Fisheries Science 
Center, based in Newport, Oregon, at the Hatfield Marine Science Center.  Bill is a Team Leader for the “Climate Change and Ocean 
Productivity” program.  One of the core activities of this program is the biweekly oceanographic cruises carried out by his laboratory 
along the Newport Hydrographic Line, where hydrography, nutrients, chlorophyll, zooplankton and krill are measured.  This ongoing 
activity was initiated in 1996.  A key outcome of these monitoring cruises is that the data are now used to forecast successfully the 
returns of salmon to the Columbia River and coastal rivers of Washington.  Bill has been active within PICES since his first meeting 
(1998), serving on the Executive Committee of the Climate Change and Carrying Capacity (CCCC) Program Implementation Panel, and 
as Chairman of the CCCC REX (Regional Experiment) Task Team.  Now he is a member of the Biological Oceanography Committee and 
Co-Chairman of Working Group 23 on “Comparative Ecology of Krill in Coastal and Oceanic Waters around the Pacific Rim”.  
Concerning the photo, the presence of the NOAA ship in the background (R/V Bell Shimada) is significant because the entire fleet of 
NOAA ships based in the Pacific Northwest will be adopting Newport as their new Fleet Headquarters in 2012. 
Dr. Kazuaki Tadokoro (den@affrc.go.jp) is a biological oceanographer at the Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute of the 
Fisheries Research Agency of Japan.  He received his PhD from the University of Tokyo in 1997.  Then he worked in the National 
Research Institute of Far Seas Fisheries, Hokkaido National Fisheries Research Institute, Ocean Research Institute of the University of 
Tokyo, JAMSTEC, and Hokkaido University.  His research interests focus on the influence of the climate change on marine ecosystems of 
the North Pacific.  Kazuaki is also collecting samples for and managing the Odate collection, known as a long-term zooplankton 
collection at the Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute. 
Appendix 6  PICES Press articles 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  189 
Mikiko Kuriyama (National Research Institute of Fisheries 
Science, Japan) reported on long-term variations in 
copepod community in relation to the climatic change in 
the Kuroshio waters off southern Japan from 1971 to 2009.  
She revealed that copepod abundances were high in the 
early 1970s and after the 1990s, and low in the 1980s.  
Paracalanus parvus, as one of the important prey for the 
Japanese sardine, was abundant through the study period. 
 
The final talk by Toru Kobari (Kagoshima University, Japan) 
demonstrated decadal changes in seasonal timing and 
population age structure of Eucalanus in the Oyasiho from 
a time series initiated in the 1970s.  He showed that a 
decline in copepod abundance originated at the early life 
stages, and was associated with a shift of atmospheric and 
oceanographic conditions.  Possible biological mechanisms to 
account for the decline were reduced egg production, lower 
survival for the portion of the annual cohort with late birth 
date, and overwintering of the survivors at younger stages. 
 
Each talk was discussed thoroughly, with many questions 
from the audience.  The workshop ended with an open 
discussion which resulted in the following recommendations:  
(1) zooplankton time series that are based on either size of 
copepod taxa, or on species abundance have far greater 
value than time series of “total biomass” or “volume” of 
the catch; (2) future workshops on the same topic would be 
welcomed warmly; and (3) more specialized workshops 
should be convened whereby zooplankton ecologists with 
long time series would work with fisheries people from the 
same region to try harder to relate interannual variations in 
zooplankton abundance and species composition with 
variations in some key aspects of pelagic fishes life history 
– either recruitment or growth. 
  
PICES Press articles  Appendix 6 
190  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
PICES and ICES on the River Elbe 
 
by Stewart (Skip) McKinnell and Jürgen Alheit 
 
 
 
Hamburg University might be considered by some as an 
unusual venue for a workshop focusing on North Pacific 
marine ecosystem variability, but its location highlights a 
continuing interest in conducting comparative studies of 
Northern Hemisphere oceans and climate.  A search for the 
ultimate cause(s) of variable fish abundance demands an 
attention to the full range of spatial scales of the potential 
forces.  The climate scale is large so ICES and PICES co-
sponsored a workshop on “Reaction of Northern Hemisphere 
ecosystems to climate events: A comparison”.  It was 
convened during a cool but sunny week (May 2–6, 2011) 
by Jürgen Alheit and Christian Möllmann from ICES, and 
Sukgeun Jung and Yoshiro Watanabe from PICES.  The 
focus of this workshop was an examination of time series 
from the northwestern North Pacific, within the context of 
an over-arching objective to conduct a meta-analysis of 
ecosystem trends and their potential drivers over the 
Northern Hemisphere.  It followed an earlier workshop 
which had focused on northeastern Atlantic ecosystems. 
 
 
Saskia Otto (Hamburg U. Ph.D. student) with Motomitsu Takahashi 
(Japan) and Sukgeun Jung (Korea) in analysis. 
Yongjun Tian (Japan), Yury Zuenko (Russia), Sukgeun 
Jung (Korea), Motomitsu Takahashi (Japan), and Skip 
McKinnell (PICES) gave presentations about regional data 
sets from the Pacific during the first day and a half.  In 
keeping with the workshop format, the serious work began 
by assembling multivariate data sets of long-term time 
series of physical, chemical and biological variables. 
 
The normal challenges confronted the group as they strove 
to achieve a balance among the physical, chemical and 
biological variables.  As the data originated in Japan, 
Republic of Korea and the Russian Federation, each with 
time series of variable durations, with missing years, 
different sampling methodologies and ecological emphasis, 
much of the first few days was spent trying to overcome 
these difficulties.  Lack of balance will, for example, cause 
ecosystem shifts to be identified some time after they 
occurred when fishery statistics of long-lived animals have 
a significant influence on the results. 
 
The analytical approach was to compare and contrast the 
results of several multivariate statistical methods with the 
intent to yield further insight into how ecosystems change 
state.  For example, the rates and magnitudes of change 
may not be the same in the different systems, reflecting 
region-specific differences in the forcing factors and 
ecosystem responses to them.  There was a general 
consensus among the methods and among various sub-
divisions of the data that a change occurred in the climate 
and marine ecosystems in parts of the northwestern North 
Pacific between the winter of 1988/89 and that of 1992/93.  
The inability to specify one particular year was because 
different methods and data combinations produced slightly 
different results. 
 
 
Jürgen Alheit (juergen.alheit@io-warnemuende.de) is a biological oceanographer 
at the Leibniz Institute for Baltic Sea Research in Warnemünde, Germany. 
 
 
 
 
Skip McKinnell (mckinnell@pices.int) is Deputy Executive Secretary of PICES. 
 
  References 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  191 
References
Alheit, J. Licandro, P., Coombs, S., Garcia, A., Giráldez, A., Santamaría, M.T.G., Slotte, A. and Tsikliras, A.C. Atlantic 
Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO) modulates dynamics of small pelagic fishes and ecosystem regime shifts in the 
eastern North and Central Atlantic. J. Mar. Syst. In press. 
Allen, J.I., Aiken, J., Anderson, T.R., Buitenhuis, E., Cornell, S., Geider, R.J., Haines, K., Hirata, T., Holt, J., Le Quéré, 
C., Hardman-Mountford, N., Ross, O.N., Sinha, B. and While, J. 2010. Marine ecosystem models for earth systems 
applications: The MarQUEST experience. J. Mar. Syst. 81: 19–33. 
Allison, E.H., Perry, A.L., Badjeck, M.C., Adger, W.N., Brown, K., Conway, D., Halls, A.S., Pilling, G.M., Reynolds, 
J.D., Andrew, N.L. and Dulvy, N.K. 2009. Vulnerabilities of national economies to the impact of climate change on 
fisheries.  Fish and Fisheries 102: 173–195. 
A’mar, Z.T., Punt, A. and Dorn, M.W. 2009. The evaluation of management strategies for the Gulf of Alaska walleye 
pollock under climate change. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 66: 1614–1632.  
Arrigo, K.R., van Dijken, G. and Pabi, S. 2008. Impact of a shrinking Arctic ice cover on marine primary production. 
Geophys. Res. Lett. 35: L19603, doi:10.1029/2008GL035028. 
Badjeck, M.C., Allison, E.H., Halls, A.S. and Dulvy, N.K.  2010. Impacts of climate variability and change on fishery-
based livelihoods.  Mar. Policy 34: 375–383. 
Barange, M., Allen, I., Allison, E., Badjeck, M.C., Blanchard, J., Drakeford, B., Dulvy, N.K., Harle, J., Holmes, R., Holt, 
J., Jennings, S., Lowe, J., Merino, G., Mullon, C., Pilling, G., Rodwell, L., Tompkins, E. and Werner, F. 2011. 
Predicting the impacts and socio-economic consequences of climate change on global marine ecosystems and fisheries: 
the QUEST_Fish framework, pp. 29–59 in World Fisheries: A Social – Ecological Analysis edited by R.E. Ommer, 
R.I. Perry, K. Cochrane and P. Curry, Wiley-Blackwell, 440 pp. 
Bell, J.D., Reid, C., Batty, M.J., Lehodey, P., Rodwell, L., Hobday, A.J., Johnson, J.E. and Demmke, A. 2013. Effects of 
climate change on oceanic fisheries in the tropical Pacific: implications for economic development and food security. 
Climatic Change  doi 10.1007/s10584-012-0606-2. 
Beltrán, F., Sansó, B., Lemos, R.T. and Mendelssohn, R. 2012.  Joint projections of North Pacific sea surface temperature 
from different global climate models.  Environmentrics 23: 451–465. 
Ben Rais Lasram, F., Guilhaumon, F., Albouy, C., Somot, S., Thuiller, W. and Mouillot, D. 2010.  The Mediterranean Sea 
as a ‘cul-de-sac’ for endemic fishes facing climate change.  Global Change Biol. 16: 3233–3245. 
Black, B.A., Schroeder, I.D., Sydeman, W.J., Bograd, S.J. and Lawson, P.W. 2010. Wintertime ocean conditions 
synchronize rockfish growth and seabird reproduction in the central California Current ecosystem.  Can. J. Fish. 
Aquat. Sci. 67: 1149–1158. 
Blackford J., Allen, J.I., Anderson, T.R. and Rose, K.A. 2010. Challenges for a new generation of marine ecosystem 
models: Overview of the Advances in Marine Ecosystem Modelling Research (AMEMR) Symposium, June 23–26, 
2008, Plymouth UK. J. Mar. Syst. 81: 1–3.  
Blanchard, J.L., Jennings, S., Holems, R., Harle, J., Merino, G., Allen, J.I., Holt, J., Dulvy, N.K. and Barange, M. 2012.  
Potential consequences of climate change for primary production and fish production in large marine ecosystems. Phil. 
Trans. Roy. Soc. Lond. B 567: 2979–2989, doi10.1098/rstb.20120231. 
Brand, E.J., Kaplan, I.C., Harvey, C.J., Levin, P.S., Fulton, E.A., Hermann, A.J. and Field, J.C. 2007. A spatially explicit 
ecosystem model of the California Current’s food web and oceanography. U.S. Dept. Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo. 
NMFS-NWFSC-84, 145 pp. 
Brander, K. 2010.  Impacts of climate change on fisheries.  J. Mar. Syst. 79: 389–402. 
Caballero-Alfonso, Á.M., Ganzedo-López, U., Trujillo-Santana, A., Santana del Pino, A. and Castro-Hernández, J.J. 2009. 
Do climate patterns explain by themselves the oscillations observed for the Bluefin tuna (Thunnus thynnus) at the 
Western Mediterranea ‘almadrabas’ traps catches since 1500s to 1960s?  ICES CM 2009/E:10 24 p. 
Carlson, S.M. and Seamons, T.R. 2008. A review of quantitative genetic components of fitness in salmonids: implications 
for adaptation to future change. Evolution. Appl. 1: 222–238. 
Casini, M., Bartolino, V., Molinero, J.C. and Kornilovs, G. 2010. Linking fisheries, trophic interactions and climate: 
threshold dynamics drive herring Clupea harengus growth in the central Baltic Sea. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 413: 241–
252. 
References 
192  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Chang, Y., Lee, M.A., Lee, K.T. and Shao, K.T. 2013. Adaptation of fisheries and mariculture management to extreme 
oceanic environmental changes and climate variability in Taiwan. Mar. Policy 38: 476–482. 
Cheung, W.W.L., Lam, V.W.Y., Sarmiento, J.L., Kearney, K., Watson, R. and Pauly, D. 2009. Projecting global marine 
biodiversity impacts under climate change scenarios. Fish and Fisheries 10: 235–251. 
Cheung, W.W.L., Dunne, J., Sarmiento, J.L. and Pauly, D. 2011. Integrating ecophysiology and plankton dynamics into 
projected maximum fisheries catch potential under climate change in the Northeast Atlantic.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68: 
1008–1018. 
Chhack, K.C., Di Lorenzo, E., Schneider, N. and Cummins, P.F. 2009. Forcing of low-frequency ocean variability in the 
Northeast Pacific. J. Climate 22: 1255–1276. 
Christensen, V. and Walters, C.J. 2004. Ecopath with Ecosim: Methods, capabilities, and limitations. Ecol. Modell. 172: 
109–139. 
Christensen, V., Walters, C.J. and Pauly, D. 2005. Ecopath with Ecosim: A User’s Guide. Fisheries Centre, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver. November 2005 edition, 154 pp. (available online at www.ecopath.org) 
Cochrane, K., De Young, C., Soto, D. and Bahri, T. (Eds.) 2009. Climate Change Implications for Fisheries and 
Aquaculture: Overview of Current Scientific Knowledge. FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Technical Paper No. 530, 
Rome, Italy, 212 pp. 
Conover, D.O. and Munch, S.B. 2002. Sustaining fisheries over evolutionary time scales. Science 297: 94–96. 
Curry, R.G. and McCartney, M.S. 2001. Ocean gyre circulation changes associated with the North Atlantic Oscillation. J. 
Phys. Oceanogr. 31: 3374–3400. 
Di Lorenzo, E., Schneider, N., Cobb, K.M., Franks, P.J.S., Chhak, K., Miller, A.J., McWilliams, J.C., Bograd, S.J., 
Arango, H., Curchitser, E., Powell, T.M. and Riviere, P. 2008. North Pacific Gyre Oscillation links ocean climate and 
ecosystem change. Geophys. Res. Lett. 35: doi:10.1029/2007gl032838. 
Di Lorenzo, E., Cobb, K.M., Furtado, J.C., Schneider, N., Anderson, B.T., Bracco, A., Alexander, M.A. and Vimont, D.J. 
2010. Central Pacific El Niño and decadal climate change in the North Pacific Ocean. Nature Geosci. 3: 762–765. 
Donelson, J.M., Munday, P.L., McCormick, M.I. and Nilsson, G.E. 2011. Acclimation to predicted ocean warming 
through developmental plasticity in a tropical reef fish. Global Change Biol. 17: 1712–1719. 
Durner, G.M., Douglas, D.C., Mielson, R.M., Amstrup, S.C., McDonald, T.L., Stirling, I., Mauritzen, M., Born, E.W., 
Wiig, Ø., DeWeaver, E., Serreze, M.C., Belikov, S.E., Holland, M.M., Maslanik, J., Aars, J., Bailey, D.A. and 
Derocher, A.E. 2009. Predicting 21st-century polar bear habitat distribution from global climate models. Ecol. 
Monogr. 79: 25–58. 
Dutil, J.-D. and Brander, K. 2003. Comparing productivity of North Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) stocks and limits to 
growth production. Fish. Oceanogr. 12: 502–512. 
Edwards, M., Beaugrand, G., Helaoue, P., Alheit, J. and Coombs, S. 2013. Marine ecosystem response to the Atlantic 
Multidecadal Oscillation. PLoS ONE 8: e57212. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0057212. 
Engelhard, G.H., Pinnegar, J.K., Kell, L.T. and Rijnsdorp, A.D. 2011. Nine decades of North Sea sole and plaice 
distribution.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68: 1090–1104. 
Fauchald, P. 2010. Predator–prey reversal: A possible mechanism for ecosystem hysteresis in the North Sea? Ecology 91: 
2191–2197. 
Fennel, W. 2010. A nutrient to fish model for the example of the Baltic Sea. J. Mar. Syst. 81: 184–195. 
Fiechter, J., Milliff, R., Wilke, C., Morre, A., Berliner, M. and Powell, Z. 2009. Estimating ecosystem model uncertainties 
and climate change impacts in the North Pacific Ocean. Workshop A: Modelling ecosystems and ocean processes: the 
GLOBEC perspective of the past, present and future. 3
rd
 GLOBEC Open Science Meeting: From ecosystem function to 
ecosystem prediction. Victoria, B.C., Canada, June 22–26, 2009. 
Frusher, S.D., Pecl, G.T. and Gardner, C. 2010. The east coast Tasmanian rock lobster fishery: vulnerability to climate 
change impacts and adaptation response options. 2010 International Climate Change Adaptation Conference, June 29–
July 1, 2010, Gold Coast, Queensland, Australia.  
Fulton, E.A. 2010. Approaches to end-to-end ecosystem models. J. Mar. Syst. 81: 171–183. 
Fulton, E.A. 2011. Interesting times: Winners and losers and system shifts under climate change around Australia.  ICES 
J. Mar. Sci. 68: 1329–1342. 
Fulton, E.A., Smith, A.D.M., Smith, D.C. and van Putten, I.E. 2010. Human behaviour: the key source of uncertainty in 
fisheries management. Fish and Fisheries 12: 2–17. 
Geffen, A.J., Høie, H., Folkvord, A., Hufthammer, A.K., Andersson, C., Ninnemann, U., Pedersen, R.B. and Nedreaas, K.  
2011.  High-latitude climate variability and its effect on fisheries resources as revealed by fossil cod otoliths.  ICES J. 
Mar. Sci. 68: 1081–1090. 
Gibson, G.A., Hermann, A.J., Hedström, K. and Curchitser, E.N. 2013. A modeling study to explore on-shelf transport of 
oceanic zooplankton in the Eastern Bering Sea. Deep-Sea Res. II 121-122: 47–64.  
Gnandesikan, A., Dunne, J.P. and John, J. 2011. What ocean biogeochemical models can tell us about bottom-up control 
of ecosystem variability.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68: 1030–1044. 
Halpern, B.S. and 18 co-authors. 2008. A global map of human impact on marine ecosystems. Science 319: 948–952. 
References 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  193 
Hare, J.A., Alexander, M.A., Fogarty, M.J., Williams, E.H. and Scott, J.D.  2010.  Forecasting the dynamics of coastal 
fishery species using a coupled climate–population model.  Ecol. Appl. 20: 452–464. 
Hare, J.A., Wuenschel, M.J. and Kimball, M.E. 2012. Projecting range limits with coupled thermal tolerance - climate 
change models: An example based on gray snapper (Lutjanus griseus) along the U.S. east coast. PLoS ONE 7: e52294. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0052294. 
Hawkins, E. and Sutton, R.T. 2009. Decadal predictability of the Atlantic Ocean in a coupled GCM: Forecast skill and 
optimal perturbations using Linear Inverse Modelling. J. Climate 22: 3960–3978, doi: 10.1175/2009JCLI2720.1. 
Haynie, A. and Pfeiffer, L. 2012. Why economics matters for understanding the effects of climate change on fisheries.  
ICES J. Mar. Sci. 69: 1160–1167. 
Hegyi, B. and Deng, Y. 2011. A dynamical fingerprint of tropical Pacific sea surface temperatures in the decadal-scale 
variability of the cool-season Arctic precipitation. J. Geophys. Res. 116: D20121, doi:10.1029/2011JD016001. 
Hidalgo, M., Rouyer, T., Bartolino, V., Cerviño, S., Ciannelli, L., Massuti, E., Jadaud, A., Saborido-Rey, F., Durant, J.M., 
Santurtún, M., Piñeiro, C. and Stenseth, N.C.  2012.  Context-dependent interplays between truncated demographies 
and climate variation shape the population growth rate of a harvested species.  Ecography 35: 637–649. 
Hinrichsen, H.-H., Dickey-Collas, M., Huret, M., Peck, M.A. and Vikebø, F. 2011. Evaluating the suitability of coupled 
biophysical models for fishery management. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68: 1478–1487. 
Hinrichsen, H.-H., Hüssy, K. and Huwer, B. 2011.  The impact of hydrodynamics and hydrography on western Baltic cod 
early life survival. ICES CM 2011/L02, 15 p. 
Hobday, A.J., Young, J.W., Moeseneder, C. and Dambacher, J.M.  2011. Defining dynamic pelagic habitats in oceanic 
waters off Australia.  Deep-Sea Res. II 58: 734–745. 
Hofstede, R. and Rijnsdorp, A.D. 2011. Comparing demersal fish assemblages between periods of contrasting climate and 
fishing pressure.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68: 1170–1188. 
Hofstede, R., Hiddink, J.G. and Rijnsdorp, A.D. 2010. Regional warming changes fish species richness in the eastern 
North Atlantic Ocean.  Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 414: 1–9. 
Hollowed, A.B., Bond, N.A., Wilderbuer, T.K., Stockhausen, W.T., A’mar, Z.T., Beamish, R.J., Overland, J.E. and 
Schirripa, M.J. 2009. A framework for modeling fish and shellfish responses to future climate change.  ICES J. Mar. 
Sci. 66: 1584–1594. 
Hollowed, A.B., Barange, M., Ito, S., Kim, S., Loeng, H. and Peck, M.  2011.  Preface.  Effects of climate change on fish 
and fisheries: Forecasting impacts, assessing ecosystem reponses, and evaluating management strategies.  ICES J. Mar. 
Sci. 68: 984–985. 
Hollowed, A.B., Barange, M., Beamish, R.J., Bradner, K., Cochrane, K., Drinkwater, K., Foreman, M.G.G., Hare, J.A., 
Holt, J., Ito, S.I., Kim, S., King, J.R., Loeng, H., Mackenzie, B.R., Meuter, F.J., Okey, T.A., Peck, M.A., Radchenko, 
V.I., Rice, J.C., Schirripa, M.J., Yatsu, A. and Yamanaka, Y. 2013. Project impacts of climate change on marine fish 
and fisheries. ICES J. Mar. Sci. doi: 10.1093/icesjms/fst081.   
Hollowed, A.B., Planque, B. and Loeng, H. 2013. Potential movement of fish and shellfish stocks from the sub-Arctic to 
the Arctic Ocean.  Fish. Oceanogr. doi 10.1111/fog.12027. 
Holt, J., Wakelin, S., Lowe, J. and Tinker, J. 2010. The potential impacts of climate change on the hydrography of the 
northwest European continental shelf.  Prog. Oceanogr. 86: 361–379. 
Howell, E.A., Wabnitz, C.C.C., Dunne, J.P. and Polovina, J.J. 2012. Climate-induced primary productivity change and 
fishing impacts on the Central North Pacific ecosystem and Hawaii-based pelagic longline fishery.  Climatic Change 
doi 10.1007/s10584-012-0597-z. 
Hsieh, H.-Y., Lo, W.-T., Wu, L.-J., Liu, D.-C. and Su, W.-C. 2011.  Comparison of distributions of patterns of larval fish 
assemblages in the Taiwan Strait between the northeasterly and southwesterly monsoons.  Zool. Studies 50: 491–505. 
Hufnagl, M. and Peck, M.A. 2011.  Physiological individual-based modeling of larval Atlantic herring (Clupea harengus) 
foraging and growth: insights on climate-driven life-history scheduling.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68: 1170–1188. 
Hunt, Jr., G.L., Coyle, K.O., Eisner, L., Farley, E.V., Heintz, R., Mueter, F., Napp, J.M., Overland, J.E., Ressler, P.H., 
Salo, S. and Stabeno, P.J. 2011.  Climate impacts on eastern Bering Sea food webs: A synthesis of new data and an 
assessment of the Oscillating Control Hypothesis.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68: 1230–1243. 
Hurrell, J. and Deser, C. 2009. North Atlantic climate variability: the role of the North Atlantic oscillation. J. Mar. Syst. 
78: 28–41. 
Ianelli, J.N., Hollowed, A.B., Haynie, A.C., Mueter, F.J. and Bond, N.A. 2011.  Evaluating management strategies for 
eastern Bering Sea walleye pollock (Theragra chalcogramma) in a changing environment.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68: 
1297–1304. 
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change). 2001. Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability edited by J.J. 
McCarthy, O.F. Canziani, N.A. Leary, D.J. Dokken and K.S. White, Cambridge Univ. Press. 
IPCC. 2007. Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fourth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change edited by R.K. Pachauri and A. Reisinger, 
IPCC, Geneva, 104 pp.  
References 
194  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Ishimura, G., Herrick, S. and Sumaila, U.R. 2013. Stability of cooperative management of the Pacific sardine fishery 
under climate variability.  Mar. Policy 39: 333–340. 
Ito, A. and Kawamiya, M. 2010.  Potential impact of ocean ecosystem changes due to global warming on marine organic 
carbon aerosols.  Global Biogeochem. Cycles 24: GB1012, doi: 10.1029/2009GB003559. 
Ito, S., Yoshie, N., Okunishi, T., Ono, T., Okazaki, Y., Kuwata, A., Hashioka, T., Rose, K.A., Megrey, B.A., Kishi, M.J., 
Nakamachi, M., Shimizu, Y., Kakehi, S., Saito, H., Takahashi, K., Tadokoro, K., Kusaka, A. and Kasai, H. 2010a.  
Application of an automatic approach to calibrate the NEMURO nutrient-phytoplankton-zooplankton food web model 
in the Oyashio region.  Prog. Oceanogr. 87: 186–200. 
Ito, S.-I., Rose, K.A., Miller, A.J., Drinkwater, K., Brander, K., Overland, J.E., Sundby, S., Curchister, E., Hurrell, J.W. 
and Yamanaka, Y.  2010b. Ocean ecosystem responses to future global change scenarios: a way forward, pp. 280–323 
in Marine Ecosystems and Global Change edited by M. Barange, J.G. Field, R.P. Harris, E.E. Hofmann, R.I. Perry and 
F.E. Werner, Oxford University Press, 412 pp. 
Ito, S., Okunishi, T., Kishi, M. and Wang, M. 2013. Modelling ecological responses of Pacific saury (Coloabis saira) to 
future climate change and its uncertainty.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 70: 980–990. 
Jang, C.J., Park, J., Park, T. and Yoo, S. 2011.  Response of the ocean mixed layer depth to global warming and its impact 
on primary production: a case study for the Northern Pacific Ocean.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68: 996–1007. 
Jennings, S. and Brander, K. 2010. Predicting the effects of climate change on marine communities and the consequences 
for fisheries. J. Mar. Syst. 79: 418–426.  
Jennings, S., Mélin, F., Blanchard, J.L., Forster, R.M., Dulvy, N.K. and Wilson, R.W. 2008. Global-scale predictions of 
community and ecosystem properties from simple ecological theory. Proc. B: Biol. Sci. 275: 1375–1383. 
Kaeriyama, M., Seo, H., Kudo, H. and Nagata, M. 2012. Perspectives on wild and hatchery salmon interactions at sea, 
potential climate effects on Japanese chum salmon, and the need for sustainable salmon fishery management reform in 
Japan.  Environ. Biol. Fishes 94: 165–177. 
Keister, J.E., Di Lorenzo, E., Morgan, C.A., Combes, V. and Peterson, W.T. 2011. Zooplankton species composition is 
linked to ocean transport in the Northern California Current.  Global Change Biol. 17: 2498–2511. 
Kidokoro, H., Goto, T., Nagasawa, T., Nishida, H., Akamine, T. and Sakurai, Y. 2010. Impact of climate regime shift on 
the migration of Japanese common squid (Todarodes pacificus) in the Sea of Japan. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 67: 1314–1322. 
Kim, S. 2010. Fisheries development in northeastern Asia in conjunction with changes in climate and social systems.  
Mar. Policy 34: 803–809. 
King, J.R., Agostini, V.N., Harvey, C.J., McFarlane, G.A., Foreman, M.G.G., Overland, J.E., Di Lorenzo, E., Bond, N.A. 
and Aydin, K.Y.  2011.  Climate forcing and the California Current Ecosystem.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68: 1199–1216. 
Kishi, M.J., Ito, S., Megrey, B.A., Rose, K.A. and Werner, F.E. 2011. A review of the NEMURO and NEMURO.FISH 
models and their application to marine ecosystem investigations.  J. Oceanogr. 67: 3–16. 
Kotenev, B.N., Serebryakov, V.P., Bondarenko, M.V. and Morozov, A.D. 2009.  Climate impact on northeastern Arctic 
cod year-class strength: Relevance to the Ricker and Beverton-Holt models for determination of the recruitment-stock 
dependence.  ICES CM 2009/E5, 35 p. 
Kristiansen, T., Lough, R.G., Werner, F.E., Broughton, E.A. and Buckley, L.J. 2009. Individual-based modelling of 
feeding ecology and prey selection of larval cod on Georges Bank. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 376: 227–243. 
Kurogi, M., Hasumi, H. and Tanaka, Y. 2013. Effects of stretching on maintain the Kuroshio meander.  J. Geophys. Res. 
118, doi: 10.1002/jgrc.20123. 
Lackey, R.T. 1998. Seven pillars of ecosystem management. Landscape and Urban Planning 40: 21–30. 
Leathwick, J., Moilanen, A., Francis, M., Elith, J., Taylor, P., Julian, K., Hastie, T. and Duffy, C. 2008. Design and 
evaluation of large-scale marine protected areas. Conserv. Lett. 1: 92–101. 
Lehodey, P. and Senina, I.  2011.  Near real time prediction and spatial management of Pacific skipjack tuna.  ICES CM 
2011/L, 9 p. 
Lehodey, P., Senina, I., Nicol, S. and Hampton, J.  Modelling the impact of climate change on South Pacific albacore tuna. 
Deep-Sea Res. Submitted. 
Lenhart, H.J. and 18 co-authors. 2010. Predicting the consequences of nutrient reduction on the eutrophication status of 
the North Sea. J. Mar. Syst. 81: 148–170. 
Lindegren, M., Östman, O. and Gårdmark, A. 2011. Interacting trophic forcing and the population dynamics of herring.  
Ecology 92: 1407–1413. 
Martins, E.G., Hinch, S.G., Patterson, D.A., Hague, M.J., Cooke, S.J., Miller, K.M., Lapointe, M.F., English, K.K. and  
Farrell, A.P. 2011.  Effects of river temperature and climate warming on stock-specific survival of adult migrating 
Fraser River sockeye salmon (Oncorhynchus nerka). Global Change Biol. 17: 99–114. 
Maury, O. 2010. An overview of APECOSM, a spatialized mass balanced “Apex Predators ECOSystem Model” to study 
physiologically structured tuna population dynamics in their ecosystem. Prog. Oceanogr. 84: 113–117. 
Mendelssohn, R. 2011. The STAMP software for state spaced models.  J. Statistical Software 41: 1–19, 
http://www.jstatsoft.org/. 
References 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  195 
Merino, G., Barange, M. and Mullon, C. 2010. Climate variability and change scenarios for a marine commodity: 
Modelling small pelagic fish, fisheries and fishmeal in a globalized market.  J. Mar. Syst. 81: 196–205. 
Merryfield, B. and Kwon, S. 2007. Changes in North Pacific mixed layer depth in the 20
th
 and 21
st
 centuries as simulated 
by coupled climate models. PICES 16
th
 Annual Meeting, October 26–November 5, Victoria, B.C., Canada. 
Moss, R.H., Edmonds, J.A., Hibbard, K.A., Manning, M.R., Rose, S.K., van Vuuren, D.P., Carter, T.R., Emori, S., 
Kainuma, M., Kram, T., Meehl, G.A., Mitchell, J.F.B., Nakicenovic, N., Riahi, K., Smith, S.J., Stouffer, R.J.,  
Thomson, A.M., Weyant, J.P. and Wilbanks, T.J.  2010.  The next generation of scenarios for climate change research 
and assessment.  Nature 463: 747–756. 
Mueter, F.J. and Litzow, M.A. 2008. Warming climate alters the demersal biogeography of a marginal ice sea. Ecol. Appl. 
18: 309–320.  
Mueter, F.J., Peterman, R.M. and Pype, B.J. 2002. Opposite effects of ocean temperature on survival rates of 120 stocks of 
Pacific salmon (Oncorhynchus spp.) in northern and southern areas. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 59: 456–463. 
Mueter, F.J., Bond, N.A., Ianelli, J.N. and Hollowed, A.B.  2011.  Expected declines in recruitment of walleye pollock 
(Theragra chalcogramma) in the eastern Bering Sea under future climate change.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68: 1284–1296. 
Munday, P.L., Dixson, D.L., McCormick, M.I., Meekan, M., Ferrari, M.C.O. and Ghivers, D.P.  2010.  Replenishment of 
fish populations is threatened by ocean acidification.  Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA 107: 12,930–12,934. 
Murzina, S.A., Meyer Ottesen, C.A., Falk-Petersen, S., Hop, H., Nemvoa, N.N. and Poluektova, O.G.  2012.  Oogenesis 
and lipids in gonad and liver of daubed shanny (Leptoclinus maculates) females from Slvalbard waters.  Fish Physiol. 
Biochem. 38: 1393–1407. 
Neuheimer, A.B., Gentleman, W.C., Pepin, P. and Head, E.J.H. 2010.  How to build and use individual-based models 
(IBMs) as hypothesis testing tools. J. Mar. Syst. 81: 122–133. 
Nielsen, J.N., Ruggerone, G.T. and Zimmerman, C.E. 2012. Adaptive strategies and life history characteristics in a 
warming climate: Salmon in the Arctic? Environ. Biol. Fishes doi: 10.1007/s10641-012-0082-6. 
Nishihara, G.N. and Terada, R. 2010. Species richness of marine macrophytes is correlated to a wave exposure gradient. 
Phycol. Res. 58: 280–292. 
Nonaka, M., Sasaki, H., Taguchi, B. and Nakamura, H. 2012. Potential predictability of interannual variability in the 
Kuroshio extension jet speed in an eddy-resolving OGCM.  J. Climate 25: 3645–3652. 
North, E.W., Gallego, A. and Petitgas, P. 2009. Manual of recommended practices for modelling physical – biological 
interactions during fish early life. ICES Cooperative Research Report No. 295, 112, pp. 
Nye, J.A., Link, J.S., Hare, J.A. and Overhultz, W.J. 2009. Changing spatial distribution of fish stocks in relation to 
climate and population size on the Northeast United States continental shelf. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 393: 111–139. 
Okey, T.A., Alidina, H.M., Montenegro, A., Lo, V. and Jessen, S. 2012. Climate Change Impacts and Vulnerabilities in 
Canada’s Pacific Marine Ecosystems. CPAWS BC and WWF-Canada, Vancouver, BC, 156 pp. 
Overland, J.E., Alheit, J., Bakun, A., Hurrell, J.W., Mackas, D.L. and Miller, A.J. 2010.  Climate controls on marine 
ecosystems and fish populations.  J. Mar. Syst. 79: 305–315. 
Overland, J.E., Wang, M., Bond, N.A., Walsh, J.E., Kattsov, V.M. and Chapman, W.L.  2011. Considerations in the 
selection of global climate model for regional climate projections: The Arctic as a case study.  J. Climate 24: 1583–
1597. 
Papaioannou, E.A., Vafeidis, A.T., Quaas, M.F. and Schmidt, J.O. 2012. The development and use of a spatial database 
for the determination and characterization of the state of the German Baltic small-scale fishery sector.  ICES J. Mar. 
Sci. 69: 1480–1490. 
Peck, M.A. and Hufnagl, M. 2011. Can IBMs explain why most larvae die in the sea? Model scenarios and sensitivity 
analyses reveal research needs. J. Mar. Syst. doi:10.1016/j.jmarsys.2011.08.005. 
Perry, R.I., Ommer, R.E., Allison, E.H., Badjeck, M.-C., Barange, M., Hamilton, L., Jarre, A., Quiñones, R.A. and 
Sumaila, U.R. 2010. Interactions between changes in marine ecosystems and human communities, pp. 221–250 in 
Marine Ecosystems and Global Change edited by M. Barange, J.G. Field, R.P. Harris, E.E. Hofmann, R.I. Perry and 
F.E. Werner, Oxford University Press, 412 pp. 
Philippart, C.J.M., Anadón, R., Danovaro, R., Dippner, J.W., Drinkwater, K.F., Hawkins, S.J., Oguz, T., O’Sullivan, G. 
and Reid, P.C. 2011.  Impacts of climate change on European marine ecosystems: Observations, expectations and 
indicators. J. Exper. Mar. Biol. Ecol. 400: 52–69.  
Phillips, S.J., Anderson, R.P. and Schapire, R.E. 2006. Maximum entropy modeling of species geographic distributions. 
Ecol. Modell. 190: 231–259. 
Pineda, J., Hare, J.A. and Sponaugle, S. 2007. Transport and dispersal in the coastal ocean and consequences for 
population connectivity. Oceanography 20: 22–39. 
Pittman, S.J., Christensen, J., Caldow, C., Menza, C. and Monaco, M. 2007. Predictive mapping of fish species richness 
across shallow-water seascapes of the U.S. Caribbean. Ecol. Modell. 204: 9–21. 
Plagányi, E.E. 2007.  Models for an Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries. FAO Fisheries Tech. Paper No. 477, 108 pp. 
References 
196  PICES Scientific Report No. 45 
Plagányi, E., Weeks, S., Gibbs, M., Skewes, T., Poloczanska, E., Norman-López, A., Blamey, L., Soares, M. and 
Robinson, W. 2011.  Assessing the adequacy of current fisheries management under changing climate: a southern 
synopsis.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68: 1305–1318. 
Planque, B., Bellier, E. and Loots, C. 2011. Uncertainties in projecting spatial distributions of marine populations.  ICES J. 
Mar. Sci. 68: 1045–1050. 
Polovina, J.J., Dunne, J.P., Woodworth, P.A. and Howell, E.A.  2011.  Projected expansion of the subtropical biome and 
contraction of the temperate and equatorial upwelling biomes in the North Pacific under global warming.  ICES J. Mar. 
Sci. 68: 986–995. 
Pörtner, H.O. 2002. Climate variations and the physiological basis of temperature dependent biogeography: systemic to 
molecular hierarchy of thermal tolerance in animals.  Comparative Biochem. Physiol. Part A 132: 739–761. 
Pörtner, H.-O. 2010. Oxygen- and capacity-limitation of thermal tolerance: a matrix for integrating climate-related stressor 
effects in marine ecosystems.  J. Exper. Biol. 213: 881–893. 
Pörtner, H.O. and Farrell, A.P. 2008. Physiology and climate change. Science 322: 690–692. 
Reid, P.C. and Valdés, L.  2011. ICES status report on climate change in the North Atlantic.  ICES Cooperative Research 
Report 310, 271 pp. 
Reygondeau, G., Maury, O., Beaugrand, G., Fromentin, J.M., Fonteneau, A. and Curry, P. 2011. Biogeography of tuna and 
bill fish communities. J. Biogeogr. 39: 114–129. 
Rice, J. and Garcia, S. 2011.  Fisheries, food security, climate change and biodiversity: characteristics of the sector and 
perspectives on emerging issues.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68: 1343–1353. 
Rijnsdorp, A., Peck, M.A., Engelhard, G.H., Möllmann, C. and Pinnegar, J.K. 2009. Resolving the effect of climate 
change on fish populations. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 66: 1570–1583. 
Rose, G.A. 2005. On distributional responses of North Atlantic fishes to climate change. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 62: 1360–1374. 
Rose, K.A., Megrey, B.A., Hay, D., Werner, F. and Schweigert, J.  2008.  Climate regime effects on Pacific herring 
growth using coupled nutrient-phytoplankton-zooplankton and bioenergetics models.  Trans. Am. Fish. Soc. 137: 278–
297. 
Rose, K.A. and 24 co-authors. 2010. End-to-end models for the analysis of marine ecosystems: Challenges, issues, and 
next steps. Mar. Coast. Fish.: Dyn. Mngmt. Ecosyst. Sci. 2: 115–130. 
Rykaczewski, R.R. and Dunne, J.P. 2010. Enhanced nutrient suppy to the California Current Ecosystem with global 
warming and increased stratification in an earth system model. Geophys. Res. Lett. 37: L21606. 
Sarmiento, J.L., Slater, R., Barber, R., Bopp, L., Doney, S.C., Hirst, A.C., Kelypas, J., Matear, R., Mikolajewicz, U., 
Monfray, P., Soldatov, V., Spall, S.A. and Stouffer, R. 2004. Response of ocean ecosystems to climate warming. 
Global Biogeochem. Cycles 18: 1–23. 
Schweigert, J.F., Boldt, J.L., Flostrand, L. and Cleary, J.S. 2010. A review of factors limiting recovery of Pacific herring 
stocks in Canada. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 67: 1903–1913. 
Senina, I., Sibert, J. and Lehodey, P. 2008. Parameter estimation for basin-scale ecosystem-linked population models of 
large pelagic predators: application to skipjack tuna. Prog. Oceanogr. 78: 319–335. 
Seo, H., Kudo, H. and Kaeriyama, M. 2011. Long-term climate-related changes in somatic growth and population 
dynamics of Hokkaido chum salmon.  Environ. Biol. Fish. 90: 131–142. 
Sherman, K., Belkin, I., Friedland, K.D., O’Reily, J. and Hyde, K. 2009.  Accelerated warming and emergent trends in 
fisheries biomass yields of the world’s large marine ecosystems.  Ambio 38: 215–224. 
Shin, Y. and Cury, P.  2001.  Exploring fish community dynamics through size-dependent trophic interations using a 
spatialized individual-based model.  Aquat. Living Resources 14: 65–80. 
Shin, Y. and Cury, P. 2004.  Using and individual-based model of fish assemblages to study the response of size spectra to 
changes in fishing.  Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 61: 414–431. 
Simpson, S.D., Jennings, S., Johnson, M.P., Blanchard, J.L., Schön, P.-J., Sims, D.W. and Genner, M.J. 2011. Continental 
shelf-wide response of a fish assemblage to rapid warming of the sea. Current Biol. 21: 1565–1570. 
Steele, J., Collie, J., Bisagni, J., Fogarty, M., Gifford, D., Link, J., Sieracki, M., Sullivan, B., Beet, A., Mountain, D., 
Durbin, E., Palka, D. and Stockhausen, W. 2007. Balancing end-to-end budgets of the Georges Bank ecosystem. Prog. 
Oceanogr. 74: 423–448. 
Steinacher, M., Joos, F., Froelicher, T., Bopp, L., Cadule, P., Doney, S., Gehlen, M., Schneider, B. and Segschneider, J. 
2009. Projected 21st century decrease in marine productivity: a multi-model analysis. Biogeosci. Discuss. 6: 7933–
7981. 
Stock, C. and Dunne, J. 2010. Controls on the ratio of mesozooplankton production to primary production in marine 
ecosystems.  Deep-Sea Res. 58: 95–112. 
Stock, C.A., Alexander, M.A., Bond, N.A., Brander, K.M., Cheung, W.W.L., Curchister, E.N., Delworth, T.L., Dunne, 
J.P., Griffies, S.M., Haltuch, M.A., Hare, J.A., Hollowed, A.B., Lehodey, P., Levin, S.A., Link, J.S., Rose, K.A., 
Rykaczewski, R.R., Sarmiento, J.L., Stouffer, R.J., Schwing, F.B., Vecchi, G.A. and Werner, F.E.  2011. On the use of 
IPCC-class models to assess the impact of climate on Living Marine Resources.  Prog. Oceanogr. 88: 1–27. 
References 
PICES Scientific Report No. 45  197 
Stow, C.A., Jolliffi, J, McGillicuddy Jr., D.J., Doney, S.C., Allen, I., Friedrichso, M.A.M., Rose, K.A. and Wallhead P. 
2009. Skill assessment for coupled biological/physical models of marine systems. J. Mar. Syst. 76: 4–15. 
Sumaila, U.R., Cheung, W.W.L., Lam, V.W.Y., Pauly, D. and Herrick, S.  2011. Climate change impacts on the 
biophysics and economics of world fisheries. Nature Climate Change 3: 449–456. 
Sumata, H., Hashioka, T., Suzuki, T., Yoshie, N., Okunishi, T., Aita, M.N., Sakamoto, T.T., Ishida, A., Okada, N. and 
Yamanaka, Y. 2010. Effect of eddy transport on the nutrient supply into the euphotic zone simulated in an eddy-
permitting ocean ecosystem model. J. Mar. Syst. 83: 67–87. 
Sundby, S. and Nakken, O. 2008. Spatial shifts in spawning habitats of Arcto-Norwegian cod related to multidecadal 
climate oscillations and climate change. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 65: 953–962. 
Van Putten, I.E., Kulmala, S., Thébaud, O., Dowling, N., Hamon, K.G., Hutton, T. and Pascoe, S. 2011. Theories and 
behavioural drivers underlying fleet dynamics models. Fish and Fisheries doi: 10.1111/j.1467-2979.2011.00430.x. 
Venables, W.N., Ellis, N., Punt, A.E., Dichmont, C.M. and Deng, R.A. 2009. A simulation strategy for fleet dynamics in 
Australia’s northern prawn fishery: effort allocation at two scales. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 66: 631–645. 
Voss, R., Hinrichsen, H.-H., Stepputtis, D., Bernreuther, M., Huwer, B., Neumann, V. and Schmidt, J.O.  2011. Egg 
mortality: predation and hydrography in the central Baltic. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68: 1379–1390. 
Wang, M., Overland, J.E. and Bond, N.A. 2010. Climate projections for selected large marine ecosystems.  J. Mar. Syst. 
79: 258–266. 
Waples, R.S. and Hendry, A.P. 2008. Evolutionary perspectives on salmonid conservation and management. Evolution. 
Appl. 1: 183–188. 
Werner, F., Quinlan, J., Lough, R. and Lynch, D. 2001. Spatially-explicit individual based modeling of marine 
populations: a review of the advances in the 1990s. Sarsia 86: 411–421. 
Wild-Allen, K., Herzfeld, M., Thompson, P.A., Rosebrock, U., Parslow, J. and Volkman, J.K. 2010. Applied coastal 
biogeochemical modelling to quantify the environmental impact of fish farm nutrients and inform managers. J. Mar. 
Syst. 81: 134–147. 
Wilderbuer, T., Stockhausen, W. and Bond, N. 2013. Updated analysis of flatfish recruitment response to climate 
variability and ocean conditions in the Eastern Bering Sea.  Deep-Sea Res. II 94: 157–164. 
Won, N.-I., Kawamura, T., Takami, H., Hoshikawa, H. and Watanabe, Y. 2011. Comparison of abalone (Haliotis discus 
hannai) catches in natural habitats affected by different current systems: Implications of climate effects on abalone 
fishery.  Fish. Res. 110:  84–91. 
Yasuda, I. 2009. The 18.6-year period moon-tidal cycle in Pacific Decadal Oscillation reconstructed from tree-rings in 
western North America. Geophys. Res. Lett. 36: L05605. 
Zhang, C.I., Hollowed, A.B., Lee, J.-B. and Kim, D.-H. 2011. An IFRAME approach for assessing impacts of climate 
change on fisheries.  ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68: 1318–1328. 
 
 
Continued from inside back cover 
Jamieson, G. and Zhang, C.-I. (Eds.)  2005.  Report of the 
Study Group on Ecosystem-Based Management Science 
and its Application to the North Pacific.  PICES Sci. 
Rep. No. 29, 77 pp. 
Brodeur, R. and Yamamura, O. (Eds.)  2005.  Micronekton of 
the North Pacific.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 30, 115 pp. 
Takeda, S. and Wong, C.S. (Eds.)  2006.  Report of the 2004 
Workshop on In Situ Iron Enrichment Experiments in the 
Eastern and Western Subarctic Pacific.  PICES Sci. Rep. 
No. 31, 187 pp. 
Miller, C.B. and Ikeda, T. (Eds.)  2006.  Report of the 2005 
Workshop on Ocean Ecodynamics Comparison in the 
Subarctic Pacific.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 32, 103 pp. 
Kruse, G.H., Livingston, P., Overland, J.E., Jamieson, G.S., 
McKinnell, S. and Perry, R.I. (Eds.)  2006.  Report of the 
PICES/NPRB Workshop on Integration of Ecological 
Indicators of the North Pacific with Emphasis on the 
Bering Sea.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 33, 109 pp. 
Hollowed, A.B., Beamish, R.J., Okey, T.A. and Schirripa, 
M.J. (Eds.) 2008.  Forecasting Climate Impacts on Future 
Production of Commercially Exploited Fish and 
Shellfish. PICES Sci. Rep. No. 34, 101 pp. 
Beamish, R.J. (Ed.)  2008.  Impacts of Climate and Climate 
Change on the Key Species in the Fisheries in the North 
Pacific. PICES Sci. Rep. No. 35, 217 pp. 
Kashiwai, M. and Kantakov, G.A. (Eds.) 2009.  Proceedings of 
the Fourth Workshop on the Okhotsk Sea and Adjacent 
Areas.   PICES Sci. Rep. No. 36, 305 pp. 
Jamieson, G., Livingston, P. and Zhang, C.-I. (Eds.)  2010.  
Report of Working Group 19 on Ecosystem-based 
Management Science and its Application to the North 
Pacific.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 37, 166 pp. 
Pakhomov, E. and Yamamura, O. (Eds.)  2010.  Report of the 
Advisory Panel on Micronekton Sampling Intercalibration 
Experiment.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 38, 108 pp. 
Makino, M. and Fluharty, D.L. (Eds.) 2011. Report of the 
Study Group on Human Dimensions. PICES Sci. Rep.  
No. 39, 40 pp. 
Foreman, M.G. and Yamanaka, Y. (Eds.) 2011. Report of 
Working Group 20 on Evaluations of Climate Change 
Projections.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 40, 165 pp. 
McKinnell, S.M., Curchitser, E., Groot, C., Kaeriyama, M. 
and Myers, K.W. 2012.  PICES Advisory Report on the 
Decline of Fraser River Sockeye Salmon Oncorhynchus 
nerka (Steller, 1743) in Relation to Marine Ecology. 
PICES Sci. Rep. No. 41, 149 pp. 
Takeda, S., Chai, F. and Nishioka, J. (Eds.) 2013.  Report of 
Working Group 22 on Iron Supply and its Impact on 
Biogeochemistry and Ecosystems in the North Pacific 
Ocean. PICES Sci. Rep. No. 42, 60 pp. 
Shaw, C.T., Peterson, W.T. and Sun, S. (Eds.) 2013.  Report 
of Working Group 23 on Comparative Ecology of Krill in 
Coastal and Oceanic Waters around the Pacific Rim. 
PICES Sci. Rep. No. 43, 100 pp. 
Abo, K., Burgetz, I. and Dumbauld, B. (Eds.) 2013. Report of 
Working Group 24 on Environmental Interactions of 
Marine Aquaculture.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 44, 122 pp. 
Hollowed, A.B., Kim, S., Barange, M. and Loeng, H. (Eds.) 
2013. Report of the PICES/ICES Working Group on 
Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish. 
PICES Sci. Rep. No. 45, 197 pp. 
 
 
 
Continued on inside back page 
PICES Scientific Reports 
 
 
Hargreaves, N.B., Hunter, J.R., Sugimoto, T. and Wada, T. 
(Eds.) 1993.  Coastal Pelagic Fishes (Report of 
Working Group 3); Subarctic Gyre (Report of Working 
Group 6).  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 1, 130 pp. 
Talley, L.D. and Nagata, Y. (Eds.) 1995.  The Okhotsk Sea 
and Oyashio Region (Report of Working Group 1).  
PICES Sci. Rep. No. 2, 227 pp. 
Anonymous. 1995.  Report of the PICES-STA Workshop 
on Monitoring Subarctic North Pacific Variability.  
PICES Sci. Rep. No. 3, 94 pp. 
Hargreaves, N.B. (Ed.) 1996. Science Plan, Implementation 
Plan (Report of the PICES-GLOBEC International 
Program on Climate Change and Carrying Capacity).  
PICES Sci. Rep. No. 4, 64 pp. 
LeBlond, P.H. and Endoh, M. (Eds.) 1996.  Modelling of 
the Subarctic North Pacific Circulation (Report of 
Working Group 7).  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 5, 91 pp. 
Anonymous. 1996. Proceedings of the Workshop on the 
Okhotsk Sea and Adjacent Areas.  PICES Sci. Rep. 
No. 6, 426 pp. 
Beamish, R.J., Hollowed, A.B., Perry, R.I., Radchenko, 
V.I., Yoo, S. and Terazaki, M. (Eds.) 1997.  Summary 
of the Workshop on Conceptual/Theoretical Studies and 
Model Development and the 1996 MODEL, BASS and 
REX Task Team Reports.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 7,  
93 pp. 
Nagata, Y. and Lobanov, V.B. (Eds.) 1998.  Multilingual 
Nomenclature of Place and Oceanographic Names in 
the Region of the Okhotsk Sea.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 
8, 57 pp. (Reprint from MIRC Science Report, No. 1, 
1998) 
Hollowed, A.B., Ikeda, T., Radchenko, V.I. and Wada, T. 
(Organizers) 1998.  PICES Climate Change and 
Carrying Capacity Workshop on the Development of 
Cooperative Research in Coastal Regions of the North 
Pacific.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 9, 59 pp. 
Freeland, H.J., Peterson, W.T. and Tyler, A. (Eds.) 1999.  
Proceedings of the 1998 Science Board Symposium on 
The Impacts of the 1997/98 El Niño Event on the North 
Pacific Ocean and Its Marginal Seas.  PICES Sci. Rep. 
No. 10, 110 pp. 
Dugdale, R.C., Hay, D.E., McFarlane, G.A., Taft, B.A. and 
Yoo, S. (Eds.) 1999.  PICES-GLOBEC International 
Program on Climate Change and Carrying Capacity:  
Summary of the 1998 MODEL, MONITOR and REX 
Workshops, and Task Team Reports.  PICES Sci. Rep. 
No. 11, 88 pp. 
Lobanov, V.B., Nagata, Y. and Riser, S.C. (Eds.) 1999.  
Proceedings of the Second PICES Workshop on the 
Okhotsk Sea and Adjacent Areas.  PICES Sci. Rep. 
No. 12, 203 pp. 
Danchenkov, M.A., Aubrey, D.G. and Hong, G.H. 2000.  
Bibliography of the Oceanography of the Japan/East 
Sea.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 13, 99 pp. 
Hunt, G.L. Jr., Kato, H. and McKinnell, S.M. (Eds.) 2000. 
Predation by Marine Birds and Mammals in the 
Subarctic North Pacific Ocean.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 
14, 168 pp. 
Megrey, B.A., Taft, B.A. and Peterson, W.T. (Eds.) 2000.  
PICES-GLOBEC International Program on Climate Change 
and Carrying Capacity:  Report of the 1999 MONITOR and 
REX Workshops, and the 2000 MODEL Workshop on Lower 
Trophic Level Modelling.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 15, 148 pp. 
Stehr, C.M. and Horiguchi, T. (Eds.) 2001.  Environmental 
Assessment of Vancouver Harbour Data Report for the 
PICES MEQ Practical Workshop.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 
16, 213 pp. 
Megrey, B.A., Taft, B.A. and Peterson, W.T. (Eds.) 2001.  
PICES-GLOBEC International Program on Climate Change 
and Carrying Capacity:  Report of the 2000 BASS, MODEL, 
MONITOR and REX Workshops, and the 2001 
BASS/MODEL Workshop.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 17, 125 pp. 
Alexander, V., Bychkov, A.S., Livingston, P. and McKinnell, 
S.M. (Eds.) 2001.  Proceedings of the PICES/CoML/IPRC 
Workshop on “Impact of Climate Variability on 
Observation and Prediction of Ecosystem and Biodiversity 
Changes in the North Pacific”.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 18, 
210 pp. 
Otto, R.S. and Jamieson, G.S. (Eds.) 2001.  Commercially 
Important Crabs, Shrimps and Lobsters of the North Pacific 
Ocean.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 19, 79 pp. 
Batchelder, H.P., McFarlane, G.A., Megrey, B.A., Mackas, 
D.L. and Peterson, W.T. (Eds.) 2002.  PICES-GLOBEC 
International Program on Climate Change and Carrying 
Capacity: Report of the 2001 BASS/MODEL, MONITOR 
and REX Workshops, and the 2002 MODEL/REX 
Workshop.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 20, 176 pp. 
Miller, C.B. (Ed.) 2002.  PICES-GLOBEC International 
Program on Climate Change and Carrying Capacity:  
Report of the PICES 2002 Volunteer Observing Ship 
Workshop.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 21, 38 pp. 
Perry, R.I., Livingston, P. and Bychkov, A.S. (Eds.) 2002.  
PICES Science: The First Ten Years and a Look to the 
Future.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 22, 102 pp. 
Taylor, F.J.R. and Trainer, V.L. (Eds.) 2002.  Harmful Algal 
Blooms in the PICES Region of the North Pacific.  PICES 
Sci. Rep. No. 23, 152 pp. 
Feely, R.A. (Ed.) 2003.  CO
2
 in the North Pacific Ocean 
(Working Group 13 Final Report).  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 
24, 49 pp. 
Aydin, K.Y., McFarlane, G.A., King, J.R. and Megrey, B.A. 
(Eds.)  2003. PICES-GLOBEC International Program on 
Climate Change and Carrying Capacity:  The BASS/ 
MODEL Report on Trophic Models of the Subarctic Pacific 
Basin Ecosystems.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 25, 93 pp. 
McKinnell, S.M. (Ed.) 2004.  Proceedings of the Third 
Workshop on the Okhotsk Sea and Adjacent Areas.  PICES 
Sci. Rep. No. 26, 275 pp. 
Kishi, M.J. (Ed.) 2004.  Report of the MODEL Task Team 
Second Workshop to Develop a Marine Ecosystem Model 
of the North Pacific Ocean including Pelagic Fishes. 
PICES Sci. Rep. No. 27, 49 pp. 
King, J.R. (Ed.)  2005.  Report of the Study Group on the 
Fisheries and Ecosystem Responses to Recent Regime 
Shifts. PICES Sci. Rep. No. 28, 162 pp. 
 
 
PICES SCIENTIFIC REPORTS 
 
 
 
Published since 1993, the PICES Scientific Report series includes proceedings of PICES workshops, final 
reports of PICES expert groups, data reports and reports of planning activities.  Formal peer reviews of the 
scientific content of these publications are not generally conducted. 
 
Printed copies of Scientific Reports are available upon request from 
 
PICES Secretariat 
P.O. Box 6000 
Sidney, British Columbia 
Canada.  V8L 4B2 
E-mail:  secretariat@pices.int 
 
 
On-line versions of PICES Scientific Reports can be found at  
www.pices.int/publications/scientific_reports/default.aspx 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This report was developed under the guidance of the PICES Science Board and its Fishery Science and 
Physical Oceanography and Climate committees. The views expressed in this report are those of participating 
scientists under their responsibilities. 
 
 
 
This document should be cited as follows: 
 
Hollowed, A.B., Kim, S., Barange, M. and Loeng, H. (Eds.) 2013.  Report of the PICES/ICES Working Group on 
Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 45, 197 pp. 
PICES SCIENTIFIC REPORT No. 45,  2013
NORTH   PACIFIC   MARINE   SCIENCE   ORGANIZATION
PICES SCIENTIFIC REPORT  
No. 45, 2013
Report of the PICES/ICES Working Group 
on Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on 
Fish and Shellfish 
ISBN 978-1-927797-03-7
ISSN 1198-273X
 
 
 
PICES PUBLICATIONS 
 
 
The North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES) was established by an international convention 
in 1992 to promote international cooperative research efforts to solve key scientific problems in the North 
Pacific Ocean. 
 
PICES regularly publishes various types of general, scientific, and technical information in the following 
publications: 
 
 
PICES ANNUAL REPORTS – are major 
products of PICES Annual Meetings which 
document the administrative and scientific activities 
of the Organization, and its formal decisions, by 
calendar year.   
 
PICES SCIENTIFIC REPORTS – include 
proceedings of PICES workshops, final reports of 
PICES expert groups, data reports and planning 
reports. 
 
PICES TECHNICAL REPORTS – are on-line 
reports published on data/monitoring activities that 
require frequent updates. 
 
SPECIAL PUBLICATIONS – are products that 
are destined for general or specific audiences. 
 
JOURNAL SPECIAL ISSUES – are peer-
reviewed publications resulting from symposia 
and Annual Meeting scientific sessions and 
workshops that are published in conjunction with 
commercial scientific journals.   
 
BOOKS – are peer-reviewed, journal-quality 
publications of broad interest. 
 
PICES PRESS – is a semi-annual newsletter 
providing timely updates on the state of the 
ocean/climate in the North Pacific, with highlights of 
current research and associated activities of PICES. 
 
ABSTRACT BOOKS – are prepared for PICES 
Annual Meetings and symposia (co-)organized by 
PICES. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For further information on our publications, visit the PICES website at www.pices.int. 
 
Front cover figure 
 
Image reproduced from the cover of the Program and Abstracts Book for the PICES/ICES/FAO Symposium 
on “Climate change effects on fish and fisheries:  Forecasting impacts, assessing ecosystem responses, and 
evaluating management strategies” held April 26–29, 2010, in Sendai, Japan (image courtesy of 
alkemicreative.com).      
