NORTH   PACIFIC   MARINE   SCIENCE   ORGANIZATION
PICES SCIENTIFIC REPORT  
No. 47, 2014
PICES SCIENTIFIC REPORT No. 47,  2014
Proceedings of the Workshop on Economic 
Impacts of Harmful Algal Blooms  
on Fisheries and Aquaculture 
ISBN  978-1-927797-11-2
ISSN 1198-273X
 
 
 
PICES PUBLICATIONS 
 
 
The North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES) was established by an international convention 
in 1992 to promote international cooperative research efforts to solve key scientific problems in the North 
Pacific Ocean. 
 
PICES regularly publishes various types of general, scientific, and technical information in the following 
publications: 
 
 
PICES ANNUAL REPORTS – are major 
products of PICES Annual Meetings which 
document the administrative and scientific activities 
of the Organization, and its formal decisions, by 
calendar year.   
 
PICES SCIENTIFIC REPORTS – include 
proceedings of PICES workshops, final reports of 
PICES expert groups, data reports and planning 
reports. 
 
PICES TECHNICAL REPORTS – are on-line 
reports published on data/monitoring activities that 
require frequent updates. 
 
SPECIAL PUBLICATIONS – are products that 
are destined for general or specific audiences. 
 
JOURNAL SPECIAL ISSUES – are peer-
reviewed publications resulting from symposia 
and Annual Meeting scientific sessions and 
workshops that are published in conjunction with 
commercial scientific journals.   
 
BOOKS – are peer-reviewed, journal-quality 
publications of broad interest. 
 
PICES PRESS – is a semi-annual newsletter 
providing timely updates on the state of the 
ocean/climate in the North Pacific, with highlights of 
current research and associated activities of PICES. 
 
ABSTRACT BOOKS – are prepared for PICES 
Annual Meetings and symposia (co-)organized by 
PICES. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For further information on our publications, visit the PICES website at www.pices.int. 
 
Front cover figure 
 
A sign posted in Puget Sound, Washington State, USA, by the Washington State Department of Health, 
warning of a ban on shellfish harvest due to high levels of paralytic shellfish toxins.  These toxins have 
severe economic impacts on recreational, commercial and subsistence fisheries. Photo credit: Vera Trainer.      
Continued on inside back page 
PICES Scientific Reports 
 
 
Hargreaves, N.B., Hunter, J.R., Sugimoto, T. and Wada, T. 
(Eds.) 1993.  Coastal Pelagic Fishes (Report of 
Working Group 3); Subarctic Gyre (Report of Working 
Group 6).  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 1, 130 pp. 
Talley, L.D. and Nagata, Y. (Eds.) 1995.  The Okhotsk Sea 
and Oyashio Region (Report of Working Group 1).  
PICES Sci. Rep. No. 2, 227 pp. 
Anonymous. 1995.  Report of the PICES-STA Workshop 
on Monitoring Subarctic North Pacific Variability.  
PICES Sci. Rep. No. 3, 94 pp. 
Hargreaves, N.B. (Ed.) 1996. Science Plan, Implementation 
Plan (Report of the PICES-GLOBEC International 
Program on Climate Change and Carrying Capacity).  
PICES Sci. Rep. No. 4, 64 pp. 
LeBlond, P.H. and Endoh, M. (Eds.) 1996.  Modelling of 
the Subarctic North Pacific Circulation (Report of 
Working Group 7).  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 5, 91 pp. 
Anonymous. 1996. Proceedings of the Workshop on the 
Okhotsk Sea and Adjacent Areas.  PICES Sci. Rep. 
No. 6, 426 pp. 
Beamish, R.J., Hollowed, A.B., Perry, R.I., Radchenko, 
V.I., Yoo, S. and Terazaki, M. (Eds.) 1997.  Summary 
of the Workshop on Conceptual/Theoretical Studies and 
Model Development and the 1996 MODEL, BASS and 
REX Task Team Reports.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 7,  
93 pp. 
Nagata, Y. and Lobanov, V.B. (Eds.) 1998.  Multilingual 
Nomenclature of Place and Oceanographic Names in 
the Region of the Okhotsk Sea.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 
8, 57 pp. (Reprint from MIRC Science Report, No. 1, 
1998) 
Hollowed, A.B., Ikeda, T., Radchenko, V.I. and Wada, T. 
(Organizers) 1998.  PICES Climate Change and 
Carrying Capacity Workshop on the Development of 
Cooperative Research in Coastal Regions of the North 
Pacific.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 9, 59 pp. 
Freeland, H.J., Peterson, W.T. and Tyler, A. (Eds.) 1999.  
Proceedings of the 1998 Science Board Symposium on 
The Impacts of the 1997/98 El Niño Event on the North 
Pacific Ocean and Its Marginal Seas.  PICES Sci. Rep. 
No. 10, 110 pp. 
Dugdale, R.C., Hay, D.E., McFarlane, G.A., Taft, B.A. and 
Yoo, S. (Eds.) 1999.  PICES-GLOBEC International 
Program on Climate Change and Carrying Capacity:  
Summary of the 1998 MODEL, MONITOR and REX 
Workshops, and Task Team Reports.  PICES Sci. Rep. 
No. 11, 88 pp. 
Lobanov, V.B., Nagata, Y. and Riser, S.C. (Eds.) 1999.  
Proceedings of the Second PICES Workshop on the 
Okhotsk Sea and Adjacent Areas.  PICES Sci. Rep. 
No. 12, 203 pp. 
Danchenkov, M.A., Aubrey, D.G. and Hong, G.H. 2000.  
Bibliography of the Oceanography of the Japan/East 
Sea.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 13, 99 pp. 
Hunt, G.L. Jr., Kato, H. and McKinnell, S.M. (Eds.) 2000. 
Predation by Marine Birds and Mammals in the 
Subarctic North Pacific Ocean.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 
14, 168 pp. 
Megrey, B.A., Taft, B.A. and Peterson, W.T. (Eds.) 2000.  
PICES-GLOBEC International Program on Climate Change 
and Carrying Capacity:  Report of the 1999 MONITOR and 
REX Workshops, and the 2000 MODEL Workshop on Lower 
Trophic Level Modelling.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 15, 148 pp. 
Stehr, C.M. and Horiguchi, T. (Eds.) 2001.  Environmental 
Assessment of Vancouver Harbour Data Report for the 
PICES MEQ Practical Workshop.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 
16, 213 pp. 
Megrey, B.A., Taft, B.A. and Peterson, W.T. (Eds.) 2001.  
PICES-GLOBEC International Program on Climate Change 
and Carrying Capacity:  Report of the 2000 BASS, MODEL, 
MONITOR and REX Workshops, and the 2001 
BASS/MODEL Workshop.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 17, 125 pp. 
Alexander, V., Bychkov, A.S., Livingston, P. and McKinnell, 
S.M. (Eds.) 2001.  Proceedings of the PICES/CoML/IPRC 
Workshop on “Impact of Climate Variability on 
Observation and Prediction of Ecosystem and Biodiversity 
Changes in the North Pacific”.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 18, 
210 pp. 
Otto, R.S. and Jamieson, G.S. (Eds.) 2001.  Commercially 
Important Crabs, Shrimps and Lobsters of the North Pacific 
Ocean.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 19, 79 pp. 
Batchelder, H.P., McFarlane, G.A., Megrey, B.A., Mackas, 
D.L. and Peterson, W.T. (Eds.) 2002.  PICES-GLOBEC 
International Program on Climate Change and Carrying 
Capacity: Report of the 2001 BASS/MODEL, MONITOR 
and REX Workshops, and the 2002 MODEL/REX 
Workshop.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 20, 176 pp. 
Miller, C.B. (Ed.) 2002.  PICES-GLOBEC International 
Program on Climate Change and Carrying Capacity:  
Report of the PICES 2002 Volunteer Observing Ship 
Workshop.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 21, 38 pp. 
Perry, R.I., Livingston, P. and Bychkov, A.S. (Eds.) 2002.  
PICES Science: The First Ten Years and a Look to the 
Future.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 22, 102 pp. 
Taylor, F.J.R. and Trainer, V.L. (Eds.) 2002.  Harmful Algal 
Blooms in the PICES Region of the North Pacific.  PICES 
Sci. Rep. No. 23, 152 pp. 
Feely, R.A. (Ed.) 2003.  CO
2
 in the North Pacific Ocean 
(Working Group 13 Final Report).  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 
24, 49 pp. 
Aydin, K.Y., McFarlane, G.A., King, J.R. and Megrey, B.A. 
(Eds.)  2003. PICES-GLOBEC International Program on 
Climate Change and Carrying Capacity:  The BASS/ 
MODEL Report on Trophic Models of the Subarctic Pacific 
Basin Ecosystems.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 25, 93 pp. 
McKinnell, S.M. (Ed.) 2004.  Proceedings of the Third 
Workshop on the Okhotsk Sea and Adjacent Areas.  PICES 
Sci. Rep. No. 26, 275 pp. 
Kishi, M.J. (Ed.) 2004.  Report of the MODEL Task Team 
Second Workshop to Develop a Marine Ecosystem Model 
of the North Pacific Ocean including Pelagic Fishes. 
PICES Sci. Rep. No. 27, 49 pp. 
King, J.R. (Ed.)  2005.  Report of the Study Group on the 
Fisheries and Ecosystem Responses to Recent Regime 
Shifts. PICES Sci. Rep. No. 28, 162 pp. 
 
 
PICES SCIENTIFIC REPORTS 
 
 
 
Published since 1993, the PICES Scientific Report series includes proceedings of PICES workshops, final 
reports of PICES expert groups, data reports and reports of planning activities.  Formal peer reviews of the 
scientific content of these publications are not generally conducted. 
 
Printed copies of Scientific Reports are available upon request from 
 
PICES Secretariat 
P.O. Box 6000 
Sidney, British Columbia 
Canada.  V8L 4B2 
E-mail:  secretariat@pices.int 
 
 
On-line versions of PICES Scientific Reports can be found at  
www.pices.int/publications/scientific_reports/default.aspx 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This report was developed under the guidance of the PICES Science Board and its Marine Environmental 
Quality Committee. The views expressed in this report are those of participating scientists under their 
responsibilities. 
 
 
 
This document should be cited as follows: 
 
Trainer, V.L. and Yoshida, T. (Eds.) 2014. Proceedings of the Workshop on Economic Impacts of Harmful Algal 
Blooms on Fisheries and Aquaculture. PICES Sci. Rep. No. 47, 85 pp. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
2014 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proceedings of the Workshop on Economic Impacts of 
Harmful Algal Blooms on Fisheries and Aquaculture 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Edited by 
Vera L. Trainer and Takafumi Yoshida  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 2014 
Secretariat / Publisher 
North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES) 
P.O. Box 6000, Sidney, BC, V8L 4B2 Canada  
E-mail: secretariat@pices.int       
www.pices.int  
 
 
  
   
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  iii 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents 
 
 
In Memoriam .................................................................................................................................................................iv 
Introduction .................................................................................................................................................................... 1 
Economic losses to the British Columbia salmon aquaculture industry due to harmful algal blooms, 2009–2012 
Nicola Haigh and Svetlana Esenkulova ................................................................................................................. 2 
Prediction of toxic algal bloom occurrences and adaptation to toxic blooms to minimize economic loss to  
the scallop aquaculture industry in Hokkaido, Japan 
Ichiro Imai, Hiroshi Shimada, Akiyoshi Shinada, Katsuhisa Baba, Makoto Kanamori, Masatoshi Sato,  
Yasuhiro Kuwahara, Koji Miyoshi, Masahide Tada, Kazuo Hirano, Akira Miyazono and Shigeru Itakura ......... 7 
Economic impacts of harmful algal blooms on fisheries and aquaculture in western Japan – An overview of 
interannual variability and interspecies comparison 
Shigeru Itakura and Ichiro Imai ........................................................................................................................... 17 
The economic cost of red tides in China from 2008–2012 
Hao Guo, Xiaoxu Liu, Dewen Ding, Chunjiang Guan and Xiaolei Yi .................................................................. 27 
Economic losses to the aquaculture industry by harmful algal blooms in Korea since 2001 
Changkyu Lee, Youngtae Park, Taegyu Park and Youngsang Suh ...................................................................... 35 
Harmful algal blooms on the Russian east coast and their possible economic impacts 
Tatiana Orlova, Tatiana Morozova, Polina Kameneva and Olga Shevchenko. ................................................... 41 
Economics of razor clam fishery closures due to harmful algal blooms in Washington State 
Daniel D. Huppert and Vera L. Trainer ............................................................................................................... 59 
Economic impacts of harmful algal blooms in the NOWPAP region 
Takafumi Yoshida and Kazuya Kumagai .............................................................................................................. 72 
Appendix 1 Workshop summary from PICES-2013 .................................................................................................. 79 
Appendix 2 Workshop participants ........................................................................................................................... 83 
Appendix 3 Corresponding authors .......................................................................................................................... 85 
  
iv  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
In Memoriam 
On Friday, October 11, 2013, the international oceanographic community, and PICES in particular, lost one of 
their outstanding scientists when Professor Mingyuan Zhu passed away from a heart attack while walking to 
join members of the Section on Ecology of Harmful Algal Blooms in the North Pacific for dinner after their 
meeting at PICES-2013 (Nanaimo, Canada).  He had given the China country report that afternoon with his 
usual enthusiasm. 
 
Prof. Zhu became involved with PICES in 1995, as a member of the Biological Oceanography Committee.  He 
served as a member of the Working Group on Effective Sampling of Micronekton to Establish Ecosystem 
Carrying Capacity (1997–2004) and Working Group on Ecology of Harmful Algal Blooms (HABs) in the 
North Pacific (1999–2003), and the Section on Ecology of Harmful Algal Blooms in the North Pacific upon its 
establishment in 2003.  He was also a member of the Advisory Panel on Anthropogenic Influences on Coastal 
Ecosystems of PICES’ integrative science program FUTURE (Forecasting and Understanding Trends, 
Uncertainty, and Responses of North Pacific Marine Ecosystems).  Prof. Zhu presented his research at many 
PICES Annual Meetings, and gave an invited talk at the Topic Session on “The relative contributions of off-
shore and in-shore sources to harmful algal bloom development and persistence in the PICES region” at the 
PICES 2007 Annual Meeting (October 5–13, 2007, Victoria, Canada).  During this period, he actively 
contributed to PICES’ development and to the promotion of international approaches to marine science.  His 
warm personality, sense of humor, and frankness made communication and collaboration with him so 
rewarding. 
 
Prof. Zhu’s contributions are well known to the world’s HAB family.  Upon his passing, an obituary was 
circulated to HAB researchers by the International Society for the Study of Harmful Algae (ISSHA) to 
remember Prof. Zhu’s career.  He served as Vice-Chairman of the IOC-FAO Intergovernmental Panel on 
Harmful Algal Blooms (1992–1996) and as Secretary General of the Chinese Committee of SCOR since 2004.  
He was very active in Chinese ocean science and in regional and international programs and projects such as 
the China Experts Group for the GEF/UNEP Yellow Sea Large Marine Ecosystem project, GEOHAB, where 
he was one of the pioneers coordinating research on both “red” and “green” tides in China, GLOBEC, and 
many others.  He was instrumental in producing China’s national protocol standards on chlorophyll a and 
primary productivity measurements, greatly adding to the development of knowledge of both HABs and 
biological oceanography in the regional seas. 
 
Prof. Zhu’s career as an oceanographer at the First Institute of Oceanography, State Oceanic Administration 
(SOA), China, spanned almost 40 years.  Starting as a Research Associate, he then became the Director of the 
Department of Marine Biology and Deputy Director of the SOA Key Lab for Marine Ecological Science and 
Engineering.  He was the principal investigator of many key national projects and strongly promoted domestic 
and international collaboration in scientific research such as the joint study of the Yellow Sea with Korean 
colleagues at the China–Korea Joint Ocean Research Center, for which he served as Director, the study of 
environmental carrying capacity with Japanese researchers, the study of eutrophication and shellfish toxins 
with U.S. scientists, and the study of sustainable mariculture with European partners.  During his career, Prof. 
Zhu trained many graduate students and young scientists, who are a rich legacy of his honest and enthusiastic 
attitude for cooperative approaches to marine science research.   
 
Prof. Zhu’s leaving is a huge loss for the Chinese as well as worldwide phytoplankton and HAB communities. 
His passing is a shock to the many regional and international colleagues who had close ties with him, and his 
research team.  We dedicate this PICES Scientific Report to Prof. Mingyuan Zhu with the spirit “to live and 
learn”.
   
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  v 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINGYUAN ZHU 
1943–2013 
  
 
  
  Introduction 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  1 
Introduction  
The Section on Ecology of Harmful Algal Blooms in the North Pacific (S-HAB) was established in October 
2003, under the direction of the Marine Environmental Quality Committee, to promote the sharing of 
information among PICES member countries on HAB occurrences in the North Pacific.  Since its formation, 
the Section has studied the characteristics of HAB occurrences and the differences between them in the eastern 
and western Pacific, including historical changes, and has provided scientific information to PICES member 
countries and relevant stakeholders.  
 
Over the past decades, serious damage caused by HABs has been reported with increasing frequency in the 
North Pacific.  These blooms have adverse economic and social impacts on the aquaculture industry, human 
health, coastal economies, and wild fisheries.  HABs have prompted routine closures of both commercial and 
recreational shellfish harvesting and have contributed to the deaths of aquaculture finfish, resulting in financial 
losses in coastal communities.  However, the economic impacts generated by these events extend far beyond 
the industry itself.  Obtaining more realistic estimates of HAB economic impacts, and the costs of preventing 
and managing them, calls for an integrated assessment approach that comprises the following:  the economic 
impact of HABs on the aquaculture industry, the secondary integrated industries, and consumers, on both local 
and regional scales; some valuation of the costs and benefits of taking any recognized steps to lessen the HAB 
problem (e.g., reducing coastal pollution and other human-related activities); and weighing the costs and 
benefits of enhanced monitoring and surveillance that potentially reduces the magnitude of the impacts (e.g., 
by limiting shellfish harvesting closure windows or alteration in the timing of finfish harvesting). 
 
This publication includes presentations made at a workshop on “Economic impacts of harmful algal blooms on 
fisheries and aquaculture” co-convened by Drs. Chang Hoon Kim (Korea) and Vera Trainer (USA) on 
October 11, 2013 at the PICES 2013 Annual Meeting in Nanaimo, Canada (see Appendices 1 and 2 for a 
summary of the workshop and list of participants), and three additional papers on the topic submitted by 
scientists who were planning but were unable to attend the workshop (Appendix 3).  The following reports 
detail what is known about the economic and social impacts of HABs in the eastern and western Pacific by 
PICES and NOWPAP researchers who describe cutting edge approaches and methodologies for assessment of 
HABs.  The thrust of the workshop, and the findings and insights that were derived, directly address two 
research themes of the PICES’ integrative science program FUTURE (Forecasting and Understanding Trends, 
Uncertainty, and Responses of North Pacific Marine Ecosystems), namely: (1) What determines an 
ecosystem’s intrinsic resilience and vulnerability to natural and anthropogenic forcing? and (2) How do 
ecosystems respond to natural and anthropogenic forcing, and how might they change in the future? 
 
This scientific report is published jointly with the Northwest Pacific Action Plan of the United Nations 
Environmental Programme (UNEP NOWPAP). One of the Regional Activity Centres of NOWPAP, CEARAC 
(Special Monitoring and Coastal Environmental Assessment Regional Activity Centre), focuses on HABs as 
an environmental issue in the Northwest Pacific and collaborates with PICES’ S-HAB as an ex-officio 
member. 
 
PICES’ S-HAB and NOWPAP hope this publication will provide useful information for the member countries 
of both organizations, and for our colleagues around the world. 
  
Haigh and Esenkulova  Canada 
2  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
Economic losses to the British Columbia salmon aquaculture industry 
due to harmful algal blooms, 2009–2012 
Nicola Haigh and Svetlana Esenkulova 
 
Harmful Algae Monitoring Program, Vancouver Island University, Nanaimo, British Columbia, Canada  
Introduction 
Marine salmon farming in British Columbia (BC), Canada, started in the early 1970s, and grew rapidly 
through the 1980s; by the early 1990s there were nearly 80 farms in BC producing approximately 20,000 
tonnes of salmon annually (BCSFA, 2006; Fisheries and Oceans Canada, 2011).  Currently, BC is the world’s 
fourth largest farmed salmon producer after Norway, Chile, and the UK (Fisheries and Oceans Canada, 2011) 
with an annual salmon production of more than 70,000 tonnes and a market value of approximately 
500 million Canadian dollars (Statistics Canada, 2010).  Farmed salmon is BC’s largest agricultural export and 
contributes approximately $150 million CAD a year (“gross value added”) to the BC economy (Statistics 
Canada, 2011).  There are four major salmon aquaculture companies in BC holding approximately 130 tenure 
licences, but only 75 to 80 farms are active at any one time (Ministry of Agriculture, 2011).  Most of the 
tenures are located around Vancouver Island and in the south–central coast (Fig. 1).  
 
Harmful algal blooms (HABs) are the largest cause of mortality to BC aquacultured salmon.  Problems with 
harmful algae were seen almost as soon as the salmon farming industry began in the province, and product 
losses soon reached into the millions of dollars (Black, 1990; Horner 1999).  During the late 1980s and 1990s, 
salmon farms in BC and Washington State lost in excess of US$35 million due to Heterosigma akashiwo and 
Chaetoceros spp. blooms (Horner et al., 1997; Whyte, 1997).  In 1999 alone, the first recorded bloom of 
Cochlodinium sp. caused approximately $2 million CAD in losses in BC (Whyte et al., 2001).  Fish mortality 
in BC is generally caused by: physical damage or irritation of gill tissue, reaction to ichthyotoxic agents, or 
hypoxia from oxygen depletion (Rensel and Whyte, 2003).  It should be noted that finfish flesh does not 
become toxic due to HABs and does not cause human health concerns. 
 
Due to the devastating effect of harmful algae on farmed fish, the BC salmon aquaculture industry has 
supported the Harmful Algae Monitoring Program (HAMP) since 1999.  Initially HAMP was managed by  
Dr. J.N.C. (Ian) Whyte of Fisheries and Oceans Canada (DFO) and Nicky Haigh. Since Dr. Whyte’s retirement 
in 2004, HAMP has been run by Nicky Haigh as a private business.  In the 15 years of the program to date, 
there have been between three and nine finfish aquaculture companies participating, with 12 to 28 sites 
sampling annually around Vancouver Island and in the BC Central Coast.  The major focus of HAMP has been 
weekly analysis (with emphasis on harmful species identification and enumeration) of phytoplankton samples 
sent to the HAMP laboratory by aquaculture operations, consultation with the salmon aquaculture industry 
when harmful blooms or fish kills occur, and education of farm staff in phytoplankton identification and 
sampling.  Detailed information on HAMP history, mandate, sampling sites, and analysis can be found 
elsewhere (e.g. Haigh et al., 2004; Haigh and Esenkulova, 2011). 
 
Canada  Haigh and Esenkulova 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  3 
 
Fig. 1 Map of British Columbia, Canada, and Washington State, USA, salmon farm locations in 2004 (adapted from 
Steinback and Fuller, 2004).  
 
 
HABs are natural phenomena affecting farmed and wild fish.  Generally, the harmful effect on farmed fish 
appears more evident as (1) fish in net pens do not have freedom to evade the harmful bloom and (2) any 
farmed fish loss can be immediately seen and removed, as opposed to wild fish kills that are most likely to be 
unobserved (Rensel, 2007).  In this way, caged fish function like a “canary in a coalmine”, and HAB data from 
fish farms can be a valuable tool for the interpretation of the state of the coastal environment and wild fish 
health.  Although data on fish losses is sensitive information, aquaculture companies have provided it here due 
to a strong commitment to sharing information that contributes to maintaining a healthy marine ecosystem. 
 
The purpose of this study was to estimate the immediate economic impact of HABs on the BC salmon 
aquaculture industry in 2009–2012.  This was achieved by assessing direct economic losses due to lost fish and 
indirect economic losses due to employing HAB mitigation measures.  These conservative estimates 
demonstrate the scale of the economic costs to BC salmon aquaculture, which should help researchers and 
policy makers recognize the sometimes devastating impact of HABs. 
Haigh and Esenkulova  Canada 
4  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
Methods 
Data on direct fish losses and associated costs due to HABs were gathered by a survey of management of four 
leading salmon aquaculture companies in BC: Cermaq (previously Mainstream Canada), Creative Salmon 
Company Ltd., Grieg Seafood BC Ltd., and Marine Harvest Canada Inc.  Formal letters requesting data for 
1999–2012 were sent in late 2012 and early 2013, followed by obtaining permissions to use the pooled data 
provided for research purposes. 
 
Both direct and additional costs of HABs were estimated by the companies.  Direct fish losses were calculated 
by multiplying weight of lost fish and approximate commercial cost.  Additional costs comprised estimates of 
reduced fish growth due to withholding feed during HABs (lost production), and mitigation equipment running 
costs – barrier curtains, upwelling or bubbling equipment, compressors, and fuel.  In this study we present the 
combined losses of all four salmon farm companies in Canadian dollars. 
Results 
Algal species causing fish kills during 2009–2012  
 
Algal species that caused fish losses to the BC finfish aquaculture industry during 2009–2012 were: 
Heterosigma akashiwo, Chattonella cf. marina, Chaetoceros convolutes, and Chaetoceros concavicornis 
(herein grouped together as harmful Chaetoceros spp.), small flagellates (three species that were linked to fish 
mortalities in BC for the first time by N. Haigh, unpublished observation), and Dictyocha speculum (Table 1). 
Figure 2 shows the total number of blooms during this period.  In 2009–2012, blooms of H. akashiwo caused 
five low level (up to 100 fish lost), eight moderate level (up to 1000 fish lost), and nine high level (more than 
1000 fish lost) fish killing events around Vancouver Island.  This species was responsible for about 65% of the 
total number of fish killing blooms during these four years and 90% of the total number of high level fish 
killing events. Chattonella cf. marina caused four moderate level and one high level fish killing events; 
harmful Chaetoceros spp. caused three low level and four moderate level fish killing events.  Blooms of small 
flagellates (three species) and Dictyocha speculum combined caused five low level fish kills that comprised 
less than 15% of the total number of recorded fish killing events. 
 
 
Table 1 Number of recorded fish killing blooms, and species that caused them, in British Columbia during 2009–2012. 
Severity level of the fish killing bloom are defined as low (up to 100 fish killed), moderate (100–1000 fish killed), and 
high (more than 1000 fish killed).  
 2009 2010 2011 2012 Total 2009–2012 
Fish kill level low mod high low mod high low mod high low mod high low mod high 
Heterosigma akashiwo – 1 1 1 4 2 2 1 4 2 2 2 5 8 9 
Chattonella cf. marina – 1 – – 1 – – – – – 2 1 – 4 1 
Harmful Chaetoceros spp. 1 3 – – 1 – – – – 2 – – 3 4 – 
Small flagellates – – – 1 – – 2 – – 1 – – 4 – – 
Dictyocha speculum – – – – – – – – – 1 – – 1 – – 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Canada  Haigh and Esenkulova 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  5 
 
Fig. 2 Total number of fish killing blooms in British Columbia during 2009–2012.  Bar color indicates severity level of 
the fish killing event: light grey for low level (up to 100 fish killed), dark grey for moderate (100–1000 fish killed), and 
black for high (more than 1000 fish killed).  
 
 
Direct economic losses due to HABs 
 
Direct losses to the salmon aquaculture industry due to HABs are shown in Figure 3.  During the survey 
period, fish mortalities were the highest in 2012 ($6.445 million CAD losses) and the lowest in 2010 ($1.912 
million CAD losses).  Total direct losses due to HABs in 2009–2012 comprised $16.135 million CAD. 
 
 
 
Fig. 3 Direct losses to the salmon aquaculture industry in British Columbia due to harmful algal blooms during 2009–
2012. 
Haigh and Esenkulova  Canada 
6  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
Associated economic losses due to HABs 
 
Additional economic losses due to HABs include “lost production” and mitigation costs.  “Lost production” is 
defined as reduced fish growth resulting from withholding feed during blooms.  This study does not estimate 
losses due to lost production, although with persistent blooms it may amount to a considerable cost. 
 
Bloom mitigation measures include several techniques (e.g., in Rensel and Whyte, 2003) but in BC are mostly 
limited to barrier curtains, pumping of deep water into cages and water oxygenation/aeration.  Cost of 
maintaining equipment and fuel is estimated to be about $1 to 2 million CAD annually per company.  
Summary 
During 2009–2012, direct losses to BC salmon aquaculture from HABs exceeded $16 million CAD.  Species 
primarily responsible for fish losses in this period were Heterosigma akashiwo, Chattonella cf. marina,  
C. convolutus, and Chaetoceros concavicornis.  Other costs to aquaculture from harmful algae are lost 
production and bloom mitigation equipment, which cost BC salmon aquaculture companies about $4 to 8 
million CAD annually. 
References 
BCSFA (BC Salmon Farmers Association). 2006. History of salmon farming.  Retrieved from http://www.salmonfarmers.
org/sites/default/files/pdf/history_of_salmon_farming.pdf on November 10, 2013. 
Black, E.A. 1990. Algal blooms in British Columbia. Red Tide News Letter 3: 11–12. 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada. 2011. Aquaculture Canada: facts and figures, 2011. Retrieved from http://www.dfo-
mpo.gc.ca/aquaculture/ref/stats/PUB_AQUA_factsfigures_eng.pdf on November 10, 2013. 
Haigh, N. and Esenkulova, S. 2011. The Harmful Algae Monitoring Program: The first dozen years and outlook for the 
future. Proceedings of the Salish Sea Ecosystem Conference, October 25–27, 2011, Vancouver, Canada. Retrieved 
from http://www.verney.ca/assets/SSEC_Presentations/Session%2010/10A_NickyHaigh_Abstract.pdf on November 10, 
2013. 
Haigh, N., Whyte, J.N.C. and Sherry, K.L. 2004. Biological and oceanographic data from the harmful algae monitoring 
program associated with salmon farm sites on the west coast of Canada in 2003. Canadian Data Report of Fisheries and 
Aquatic Sciences No. 1158. 
Horner, R. 1999. Harmful algal blooms in the USA: an update, p. 10 in Proceedings of the Sixth Canadian Workshop on 
Harmful Marine Algae edited by J.L. Martin and K. Haya, Canadian Technical Report of Fisheries and Aquatic 
Sciences No. 2261. 
Horner, R.A., Garrison, D.L. and Plumley, F.G. 1997. Harmful algal blooms and red tide problems on the U.S. west coast. 
Limnol. Oceanogr. 42: 1076–1088. 
Ministry of Agriculture. 2011. British Columbia seafood industry. Year in review 2011. Retrieved from 
http://www.env.gov.bc.ca/omfd/reports/Seafood-YIR-2011.pdf on November 23, 2013. 
Rensel, J.E. 2007. Fish kills from the harmful alga Heterosigma akashiwo in Puget Sound: recent blooms and review. 
Prepared by Rensel Associates Aquatic Sciences for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Center for 
Sponsored Coastal Ocean Research (CSCOR). Washington, D.C., 58 pp. 
Rensel, J.E. and Whyte, J.N.C. 2003. Finﬁsh mariculture and harmful algal blooms, pp. 693–722 in Manual on Harmful 
Marine Microalgae. Monographs on Oceanographic Methodology, vol. 11 edited by G.M. Hallegraeff,  D.M. Anderson  
and A.D. Cembella, UNESCO Publishing, Paris.  
Statistics Canada. 2010. Canadian Aquaculture Production Statistics. Retrieved from http://www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/stats/aqua/ 
aqua10-eng.htm on November 10, 2013. 
Statistics Canada. 2011. Value added account – aquaculture industry. Retrieved from http://www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/stats/ 
aqua/va11pub-eng.htm on November 10, 2013. 
Steinback, C. and Fuller, A. 2004. Map of Canadian salmon aquaculture. Retrieved from http://www.inforain.org/maparch
ive/maps_big/63007_fishfarms_300dpi.jpg on November 21, 2013. 
Whyte, J.N.C. 1997. Impacts of harmful algae on the west-coast aquaculture industry and a National Research Plan by the 
Phycotoxins working Group of Fisheries and Oceans Canada to address such issues. Bull. Fish. Res. Bd. Can. 97: 19–25. 
Whyte, J.N.C., Haigh, N., Ginther, N.G. and Keddy, L.J. 2001 First record of blooms of Cochlodinium sp. (Gymnodiniales, 
Dinophyceae) causing mortality to aquacultured salmon on the west coast of Canada. Phycologia 40: 298–304.  
Japan  Imai et al. 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  7 
Prediction of toxic algal bloom occurrences and adaptation to toxic 
blooms to minimize economic loss to the scallop aquaculture 
industry in Hokkaido, Japan
Ichiro Imai
1
, Hiroshi Shimada
2
, Akiyoshi Shinada
2
, Katsuhisa Baba
2
, Makoto Kanamori
3
, 
Masatoshi Sato
3
, Yasuhiro Kuwahara
4
, Koji Miyoshi
4
, Masahide Tada
4
, Kazuo Hirano
4
,  
Akira Miyazono
2
 and Shigeru Itakura
5
 
 
1   
Graduate School of Fisheries Sciences, Hokkaido University, Hakodate, Hokkaido, Japan  
2
  Hokkaido Research Organization (HRO), Central Fisheries Research Institute, Yoichi, Hokkaido, Japan 
3
  HRO, Hakodate Fisheries Research Institute, Hakodate, Hokkaido, Japan 
4
  HRO, Abashiri Fisheries Research Institute, Abashiri, Hokkaido, Japan 
5
  National Research Institute of Aquaculture, Fisheries Research Agency, Mie, Japan 
Abstract 
Scallop aquaculture is a big industry in Japan, especially in the northern areas of Hokkaido and Tohoku. 
Production is about 500 thousand tons per year with a value reaching about 84 billion JPY (about 840 million 
USD).  More than 60% of the total production is in Hokkaido, mainly in the Okhotsk Sea and Funka Bay 
regions.  Both areas have long histories of economic impacts due to paralytic shellfish poisoning toxins (PSTs) 
and diarrhetic shellfish poisoning toxins (DSTs).  However, in Funka Bay, in the southwestern part of 
Hokkaido, the scallop culturing industry has adapted to the frequent occurrences of toxic dinoflagellate blooms 
that produce DSTs and PSTs, which usually occur in May and during the summer season.  The timing of the 
scallop harvest every year from December to April avoids this toxic bloom season.  Scallops are harvested for 
fresh consumption or for storage by boiling and freezing.  Modified harvesting approaches were necessitated, 
in part, by severe fisheries damage in the 1980s due to high PST contamination that stopped all bivalve 
shipments.  In the Okhotsk Sea, recent occurrences of toxin contamination of scallops by PSTs have been 
precisely predicted on the basis of the movement of the Soya Warm Current.  The strength of this current 
prevents the transport of the toxic dinoflagellate Alexandrium tamarense which typically resides in the 
offshore water masses of the Okhotsk Sea to locations such as Monbetsu and Abashiri on the northern coast of 
Hokkaido.  Adaptive harvesting in response to these predictive factors is an effective way to avoid the impacts 
of toxic blooms to the bivalve aquaculture industry in coastal seas. 
Introduction 
Records of bivalves as an important food for ancient people have been found as early as 5,000 years ago when 
the shells of the scallop (Mizuhopecten yessoensis) were found with high frequency in shell mounds in 
Hokkaido, Japan (Sakai, 1976).  Today, bivalve aquaculture plays an important role in providing food for 
humans, and scallop aquaculture prevails mainly in the cold temperate coastal sea.  The global production of 
scallops is about 2 million tons per year, and about half that amount is produced in China.  About 0.5 million 
tons per year are produced in Japan, the world’s second highest producer, and about 0.4 million tons per year 
are harvested in the coastal waters of Hokkaido.  
Imai et al.  Japan 
8  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
Hokkaido is located at the most northern part of Japan (Fig. 1), and is a suitable habitat for scallops.  The 
annual scallop production in Funka Bay is about 100 thousand tons and in the Okhotsk Sea is 200–250 
thousand tons (Shimada et al., 2000, 2012).  The annual production and income values (Japanese yen, JPY) 
due to scallop aquaculture from 1980 and 2008 in the Okhotsk Sea are presented in Figure 2.  Production 
(annual catch) gradually increased up to a maximum value of about 300 thousand tons, coinciding with an 
increase in income from about 10 billion JPY to 30–40 billion JPY (300–400 million USD).  Thus, scallop 
aquaculture is an important industry in the coastal areas of Hokkaido. 
 
Fig. 1 Funka Bay and Okhotsk Sea area, Hokkaido, Japan.  Both areas have large scallop culture industries and long 
histories of toxins that can cause paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP) and diarrhetic shellfish poisoning (DSP). 
 
 
 
Fig. 2 Annual yields (10
6
 kg year
–1
) and income values (JPY) from scallop aquaculture in the Okhotsk Sea, Hokkaido. 
 
Okhotsk Sea  
Funka Bay 
Japan  Imai et al. 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  9 
Toxin contamination of scallops in the coastal areas of Hokkaido 
Bivalves are filter feeders that process high volumes of seawater in order to collect particulate matter such as 
phytoplankton and detritus as their food.  When toxic phytoplankton cells are present, filter-feeding bivalves 
accumulate their toxins by feeding.  In Japanese coastal waters, contamination of bivalves by paralytic 
shellfish toxins (PSTs) and diarrhetic shellfish toxins (DSTs) are the most common toxic events (Fukuyo et al., 
2002; Imai et al., 2006; Imai and Itakura, 2007).  The toxicity of market bivalve species is monitored using the 
mouse bioassay.  When toxin concentrations of shellfish exceed the quarantine level (4 MU/g wet weight for 
PST, 0.05 MU/g wet weight for DST), the harvest of bivalves is stopped and the marketing of commercial 
bivalves is prohibited by law (Yamamoto and Yamasaki, 1996).  This can have serious consequences for the 
bivalve aquaculture industry in Hokkaido, which has previously suffered from the impacts of PSTs and DSTs 
(Hokkaido Fisheries Experimental Station, 2000). 
 
In Hokkaido, the monitoring of causative species of PSP began in 1976 together with PST monitoring in 1975 
as a response to a bloom of Gonyaulax (= Alexandrium) species in Lake Saroma in 1974 (Nishihama, 1980; 
Hokkaido Fisheries Experimental Station, 2000).  The first closure of scallop harvesting occurred in Funka 
Bay in 1978 due to PSTs that exceeded the quarantine level (> 4 MU/g; Hokkaido Fisheries Experimental 
Station, 2000).  Figure 3 shows data from the monitoring of PSTs on the coast of Hokkaido from 1980 to 2011. 
Concentrations of PSTs in scallops were high until 1991 then showed relatively weak toxicity in subsequent 
years.  The highest PST concentration was detected in 1989, at 2,812 MU/g hepatopancreas.  Areas affected by 
PSTs, mainly the Pacific coast and Funka Bay, generally correspond to waters influenced by the cold Oyashio 
Current (Figs. 3 and 4).  On the other hand, coastal areas affected by the Tsushima Warm Current (the west 
side of Hokkaido) rarely experience PST closures. 
 
   
Fig. 3 Historical changes in paralytic shellfish toxins (PSTs) (MU/g hepatopancreas) in cultured scallops along the coast 
of Hokkaido.  MU: mouse unit. 
Imai et al.  Japan 
10  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
 
Fig. 4 Schematic paths of the warm currents (Tsushima, Soya and Tsugaru warm currents) and cold currents (East 
Sakhalin Current, Coastal Oyashio and Oyashio around Hokkaido (Isoda and Kishi, 2003). 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5 Historical changes in the toxicity (MU/g meat) of diarrhetic shellfish toxins (DSTs) in cultured scallops along the 
coast of Hokkaido.  MU: mouse unit. 
East Sakhalin 
Current
Pacific 
Ocean
136
o
138
o
140
o
142
o
144
o
146
o
148
o
150
o
E
46
o
N
44
o
42
o
40
o
●
●
●
●
Japan  Imai et al. 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  11 
The DSTs, including okadaic acid (OA) and dinophysistoxins (DTXs), were first identified from the samples 
obtained from a food poisoning incident that occurred in Iwate Prefecture in 1976 (Yasumoto et al., 1978).  
The dinoflagellate, Dinophysis fortii, was identified from this event and reported to be the causative organism 
(Yasumoto et al., 1980).  In Hokkaido, the monitoring of the DSP-causing organisms, Dinophysis spp., began 
in 1980 together with DST monitoring (Nishihama, 1985; Hokkaido Fisheries Experimental Station, 2000).  
Figure 5 demonstrates the historical changes of DSTs in cultured bivalves along the coast of Hokkaido from 
1980 to 2011.  Areas affected by DSTs corresponded to those affected by the Tsushima Warm Current, with 
Funka Bay and Okhotsk Sea as the major areas of DST events.  High DST concentrations in scallops were 
more frequent until around 1993, after which time they became less toxic. 
Adaptation of the scallop harvest to mitigate the impacts of toxic blooms in Funka Bay 
Funka Bay is located in the southwestern part of Hokkaido (Fig. 1).  The cold Oyashio Current generally 
impacts the coastline during winter to spring seasons and the Tsugaru Warm Current tends to dominate during 
summer to autumn seasons (Ohtani and Kido, 1980; Fig. 4).  The scallop aquaculture industry in the bay has 
long suffered from seasonal PST and DST problems, and has frequently experienced harvest closures for 
several months of the year due to shellfish contamination by these toxins. 
  
In late 1970s, mass mortalities of cultured scallops coincided with the increase in production at various 
aquaculture sites, such as Mutsu Bay (Aomori Prefecture), Sanriku coast (Iwate and Miyagi Prefecture) and 
Funka Bay (Hokkaido) mainly due to overcrowding (Kanno and Sato, 1980; Hokkaido Fisheries Experimental 
Station, 2000).  Maintaining adequate densities of farmed scallops in culturing baskets as supportive treatments 
contributed not only to the decrease in mortality rates but also enhanced the growth rates of the scallops.  At 
present, scallop culture uses procedures depicted in Figure 6 to decrease mortalities and to enhance growth.  
 
 
 
Fig. 6 Annual schedule of scallop cultures in Funka Bay (Yakumo Town).  Ear suspended hanging involves drilling a 
hole in the scallop ear (the protruding margin of shell near where the two shells join) and attaching it to a fixed submerged 
line for growth. 
Imai et al.  Japan 
12  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
Most importantly, scallop harvest and shipment are conducted from December to April, just before the 
beginning of the typical toxin period for scallops in Funka Bay.  On the other hand, the scallop culture industry 
on the Okhotsk Sea coast harvest and ship from late April to mid-December.  The shift of harvest and shipment 
times for scallops in Funka Bay is an excellent strategy to avoid competition between the industries in the 
Okhotsk Sea and Funka Bay.  The strategic adaptation of scallop aquaculture industries to toxic blooms has 
resulted in successful mitigation of the effects of harmful algal blooms in Funka Bay. 
Prediction of PSP toxin contamination of scallops in the Okhotsk Sea 
Along the coasts of the Okhotsk Sea, the toxic dinoflagellate Alexandrium tamarense has caused PST 
contamination to scallops once every few years (Fig. 7; Nishihama, 1994; Shimada et al., 2010).  Therefore, 
the prediction of PSP toxin events is important for planning the harvesting and shipping of scallops (e.g., 
recommendation of earlier shipping before closure).  
 
Figure 8 presents a hypothetical scenario for occurrences of PSP toxin contamination of scallops in summer 
along the coast of Hokkaido in the Okhotsk Sea (Shimada et al., 2012).  Alexandrium tamarense cells are 
usually distributed offshore in low salinity surface water of the Okhotsk Sea (Shimada et al., 2010).  Since the 
Soya Warm Current (SWC) flows southeastward and alongshore, it generally dominates in the scallop culture 
area.  Alexandrium tamarense is rarely found in the SWC.  It is now known that the intrusion of oceanic 
surface seawater to the coastal region, corresponding to the weakening of the SWC, is associated with the PST 
contamination of cultured scallops along the coast of the Okhotsk Sea.  The strength of the SWC is driven by 
the sea-level difference (SLD) between Wakkanai and Abashiri (Aota, 1975; Fukamachi et al., 2008). 
Consequently, the following scenario can be presented: PSP occurs when low-salinity water containing  
A. tamarense intrudes into the coastal areas in relation to the weakened SWC due to a decrease of the SLD 
(Fig. 8).  
 
 
Fig. 7 Paralytic shellfish poison (PSP) toxicity in whole meat of scallops along the Okhotsk Sea coast of Hokkaido since 
1980 (data source: Hokkaido Government; Shimada et al., 2012).  The dashed line indicates the quarantine level for PSTs 
(4 MU/g).  *PSP: occurrence over quarantine level; MU: mouse unit. 
Japan  Imai et al. 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  13 
 
Fig. 8 Schematic path of the Soya Warm Current (salinity > 33.6) and location of the scallop fishing grounds and low-
salinity water (salinity < 32.5) in summer by the hypothetical scenarios for (a) normal non-toxic conditions, (b) period of 
paralytic shellfish contamination of scallops by Alexandrium tamarense exposure.  SWC: Soya Warm Current; SLD: sea- 
level difference. 
 
 
Shimada et al. (2012) succeeded in demonstrating the validity of this hypothesis.  In mid-July 2004,  
A. tamarense cells in the Okhotsk Sea intruded into the scallop culturing areas just after a decrease of the SLD.  
In early June 2007, high densities of A. tamarense were found in a front offshore of the SWC, and it was 
predicted that PST contamination of scallops would occur following a decrease of the SLD.  In early July, the 
SLD decreased and A. tamarense cells became abundant in scallop culture areas, resulting in eventual PSTs in 
excess of the quarantine level by mid-July.  In contrast, no bloom of A. tamarense was detected in offshore 
waters in late May 2008.  The SLD decreased in late June, but no PST events were observed along the coast of 
Hokkaido.  
 
In conclusion, the following two conditions are needed for PST contamination of scallops on the Okhotsk Sea 
coast of Hokkaido:  
1. Existence of a bloom of A. tamarense in offshore surface water; 
2. Intrusion of oceanic surface waters containing A. tamarense cells into the coastal areas of Hokkaido due to 
an obvious decrease in the SLD (weakening of Soya Warm Current). 
Imai et al.  Japan 
14  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
When the above two conditions are satisfied, PST events occur a few weeks later.  The PST prediction system 
can be implemented using the flowchart depicted in Figure 9.  For condition 1, the criteria for a bloom of  
A. tamarense should be equivalent to the cell density that causes PSTs to accumulate in scallops over the 
quarantine level.  It is known that A. tamarense density of about 100 cells/liter causes frequent quarantine 
conditions (Hokkaido Fisheries Experimental Station, 2000; Takata et al., 2004).  Therefore, 100 cells/liter or 
higher should be the threshold level used to implement early warning (Shimada et al., 2012).  For condition 2, 
an obvious decrease of SLD is a reduction from the typical value of about 20 cm to about 10 cm.  A decrease 
in sea surface salinity will also correspond to the weakened SWC and can be a helpful criterion to assess the 
decrease of SLD (Shimada et al., 2012). 
 
 
 
Fig. 9 Flowchart for prediction of PST occurrences in scallops on the Okhotsk Sea coast of Hokkaido, based on sea-level 
difference (SLD) between Wakkanai and Abashiri. 
Japan  Imai et al. 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  15 
Overview 
When toxin concentrations in shellfish exceed quarantine levels, the commercial harvest of bivalves is stopped 
on a voluntary basis and shipment of the toxic bivalves to market is prohibited by law (Yamamoto and 
Yamasaki, 1996).  Calculation of economic losses is very difficult; however, temporary workers employed to 
ship bivalves, such as scallops, actually lose their jobs during the period of quarantine.  
  
In recent years, the prediction of the occurrences of PST contamination of scallops has been successful on the 
Okhotsk Sea coast (Shimada et al., 2012).  A future goal is the reduction of fishery damage caused by toxic 
blooms.  Countermeasures against toxic blooms may be used for the prevention of their occurrences.  Recently, 
growth-inhibiting bacteria against the toxic dinoflagellate Alexandrium tamarense were isolated from the 
blades of the seagrass Zostera marina (Onishi et al., 2014).  These bacterial strains revealed strong inhibiting 
activities against A. tamarense.  Further, Nishihama (1994) reported that there are large-scale seagrass beds in 
Lake Saroma, where A. tamarense has rarely caused PST problems, according to long-term observations.  The 
existence of growth-inhibiting bacteria in the biofilm of seagrass blade surfaces provides an enticing 
possibility for biological control of toxic blooms.   
References 
Aota, M. 1975. Studies on the Soya Warm Current. Low Temp. Sci. A33: 151–172 (in Japanese with English summary). 
Fukamachi, Y., Tanaka, I., Oshima, K.I., Ebuchi, N., Mizuta, G., Yoshida, H., Takayanagi, S. and Wakatsuchi, M. 2008. 
Volume transport of the Soya Warm Current revealed by bottom-mounted ADCP and ocean-radar measurement. J. 
Oceanogr. 64: 385–392. 
Fukuyo Y., Imai I., Kodama M. and Tamai K. 2002. Red tides and harmful algal blooms in Japan, pp. 7–20 in Harmful 
Algal Blooms in the PICES Region of the North Pacific edited by F.J. Taylor and V.L. Trainer, PICES Scientific 
Report No. 23, North Pacific Marine Science Organization. 
Hokkaido Fisheries Experimental Station, 2000. The studies on shellfish poison in the coastal water around Hokkaido. 
Technical Report No. 3, Hokkaido Fisheries Experimental Station, Yoichi, Hokkaido, 69 pp. (in Japanese).                   
Imai, I. and Itakura, S. 2007. History of shellfish poisonings and fishery damages in Japan, pp. 9–18 in Advanced 
Researches on Shellfish Poisonings: Current status and Overview edited by I. Imai, Y. Fukuyo and S. Hiroishi, 
Fisheries Science Series 153, Koseisha-Koseikaku, Tokyo (in Japanese).  
Imai, I., Yamaguchi, M. and Hori, Y. 2006. Eutrophication and occurrences of harmful algal blooms in the Seto Inland 
Sea, Japan. Plankton Benthos Res. 1: 71–84. 
Isoda, Y. and Kishi, M.J. 2003. A summary of “Coastal Oyashio” Symposium. Bull. Coast. Oceanogr. 41: 1–3 (in 
Japanese). 
Kanno, H. and Sato, H. 1980. Present aspects of commercial scallop culture in Japan, pp. 11–25 in Systematic Approach to 
Mariculture and Utilization of Scallop, Japanese Society of Fisheries Sciences, Fisheries Science Series 31, Koseisha-
Koseikaku, Tokyo (in Japanese). 
Nishihama, Y. 1980. Environmental factors affecting the occurrence of paralytic shellfish poison in scallop, pp. 40–52 in 
Systematic Approach to Mariculture and Utilization of Scallop, Japanese Society of Fisheries Sciences, Fisheries 
Science Series 31, Koseisha-Koseikaku, Tokyo (in Japanese). 
Nishihama, Y. 1985. Ecology of toxic dinoflagellates in Hokkaido, pp. 47–58 in Toxic Dinoflagellate – Implication in 
Shellfish Poisoning edited by Y. Fukuyo, Fisheries Science Series 56, Koseisha-Koseikaku, Tokyo (in Japanese). 
Nishihama, Y. 1994. Scallop Fishery in the Okhotsk Sea Coast of Hokkaido. Hokkaido University Press, Sapporo, 218 pp. 
(in Japanese).  
Ohtani, K. and Kido, K. 1980. Oceanographic structure in Funka Bay. Bull. Faculty Fish., Hokkaido Univ. 31: 84–114 (in 
Japanese with English abstract).  
Onishi, Y., Mohri, Y., Tuji, A., Ohgi, K., Yamaguchi, A. and Imai, I. 2014. The seagrass Zostera marina harbors growth-
inhibiting bacteria against the toxic dino-flagellate Alexandrium tamarense. Fisheries Sci. 80: 353–362.   
Sakai, K. 1976. Scallop Cultures in Japan. Suisan Hokkaido Kyokai, Sapporo, 750 pp. (in Japanese).   
Shimada, H., Nishida, Y., Ito, Y. and Mizushima, T. 2000. Relationship among growth and survival of cultured scallops 
(Patinopecten yessoensis JAY), and environmental conditions in the coastal area off Yakumo, Funka Bay, Hokkaido, 
Japan. Science Reports of Hokkaido Fisheries Experimental Station 58, pp. 49–62 (in Japanese with English abstract).   
Shimada, H., Sawada, M., Kuribayashi, T., Nakata, A., Miyazono, A. and Asami, H. 2010. Spatial distribution of the toxic 
dinoflagellate Alexandrium tamarense in summer in the Okhotsk Sea off Hokkaido, Japan. Plankton Benthos Res. 5: 
1–10.  
Imai et al.  Japan 
16  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
Shimada, H., Sawada, M., Tanaka, I., Asami, H. and Fukamachi, Y. 2012. A method for predicting the occurrence of 
paralytic shellfish poisoning along the coast of Hokkaido in the Okhotsk Sea in summer. Fish. Sci. 78: 865–877. 
Takata, K., Seno, M., Toukubo, Y., Takatsuji, H., Takayama, H. and Ogawa, H. 2004. Difference in accumulation and 
elimination of paralytic shellfish toxins among oyster, scallop and mussel. Nippon Suisan Gakkaishi 70: 598–606 (in 
Japanese with English abstract). 
Yamamoto, M. and Yamasaki, M. 1996. Japanese monitoring system on shellfish toxins. pp. 19–22 in Harmful and Toxic 
Algal Blooms edited by T. Yasumoto, Y. Oshima and Y. Fukuyo, IOC-UNESCO, Paris.  
Yasumoto T., Oshima, Y. and Yamaguchi, M. 1978. Occurrence of a new type of shellfish poisoning in the Tohoku district. 
Bull. Japanese Soc. Sci. Fish. 44: 1249–1255. 
Yasumoto, T., Oshima, Y., Sugawara, W., Fukuyo, Y., Oguri, H., Igarashi, T. and Fujita, N. 1980. Identification of 
Dinophysis fortii as the causative organism of diarrhetic shellfish poisoning. Nippon Suisan Gakkaishi 46: 1405–1401. 
 
Japan  Itakura and Imai 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  17 
Economic impacts of harmful algal blooms on fisheries and 
aquaculture in western Japan – An overview of interannual 
variability and interspecies comparison 
Shigeru Itakura
1
 and Ichiro Imai
2
 
 
1
 National Research Institute of Aquaculture, Fisheries Research Agency, Mie, Japan 
2
 Graduate School of Fisheries Sciences, Hokkaido University, Hakodate, Hokkaido, Japan 
Abstract 
In Japanese coastal waters, fish kills caused by harmful algal blooms (HABs) have occurred mainly in the 
western part of Japan, in the Seto Inland Sea and the Kyushu coasts.  Since the 1970s, the Japanese Fisheries 
Agency of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries has been gathering data on HABs, or red tides, 
in two areas – the Seto Inland Sea since 1970, and the Kyushu coast since 1979 – and has published annual 
reports.  These reports contain detailed statistics on the number of HAB events and the economic losses 
attributed to each causative species.  Based on these reports, here we make interannual and interspecies 
(causative species) comparisons of the economic impacts of HABs on fisheries and aquaculture in western 
Japan.  In the Seto Inland Sea, the most harmful species causing severe economic losses are Chattonella  
(C. antiqua/marina/ovata), followed by Karenia mikimotoi. For example, Chattonella caused 7.1 billion JPY 
(approximately 73 million USD) of economic losses in Harima-Nada in 1972, and K. mikimotoi caused 
approximately 1.3 billion JPY of economic losses in Bungo-Suido in 2012.  On the Kyushu coast,  
K. mikimotoi and Cochlodinium polykrikoides are the major harmful species, although Chattonella has begun 
to cause severe economic losses in recent years (8.7 billion JPY in Yatsushiro Sea in 2009–2010).  This report 
also describes unrecognized financial losses in coastal communities and some proposed countermeasures to 
mitigate these economic losses. 
Introduction 
Two types of harmful algal blooms (HABs) are known in Japan. The first one is noxious algal blooms (so- 
called “red tides”) associated with the mass mortality of marine organisms, especially fish kills in aquaculture 
cages (Imai et al., 2006).  The second type of HAB is toxic algal blooms causing toxin contamination to 
shellfish that can result in either paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP) or diarrhetic shellfish poisoning (DSP), 
(Fukuyo et al., 2002).  
 
Organizations responsible for monitoring or researching HAB events in Japan include governmental 
organizations (MAFF: Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, MEXT: Ministry of Education, Culture, 
Sports, Science and Technology, MOE: Ministry of the Environment, MHLW: Ministry of Health, Labor and 
Welfare), local prefectural governments and incorporated administrative agencies (i.e., FRA: Fisheries 
Research Agency, NIES: National Institute for Environmental Studies, NIHS: National Institute of Health 
Sciences), incorporated foundations (NPEC: Northwest Pacific Region Environmental Cooperation Center) 
and a number of universities (Fig. 1).  Among these organizations, MAFF compiles statistics on HAB events in 
Japanese coastal waters.  To be more specific, the Fisheries Agency of MAFF gathers statistical data on red 
tides and the Food Safety and Consumer Affairs Bureau of MAFF gathers data on toxic algal blooms. 
Itakura and Imai  Japan 
18  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1 Organizations tied to harmful algal bloom (HAB) events in Japan. MAFF: Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and 
Fisheries; MEXT: Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology; MOE: Ministry of the Environment; 
MHLW: Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare. 
 
 
As described above, statistical data on HABs, including both red tides and toxic algal blooms, are available in 
Japan.  However, statistical data on the economic impacts of HABs are available only for fish kill events. 
Shellfish (also finfish) are rarely killed by toxic algal blooms; therefore, it is very difficult to estimate the 
economic loss due to shipping bans or restrictions caused by outbreaks of the blooms.  For this reason, this 
report focuses on the economic impacts of red tides on aquaculture in Japan. 
 
Japanese marine finfish aquaculture production consists mainly of yellowtail and sea bream.  For instance, in 
2013, the total Japanese marine finfish aquaculture production was 243,600 tons per year, and the annual 
production of yellowtail and sea bream was 150,800 tons and 56,600 tons, respectively (MAFF, 2014). 
Consequently, the production of yellowtail and sea bream accounted for 85% of the total Japanese marine 
finfish aquaculture production in 2013. 
 
  
Japan  Itakura and Imai 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2 Map of the western part of Japan where the main yellowtail and/or sea bream aquaculture sites are located. 
 
 
The main areas of yellowtail and/or sea bream aquaculture are located in the western part of Japan, the Seto 
Inland Sea and the Kyushu coasts (Fig. 2).  Therefore, fish kills caused by red tides occur mainly in these 
areas. The Japanese Fisheries Agency has gathered data on HABs in these two areas:  the Seto Inland Sea since 
1970 (Fisheries Agency 1970–present) and the Kyushu coast since 1979 (Fisheries Agency 1979–present), and 
publishes annual reports (Fisheries Agency, 1970–2008; 1979–2008).  These reports contain detailed statistics 
on the number of HAB events, the economic losses to finfish aquaculture attributed to each event, and the 
causative species.  Guided by those reports, this report makes interannual and interspecies (causative species) 
comparisons of the economic impacts of red tides on finfish aquaculture in western Japan. 
Interannual variability of HAB (red tide) events in the Seto Inland Sea 
Before the 1950s, red tide outbreaks were very rare in the Seto Inland Sea.  The number of red tide cases 
drastically increased in the 1960s and the early 1970s, and reached a peak of 299 cases per year by the middle 
of the 1970s (Fig. 3).  After this period, they declined and have remained relatively stable at approximately 100 
cases per year.  This decrease is thought to be due mainly to governmental regulations regarding eutrophication 
based on laws such as the Law Concerning Special Measures for Conservation of the Environment of the Seto 
Inland Sea (“Seto Inland Sea Law”) which was enforced in 1973 (Fukuyo et al., 2002).  On the other hand, 
there is no obvious trend in the number of fish kill events over time.  After the 1980s, the number of fish kills 
ranged from 2 to 19 cases per year in the Seto Inland Sea (Fig. 3).  
 
Bungo-Suido 
Itakura and Imai  Japan 
20  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
 
Fig. 3 Number of red tides (blue bars) and fish kill cases (red bars) in the Seto Inland Sea (1950–2008). 
 
 
Table 1 displays the amount of annual economic loss due to red tides in the Seto Inland Sea.  Maximum 
economic loss of about 7.1 billion Japanese yen (about 73 million USD) was recorded in 1972 when red tides 
of Chattonella spp. caused severe damage to cultured yellowtail in Harima-Nada in the eastern part of the Seto 
Inland Sea during the summer.  
 
Severe fisheries damage (loss of over 1 billion JPY; about 10 million USD) was observed frequently in the 
1970s to 1980s.  After 1990, the annual economic loss decreased in comparison to the 1970s and 1980s.  
However, even in the 2000s severe fisheries damage (loss of over 1 billion JPY) was recorded in this area.  
 
 
Table 1 Amount of annual economic losses (JPY) due to red tides in the Seto Inland Sea. 
Year Amount (JPY) 
1970  0 
1971  6,700,000 
1972  7,147,060,000 
1973  1,350,000 
1974  70,150,000 
1975  88,000,000 
1976  83,605,000 
1977  2,970,000,000 
1978  3,317,669,000 
1979  1,114,678,000 
Japan  Itakura and Imai 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  21 
 
 
 
Table 1 Continued. 
Year Amount (JPY) 
1980  391,414,000 
1981  109,267,000 
1982  1,098,221,000 
1983  391,414,000 
1984  2,880,641,000 
1985  1,021,068,000 
1986  374,337,000 
1987  2,534,454,000 
1988  27,923,000 
1989  496,951,000 
1990  123,570,000 
1991  1,547,859,000 
1992  18,644,000 
1993  184,085,000 
1994  806,885,000 
1995  963,826,000 
1996  142,632,000 
1997  579,057,000 
1998  3,899,101,000 
1999 no data 
2000  62,440,000 
2001  252,683,000 
2002  222,784,000 
2003  1,299,224,000 
2004  392,342,000 
2005  317,388,000 
2006  203,421,000 
2007  423,660,000 
2008  111,973,000 
 
 
  
Itakura and Imai  Japan 
22  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
Figure 4 shows the number of fisheries damage events due to each causative HAB species in the Seto Inland 
Sea (1980–2008).  In the Bungo-Suido (Bungo Strait) area of the Seto Inland Sea, Karenia spp. (mostly  
K. mikimotoi) caused the majority of fisheries damage after the 1980s.   
 
 
 
Fig. 4 Number of fisheries damage events due to each HAB species in the Seto Inland Sea (1980–2008). 
 
 
Although Chattonella spp. (C. antiqua/marina/ovata) caused much damage to fisheries in the Seto Inland Sea 
in the 1980s (and also in the 1970s), the amount of damage generated by the species decreased after 1990. 
However, from 1995, Heterocapsa circularisquama (briefly), Cochlodinium polykrikoides and diatoms, 
including Coscinodiscus wailesii and Eucampia zodiacus, began to occur frequently (Fig. 4).  Diatom blooms 
(from winter to spring) have led to the exhaustion of nutrients in the water column during the “nori” (Pyropia 
yezoensis, formerly Porphyra yezoensis) harvest season.  Nutrient deficiency has suppressed the growth of 
nori, lowered the quality of nori products due to bleaching, and has caused economic damage on the order of 
billions of Japanese yen (Nishikawa, 2007). 
 
Although it is not fully understood why the composition of damage-causing HAB species changed after the 
mid-1990s, it has been proposed that decreasing inorganic nutrients, such as inorganic nitrogen (Nishikawa et 
al., 2011), and increasing water temperature (Nishikawa et al., 2014; Takizawa et al., 2014) in the Seto Inland 
Sea may play a role.  
  
Japan  Itakura and Imai 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  23 
Interannual variability of HAB (red tide) events in the Kyushu coasts 
On the Kyushu coast, there is no obvious trend in the number of red tide cases from 1979 to 2008 (Fig. 5).  
Table 2 shows the amount of annual economic losses due to red tides on the Kyushu coast.  The maximum 
economic loss of about 4 billion Japanese yen (about 4 million USD) was recorded in 2000 when 
Cochlodinium polykrikoides caused severe damage to cultured yellowtail in Yatsushiro Bay. 
 
  
Table 2 Amount of annual economic losses (JPY) due to red tides on the Kyushu coast. 
Year Amount (JPY) 
1979  11,752,000 
1980  32,726,000 
1981  70,881,000 
1982  142,040,000 
1983  4,163,000 
1984  15,961,000 
1985  889,811,000 
1986  29,923,000 
1987  61,038,000 
1988  49,064,000 
1989  318,814,000 
1990  1,708,675,000 
1991  225,114,000 
1992  621,420,000 
1993  34,805,000 
1994  232,250,000 
1995  1,019,490,000 
1996  7,529,000 
1997 no data 
1998  14,788,000 
1999  819,779,000 
2000  4,335,702,000 
2001  146,904,000 
2002  725,300,000 
2003  829,682,000 
2004  234,085,000 
2005  98,117,000 
2006  20,934,000 
2007  33,530,000 
2008  180,506,000 
Itakura and Imai  Japan 
24  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
 
Fig. 5 Number of red tides (blue bars) and fish kill cases (red bars) on the Kyushu coast (1979–2008). 
 
 
 
Fig. 6 Number of fisheries damage cases due to each HAB species on the Kyushu coast (1980–2008). 
 
Figure 6 depicts the number of cases of fisheries damage from 1980 to 2008 due to each causative HAB 
species on the Kyushu coast. Karenia (mostly K. mikimotoi), Cochlodinium polykrikoides and diatoms were 
the major damage-causing HAB species, although Chattonella began to generate severe economic losses after 
the late 1980s.  
Japan  Itakura and Imai 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  25 
Extensive damage by HABs in western Japan 
Table 3 shows extensive fisheries damage ( ≥1 billion JPY) due to red tides in western Japan from 1972 to 
2012.  In the area, Chattonella (C. antiqua/marina/ovata), Karenia (mostly K. mikimotoi), Cochlodinium 
polykrikoides and Heterosigma akashiwo have caused massive fish kills.  Additionally, after 1990, 
Heterocapsa circularisquama blooms caused shellfish deaths, and diatoms began to cause bleaching of 
Pyropia (nori) in the same area. 
 
 
Table 3 Extensive economic damage (≥1 billion JPY) caused by HABs (red tides) in western Japan.  
Year Area Causative species Damaged organism 
Economic loss 
(billion JPY) 
1972  Harima-Nada  Chattonella  Yellowtail 7.1 
1977  Harima-Nada  Chattonella  Yellowtail 2.7 
1978  Harima-Nada  Chattonella  Yellowtail 3.3 
1984  Kumano-Nada  Karenia  Yellowtail, etc. 4.6 
1991  Aki-Nada, etc.  Karenia  Red sea bream, etc. 1.5 
1992  Ago Bay  Heterocapsa  Pearl oyster 3.0 
1995  Kagoshima Bay  Heterosigma  Yellowtail, etc. 1.0 
1998  Hiroshima Bay  Heterocapsa  Oyster 3.9 
2000  Yatsushiro Sea  Cochlodinium  Yellowtail, etc. 4.0 
2000–2001  Ariake Sea  Diatoms  Pyropia “nori” >10* 
2009–2010  Yatsusiro Sea  Chattonella  Yellowtail, etc. 8.7 
2012  Bungo-Suido  Karenia  Yellowtail, etc. 1.3 
* Estimated amount (No official information) 
 
Unrecognized financial losses in coastal communities and countermeasures to mitigate these 
economic losses 
As mentioned in the beginning of this report, there are unrecognized financial losses attributed to HABs 
(defined as toxic phytoplankton blooms).  In most cases, however, an accurate estimate of the economic loss 
due to HABs is difficult to determine (e.g., a hiring halt may occur due to shipment closure of cultured 
shellfish).  Also, economic losses by damaged wild aquatic resources (direct and/or indirect influence to the 
coastal ecosystem) have not yet been quantified.  There are also economic losses due to a reluctance by 
consumers to buy fishery products when HAB events are reported. 
 
In Japan, aquaculture insurance (mutual aid system) mitigates the economic losses due to HABs. Aquaculture 
insurance is offered under the Fishery Damage Indemnification System in Japan.  The System is both a mutual 
aid system and an important part of the national government’s fishery damage assistance policy (FAO, 2006). 
Itakura and Imai  Japan 
26  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
Conclusions 
In the Seto Inland Sea, the most harmful species causing severe economic losses are Chattonella (C. antiqua/ 
marina/ovata), followed by Karenia mikimotoi.  Chattonella caused a total of 7.1 billion JPY (about 73 million 
USD) in economic losses in Harima-Nada in 1972, and K. mikimotoi caused approximately 1.3 billion JPY in 
economic losses in Bungo-Suido in 2012.  
 
On the Kyushu coast, K. mikimotoi and Cochlodinium polykrikoides are the major harmful species, although 
Chattonella has begun to cause severe economic losses in recent years.  
 
From 1995, the dinoflagellates, Cochlodinium polykrikoides and Heterocapsa circularisquama (briefly), were 
responsible for shellfish deaths, and diatoms began to cause bleaching of Pyropia (“nori”) in the Seto Inland 
Sea and the Kyushu coast.    
 
There has been a change in the composition of damage-causing HAB species after the middle of 1990s in the 
Seto Inland Sea.  Although the reason is not fully understood, it is theorized that changing environmental 
factors, such as decreasing inorganic nutrients and increasing water temperatures in the winter season, may 
play a role in the changes of damage-causing HAB species composition. 
References 
FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2006. Review of the current state of world aquaculture insurance. FAO 
Fisheries Technical Paper, No. 493. Rome, FAO, 92 pp. 
Fisheries Agency. 1970 ~ 2008. Information on the occurrence of red tide in the Seto Inland Sea. Seto Inland Sea Fisheries 
Coordination Office, Annual Report 1970 ~ 2008 (in Japanese). 
Fisheries Agency. 1979 ~ 2008. Information on the occurrence of red tide in the Kyushu coast. Kyushu Fisheries 
Coordination Office, Annual Report 1979 ~ 2008 (in Japanese). 
Fukuyo Y., Imai I., Kodama M. and Tamai K. 2002. Red tides and harmful algal blooms in Japan, pp. 7–20 in Harmful 
algal blooms in the PICES region of the North Pacific edited by F.J. Taylor and V.L. Trainer, PICES Scientific Report 
No. 23, North Pacific Marine Science Organization. 
Imai I., Yamaguchi M. and Hori Y. 2006. Eutrophication and occurrences of harmful algal blooms in the Seto Inland Sea, 
Japan. Plankton Benthos Res. 1: 71–84. 
MAFF (Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries). 2014. Statistics of agriculture, forestry and fisheries (in 
Japanese). http://www.maff.go.jp/j/tokei/kouhyou/kaimen_gyosei/pdf/gyogyou_seisan_13.pdf. 
Nishikawa, T. 2007. Occurrence of diatom blooms and damage to cultured Porphyra thalli by bleaching. Aquabiology 
172: 405–410 (in Japanese with English abstract). 
Nishikawa, T., Hori, Y., Nagai, S., Miyahara, K., Nakamura, Y., Harada, K., Tada, K. and Imai, I. 2011. Long time-series 
observations in population dynamics of the harmful diatom Eucampia zodiacus and environmental factors in Harima-
Nada, eastern Seto Inland Sea, Japan during 1974–2008. Plankton Benthos Res. 6: 26–34. 
Nishikawa, T., Hori, Y., Nagai, S., Miyahara, K., Nakamura, Y., Harada, K., Tada, K. and Imai, I. 2014. Long-term (36-
year) observations on the dynamics of the fish-killing raphidophyte Chattonella in Harima-Nada, eastern Seto Inland 
Sea, Japan. J. Oceanogr. 70: 153–164. 
Takizawa, K., Oka, H., Takimoto S., Nakazato, A. and Motoyama, T. 2014. Trend analysis of monthly water temperature 
at the eastern coast of Suo Nada, 1987–2010. J. Natl. Fisheries Univ. 62: 117–128. 
 
People’s Republic of China  Guo et al. 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  27 
The economic cost of red tides in China from 2008–2012 
Hao Guo
1,2
, Xiaoxu Liu
3
, Dewen Ding
1
, Chunjiang Guan
2
 and Xiaolei Yi
4
 
 
1
 Dalian Maritime University, Dalian, People’s Republic of China 
2
 National Marine Environmental Monitoring Center, State Oceanic Administration Dalian, People’s Republic of China 
3
 College of Fisheries and Life Science, Dalian Ocean University, Dalian, People’s Republic of China 
4
 State Oceanic Administration, Beijing, People’s Republic of China  
Abstract 
More than 330 cases of red tides covering an area of 52,777 km
2
, with the economic cost of these disasters 
totaling nearly 2.23 billion Chinese Yuan (364 million USD), were reported in China from 2008 to 2012.  Our 
coastal surveys show that the southeast coastline of China is an important area for the frequent occurrence of 
red tides which cause enormous economic losses.  The primary months of annual red tides are May and June 
when the dominant species are Karenia mikimotoi, Skeletonema costatum, Noctiluca scientillans, and 
Prorocentrum donghaiense.  The major harmful phytoplankton are Karenia mikimotoi, Cochlodinium geminatum, 
Aureococcus anophagefferen, and Prorocentrum donghaiense. 
Introduction 
China is a coastal country with 18,000 km of mainland coastline.  The total sea area claimed under China’s 
jurisdiction is about 3,000,000 km
2
, including the Bohai Sea and the areas in the Yellow Sea, East China Sea 
and South China Sea
1
.  There are more than 1,500 rivers flowing into these seas through broad drainage basins. 
China’s seas also boast of abundant marine biodiversity, with more than 22,600 species documented, and 
various types of marine ecosystems, such as mangroves, coral reefs, sea grass beds, and coastal wetlands. 
 
In 2011, for example, the coasts of China were believed to be in good condition, as 95% of all sea areas met 
Seawater Quality Standard Category I standards (SOA, 2011).  The marine sediment quality in coastal waters 
has also been determined generally to be in good condition.  However, some of the coastal areas have recently 
been subjected to adverse impacts from land-based pollution, environmental disasters, and habitat destruction. 
The occurrence of red tides may cause environmental pressures, such as anomalies in the seawater 
hydrochemistry and imbalances in marine ecology, with serious impacts on the eco-environment of China’s 
coastal areas. 
Monitoring system for harmful algal blooms in China 
In order to understand the overall environmental status of the China’s sea areas, more than 9,800 survey 
stations were established in order to obtain over 2.5 million marine environmental data points.  This national 
                                                           
1
 Although the South China Sea is not in the PICES convention area, it is being included for completeness in this 
report, as these are part of China’s waters. 
Guo et al.  People’s Republic of China 
28  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
monitoring system of harmful algal blooms (HABs) began in 2002 with the establishment of 10 monitoring 
zones.  Today, 19 HAB monitoring and control zones and 16 ecological monitoring and control zones are 
distributed along the Chinese coast to enhance the understanding of HABs.  Monitoring and control zones for 
HABs were selected mainly in aquaculture areas, ecological protection areas, recreation resorts, and areas 
where HABs frequently occur. 
 
At present, China’s major means of monitoring marine red tides include fixed-point monitoring by ship 
surveys, satellite remote sensing, and aerial remote sensing.  At the same time, monitoring at coastal stations 
and buoys, with subsequent laboratory testing, is used frequently.  Panoramic and land-based monitoring 
systems greatly enhance the discovery of HABs and emergency response protocols play an important role in 
mitigating the impacts of red tides. 
Algal blooms in China 
Red tides are important environmental problems in coastal areas and may do great harm to society and coastal 
economics.  The first record of red tide in China is from 1933 and since that year, more than 1200 HAB events 
have been recorded.  Specifically, there were only 14 cases of red tides before 1979, 75 cases in the 1980s, 226 
cases in the 1990s, and nearly 1000 cases from 2000 to 2012 (Fig. 1).  The frequency and scale of observed 
marine red tides reached a maximum during 2003–2006.  In addition, poisonous and harmful species have 
increased in recent years.  It appears that the duration and frequency of HABs have increased; furthermore, 
their scope of influence and harmful effects have also increased. 
 
 
 
 
The characteristics of marine red tides include their duration, concentration, and spatial extent.  Red tides may 
occur in China during all seasons of the year.  In the Bohai and Huanghai sea areas, red tides occur in April–
October every year, with the most intense spatial blooms occurring in July–September.  In the East China Sea, 
red tides occur in February–October, with the highest concentration blooms in May–August.  In the South 
China Sea, red tides occur all year round, with the periods of most concentrated blooms occurring mainly in 
March–May and August–November.  The duration of individual red tides can range from 3–5 days to 2 weeks 
to over 1 month. 
 
  
10172  
53  
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Average
Frequency of algal blooms 
Area of algal blooms (km
2
) 
Area
Frequency
Fig. 1 Harmful algal blooms in China during the past two decades. 
People’s Republic of China  Guo et al. 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  29 
In the 1980s, red tides were mainly found in small semi-enclosed bays.  Since the 1990s, however, the 
occurrence of red tides has been recorded mostly in China’s nearshore waters.  The results of monitoring show 
that the areas where red tides appear more frequently are located mainly along southeast China Sea and some 
bays as well as estuaries like Dalian Bay, Jiaozhou Bay, Hangzhou Bay, Shenzhen Bay, Daya Bay, the sea near 
the Changjiang River mouth, and the Zhujiang River mouth.  The area of red tides in the Bohai Sea and the 
Changjiang River mouth is relatively large while those in the Zhujiang River mouth are relatively smaller, but 
occur with higher frequency.  The scope of individual red tides has expanded from several km
2
 to thousands of 
km
2
 over the past two decades. 
The characteristics of algal blooms in China from 2008 to 2012 
General observations 
 
There was an average of nearly 67 HAB events over an average affected area of 10,556 km
2
 in Chinese coastal 
areas annually from 2008 to 2012 (Fig. 2).  The occurrences of marine red tides and affected areas have 
remained relatively constant over the past 20 years. 
 
 
 
 
 
Harmful algal blooms in Chinese coastal waters are located mainly in the East China Sea where the number of 
occurrences and areas are evidently much higher than in the other three sea regions over these past five years 
(more than 57% of the total red tides and 54% of the total HAB area are in the East China Sea).  On average, 
there were 7 events and an affected area of 2590 km
2
 in the Bohai Sea, 11 events and 1950 km
2
 in the Yellow 
Sea, 38 events and 5690 km
2
 in the East China Sea, 11 events and 321 km
2
 in the South China Sea every year 
(Figs. 3 and 4).  Large-scale HAB events occurred mainly in marine waters adjacent to the Yangtze River 
estuary and in the southeast coastal waters of China. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10556  
67  
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Average
Frequency of algal blooms 
Area of algal blooms(Km
2
) 
Area Frequency
Fig. 2 Distribution of HABs from 2008 to 2012. 
Guo et al.  People’s Republic of China 
30  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
Frequency of algal blooms 
Bohai Sea Yellow Sea East China Sea South China Sea
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
Area of algal blooms (km
2
) 
Bohai Sea Yellow Sea
East China Sea South China Sea
Fig. 3 HAB frequency in 4 areas during 2008–2012. 
Fig. 4 HAB scale in 4 areas during 2008–2012. 
People’s Republic of China  Guo et al. 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  31 
Monthly distribution 
 
The occurrence of HAB events and affected areas showed a normal distribution.  The main seasons of the 
annual events were from April–October, with the majority occurring in May and June (Figs. 5 and 6).  The 
number of occurrences and areas were much higher than in other seasons, with May and June events 
accounting for 52% and 73%, respectively of the total HAB events over the past five years.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disaster-causing species and its toxicity  
 
There are more than 260 species of marine red tide organisms.  About 90 species have latent toxins, most 
belonging to the group Pyrrophyta (Sournia, 1995).  There are about 40 known genera and 140 species of red 
tide organisms in China. The dominant species are Karenia mikimotoi, Skeletonema costatum, Noctiluca 
scintillans, and Prorocentrum donghaiense.  The major fish-killing organisms are Karenia mikimotoi, 
Cochlodinium geminatum, and Prorocentrum donghaiense. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
Frequency of algal blooms 
South China Sea East China Sea
Yellow Sea Bohai Sea
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
Area of algal blooms (km
2
) 
South China Sea East China Sea
Yellow Sea Bohai Sea
Fig. 5 Monthly distribution of HABs from 2008–2012. 
Fig. 6 Monthly distribution of HAB area from 2008–2012. 
Guo et al.  People’s Republic of China 
32  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
In many cases, algal blooms are considered harmless.  However, it is when these algal blooms exceed a 
threshold level that they begin to have negative impacts on the environment and human health.  Harmful algal 
blooms impact coastal fisheries by clogging gills of fish in captivity, depleting oxygen, thereby causing 
hypoxia, and by production of toxins causing diarrhetic shellfish poisoning (DSP), paralytic shellfish 
poisoning (PSP), neurotoxic shellfish poisoning (NSP), amnesic shellfish poisoning (ASP), and ciguatera fish 
poisoning in humans.  These red tides generally are of concern only when they are close to shore where they 
can impact coastal fisheries.  
 
Here, we will describe red tide events that have had negative impacts on the economy in coastal China.  In 
2008, Noctiluca scintillans broke out in Liaoning Province.  Although this species does not produce a toxin, it 
is found to accumulate toxic levels of ammonia which are excreted into the surrounding waters.  It caused high 
mortalities of cultivated shellfish (Ruditapes philippinarum, Meretrix meretrix) and led to 200 thousand 
Chinese Yuan (32.6 thousand USD) in economic losses (Table 1).  
 
 
Table 1 Major disaster-causing HABs events and direct economic losses (million USD) in China’s four seas regions. 
Date Region Species 
Area 
(km
2
) 
Affected species 
Loss 
(millions 
USD) 
June 2008 Yellow Sea Noctiluca scintillans 500 cultivated shellfish – 
Ruditapes philippinarum,  
Meretrix meretrix 
 0.03  
May 2009 East China Sea Noctiluca scintillans 30 mariculture – 
Seriola quinqueradiata 
 1.14  
May–June 2010 Bohai Sea Aureococcus anophagefferen 3350 cultivated shellfish – 
Argopecten irradians 
 32.68  
July 2010 Bohai Sea Mesodinium rubrum 20 cultivated shellfish – 
Argopecten irradians 
 0.82  
May 2010 East China Sea Prorocentrum donghaiense 30 cultivated fish – 
Pseudosciaena crocea 
 0.11  
June 2010 East China Sea Karenia mikimotoi 7 cultivated fish & juvenile 
fish 
 0.01  
May–June 2010 East China Sea Karenia mikimotoi, 
Prorocentrum donghaiense 
628 cultivated abalone – 
Haliotis discushannai, 
Haliotis diversicolor 
 329.28  
May–June 2011 East China Sea Prorocentrum donghaiense 50 mariculture – 
Epinephelus sp., 
Octopus vulgaris 
 0.01  
August 2011 South China Sea Cochlodinium geminatum 89 cultivated fish fry & 
juvenile fish – 
Ephippus orbis, 
Epinephelus awoara 
 0.52  
 
 
In 2010, Mesodinium rubrum covered 20 km
2
 and led to 5 million Chinese Yuan (0.82 million USD) in 
economic losses along Hebei Province, even though this species is rarely linked to damage.  
 
In 2011, economic loss of more than 3.2 million Chinese Yuan (0.52 million USD) was caused by 
Cochlodinium, which spread to a maximum area of 89 km
2
 in Guangdong Province, affecting fish fry and 
juvenile fish (Lateolabrax japonicas).  Ichthyotoxins produced by Cochlodinium have caused major losses in 
fishery and shell fishery production in many countries.  It is believe that this species expanded into Chinese 
coastal waters beginning in 2006.  
People’s Republic of China  Guo et al. 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  33 
In 2012, Karenia mikimotoi caused huge damage to the mariculture industries of Zhejiang and Fujian 
provinces, especially to cultivated abalone.  The direct economic loss was more than 2 billion Chinese Yuan 
(330 million USD). 
 
There are two major disaster-causing species in China.  One is Prorocentrum donghaiense D. Lu, a very 
common species along the East China Sea in recent years, which frequently co-occurs with Karenia mikimotoi. 
Some experiments with this species show its specific damage to marine organisms.  Another harmful alga is 
Aureococcus anophagefferens Hargraves & Sieburth which causes brown tides.  From 2009 to 2012, with a 
maximum cell density around 10
9
 cell/L, it caused huge damage to the scallop culture industry along Hebei 
Province.  The bloom significantly damaged the mariculture industry in this region by causing cessation of 
feeding and stagnant growth of scallops.  For example, in May–June, 2010, it was responsible for 32.7 million 
USD economic losses. 
Economic cost of HABs in China from 2008 to 2012 
Direct economic loss from HABs in China’s four sea areas 
 
There were more than 330 cases of red tides in China from 2008 to 2012, encompassing a total area of 
53,000 km
2
, with an economic cost of nearly 2.23 billion Chinese Yuan (364 million USD).  These red tides 
caused great harm to marine fisheries, resulting in enormous economic losses.  The hardest hit areas were 
mainly in southeast Chinese coastal waters where 17 disastrous HABs broke out and led to direct economic 
loss, accounting for about 91% of the total losses.  However, the largest scale HAB events were in the Bohai 
Sea (Fig. 7). 
 
 
 
 
Variability of economic loss from 2008 to 2012 
 
Two significant features of economic loss in China are shown in Figure 8.  The first is that the largest area of 
HABs (about 3350 km
2
), caused by Aureococcus anophagefferen, occurred in May–June 2010 in 
Qinghuangdao, Hebei Province.  The highest direct economic loss, of about 2.02 billion Chinese Yuan (330 
million USD), was in 2012 and accounted for about 91% of the total documented losses due to red tides 
(Fig. 11).  The main species responsible for this costly event was Karenia mikimotoi which affected cultivated 
abalone.  The average annual loss during 2008–2012 was 446 Chinese Yuan (73 million USD). 
Bohai Sea Yellow Sea East China Sea
South China
Sea
Area 3370 500 745 89
Frequency 2 1 17 1
Loss(USD) 33.50 0.03 330.44 0.52
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
Area of algal blooms (Km
2
) 
Direct economic loss (million USD) 
Fig. 7 Direct economic loss of HABs in 4 areas from 2008 from 2012. 
Guo et al.  People’s Republic of China 
34  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
 
 
Summary 
China is a major maritime country.  The ocean occupies an important strategic position in China’s national 
economy and social development.  However, while marine development and the coastal economy in China are 
advancing rapidly, several problems impacting the marine environment must be considered.  With yearly 
increases of nutrients and organic compounds polluting the sea, marine red tide disasters have also occurred 
more frequently. The main disaster-causing species are Karenia mikimotoi, Skeletonema costatum, 
Aureococcus anophagefferen, Noctiluca scintillans, Cochlodinium geminatum, and Prorocentrum donghaiense. 
 
There were nearly 70 cases of HABs over approximately 10,560 km
2 
annually from 2008 to 2012, 
accompanied with the total direct economic loss of nearly 450 million Chinese Yuan (73 million USD).  The 
southeast coastal area of China is an important fishery area where red tides occur frequently, causing enormous 
economic losses.  The worst-hit species affected by these red tides are cultivated abalone (Haliotis discus 
hannai, Haliotis diversicolor), scallop (Patinopecten yessoensis, Argopecten irradians, Chlamys farreri) and 
fish (Lateolabrax japonicas). 
 
Harmful algal blooms are a global marine issue as well as a major marine disaster in China.  Management and 
disaster mitigation are of great importance in China.  Mitigation efforts should be focused on the adverse 
impact of land-based pollution that can result in environmental disasters and habitat destruction.  This should 
be an area of future research and management. 
References 
SOA (State Oceanic Administration of China). 2011. Bulletin of Marine Environmental Status of China in 2011.  
Sournia A. 1995. Red tide and marine phytoplankton of the world ocean: an inquiry into biodiversity in Harmful 
Marine Algal Blooms edited by P. Lassus, G. Arzul, E. Erard-Le Denn, P. Gentien and C. Marcaillou-LeBaut, 
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Toxic Marine Phytoplankton, 1993, Lavoisier, Paris. 
 
 
 
 
  
2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 Average
Area 500 30 3407 139 628 940.8
Frequency 1 2 4 2 12 4.2
Loss(USD) 0.03 1.06 33.66 0.53 329.25 73
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
Area of algal blooms (Km
2
) 
Direct economic loss (million USD) 
Fig. 8 Direct economic loss of disasterous HABs during 2008–2012. 
Republic of Korea  Lee et al. 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  35 
Economic losses to the aquaculture industry by harmful algal 
blooms in Korea since 2001 
Changkyu Lee, Youngtae Park, Taegyu Park and Youngsang Suh 
 
Fishery and Ocean Information Division, National Fisheries Research and Development Institute, Ministry of 
Oceans and Fisheries, Busan, Republic of Korea 
 
Introduction 
Since the 1970s, annual aquaculture production (fish, shellfish and macro algae) in Korea has increased 
steadily each year from around 147,000 metric tons in 1971, to an excess of 700,000 metric tons in 1981, and 
around 1.2–1.5 million metric tons since 2006 (Yoon, 2008; KOSTAT, 2013).  In 2012, finfish production was 
7630 metric tons, accounting for about 6% of total aquaculture production (KOSTAT, 2013).  In 2012, the 
total area of finfish cage culture farms in Korean waters was approximately 1,076,309 square meters 
(KOSTAT, 2013).  Most of the cage culture farms are concentrated along the south coast of Korea rather than 
the east and west coasts due to conditions that are beneficial to aquaculture in the south, including the 
protection of semi-closed bays and islands and moderate tidal ranges.  This archipelagic environment makes it 
an ideal place for the installation of cages.  With the development of advanced aquaculture technology, a 
number of important aquaculture species have become lucrative in Korea since the late 1980s, including olive 
flounder, Paralichthys olivaceus, Korean rockfish, Sebastes schlegeli, sea bream, Pagrus major and 
Acanthopagrus schlegeli, and grey mullet, Mugil cephalus, which have been important aquaculture species 
since the late 1980s (Lim, 2006).  The highest yields of aquacultured fish are olive flounder (51%), followed 
by Korean rockfish (29%), grey mullet (7%), sea bream (5%) and sea bass (2%; KOSTAT, 2013).  Cage 
cultures are much more common than land-based cultures for Korean rockfish, sea bream and sea bass along 
the southern coast (Lim, 2006; Yoon, 2008; KOSTAT, 2013).  
 
Harmful algal blooms (HABs) have become more frequent in Korean waters since the 1990s, although less 
dense blooms were sporadic until the 1980s.  In particular, blooms by the fish killing dinoflagellate, 
Cochlodinium polykrikoides, have become annual and persistent occurrences since the mid-1990s, after the 
first event was recorded in Jinhae Bay in 1982 (Kim, 1997; Lee et al., 2013b).  The first fish kill by HABs (by 
Karenia mikimotoi) in Korea occurred in 1981, resulting in fisheries losses of 1.7 million USD.  In 1992, 
Gyrodinium sp. caused fisheries losses of 5 million USD (NFRDI, 2010).  Since then, C. polykrikoides caused 
fish kills with fisheries losses of 7 million USD in 1993 and 60 million USD in 1995 (the largest fish kill). 
Through the 2000s and 2010s, C. polykrikoides was the single most important fish killing species causing 
damage to aquaculture farms in Korea (Fig. 1). 
Lee et al.  Republic of Korea 
36  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
 
Fig. 1 Caged fish kill caused by a Cochlodinium bloom in Korea. 
 
 
The main factors leading to fish kills by C. polykrikoides blooms have been reported to be associated with 
structural and functional changes at the gill filament/tissue level (inactivation of enzymes, decrease of partial 
blood pressure and distortion of the epithelium, etc.) resulting in suffocation by the decrease in oxygen 
exchange in the fish gills (Kim et al., 1999; Kim et al., 2000; Kim et al., 2001; Kim et al., 2002a; Kim et al., 
2002b). These observations suggest that finfish flesh does not become toxic by C. polykrikoides blooms and 
does not cause human health concerns.  
 
The National Fisheries Research and Development Institute (NFRDI) and fisheries extension service stations 
under local governments have their own HAB monitoring networks covering the entire Korean coastline.  The 
stations were established in 1995 to monitor massive fish kills by C. polykrikoides blooms.  In addition, special 
monitoring programs targeting Cochlodinium are in place before, during, and after blooms on the south coast 
where there have been frequent and dense blooms since 2000.  This monitoring program is aimed primarily at 
early prediction and warning of Cochlodinium blooms based on biological and hydrological data collected 
through field surveys at 2-week intervals from June to October.  A HAB clearinghouse at NFRDI collects all 
available biological and hydrological data from both monitoring institutes and coastal environment observation 
buoys deployed near aquaculture farms, and collates available meteorological and remote sensing data to 
synthesize, analyze and publish a daily HABs newsletter.  The newsletter, describing causative organisms, cell 
densities, affected and warning areas, is disseminated to fishermen and HAB agencies by automated telephone 
response system, short message service (SMS), satellite TV, fax, and via a webpage.  NFRDI has adopted a 
HABs warning system for fishermen and aquaculturists consisting of two levels: red tide attention (<300 
cells/ml) and red tide alert (<1,000 cells/ml). 
 
In this report, characteristics of HAB occurrences and economic losses in association with C. polykrikoides 
blooms from 2001 to 2012 are provided, which might be helpful for researchers and policymakers to 
understand and mitigate the fisheries impact by HABs in Korea.   
Republic of Korea  Lee et al. 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  37 
Methods 
Data on HAB events were collected through both a regular HABs monitoring program at 98 sites along the 
entire Korean coast (Fig. 2), and a special Cochlodinium monitoring program for 30 sites on the south coast 
where there have been frequent and dense blooms.  Data on HAB causative species, cell density, areas affected 
by blooms, hydrological (CTD) measurements and water quality (nutrients) were collected by the regular 
HABs monitoring and special Cochlodinium monitoring programs, conducting monthly from March to 
November and every the other week from June to October, respectively.  The relative bloom intensity of 
Cochlodinium (0–10 points) was calculated based on a summary value determined from the following: cell 
density (0–3 points), bloom duration (0–3 points), area affected by bloom (0–3 points) and direct fisheries 
losses (0–1 point).  Data on direct fisheries losses due to Cochlodinium blooms were gathered from statistics 
reported by the local government and/or Ministry of Oceans and Fisheries (MOF, 2012).  Additional costs 
were calculated based on the expenses for HAB control by clay (sum of purchase, transportation and dispersal) 
by local governments who are in charge of HAB mitigation during blooms.  However, indirect economic 
losses by HABs (e.g., purchasing and running of mitigation equipment, fuel and labour for mitigation 
activities, retarded fish growth resulting from reduced or no feeding during blooms, reduction of fisheries 
consumption and decrease of marine recreational activities) were not included in this report. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2 Map showing regular HAB monitoring locations along the Korean coastline. 
 
  
Lee et al.  Republic of Korea 
38  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
Results 
HAB events and bloom intensity of Cochlodinium during 2001–2012 
 
A total of 470 HAB events were recorded, of which 155 events were caused by fish killing species that 
occurred along the entire Korean coast from 2001 to 2012 (Fig. 3).  HAB events caused by non-fish killing 
species (67%) were much higher than those by fish killing species (Cochlodinium polykrikoides and 
Chattonella spp.) during this period.  Overall, the number of HAB events has decreased gradually since the 
latter half of the 2000s, and the decrease was closely associated with a decrease in C. polykrikoides blooms.  In 
particular, the number of C. polykrikoides blooms in 2010 was very low (3 events), with no bloom observed in 
2011.  From the latter half of the 2000s, the most frequent red tides were caused by C. polykrikoides, 
Heterosigma akashiwo, Noctiluca scintillans, Skeletonema coastatum, Akashiwo sanguinea, Prorocentrum 
minimum, Gonyaulax polygramma, Mesodinium rubrum, Prorocentrum dentatum/donghaiense, Chatonella 
antiqua and C. marina, among which C. polykrikoides was the only species that led to fish kills during the period.  
 
On the other hand, the intensity of C. polykrikoides blooms was comparatively high in 2007 (9.5 relative 
bloom intensity), 2003 (9.2), 2001 (8.5), 2005 (8.0) and 2002 (7.9); low in 2009–2011 (2–0), 2006 (3.9), 2004 
(4.8) and 2008 (5.9).  In particular, the bloom intensity in 2007 and 2003 was remarkably high at more than 9.2 
of a possible 10 total relative bloom intensity points (Fig. 4). 
  
 
 
Fig. 3 Number of HAB events on Korean coasts during 2001–2012. 
 
 
0
20
40
60
80
 '01 '02 '03 '04 '05 '06 '07 '08 '09 '10 '11 '12
HAB event 
Year 
 non-fish killing species
 fish killing species
0
2
4
6
8
10
 '01 '02 '03 '04 '05 '06 '07 '08 '09 '10 '11 '12
Bloom intensity 
Year 
Fig. 4 Intensity of Cochlodinium blooms on Korean coastlines during 2001–2012. 
Republic of Korea  Lee et al. 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  39 
Direct economic losses due to HABs 
 
Fish kills by HABs in Korea from 2001 to 2012 were caused only by C. polykrikoides blooms.  Direct fisheries 
losses to aquaculture farms due to C. polykrikoides blooms are shown in Figure 5.  Total direct losses due to  
C. polykrikoides blooms from 2001 to 2012 were 53.22 billion Korean Won (equivalent to about 52 million 
USD).  Direct fisheries losses were relatively high in 2003 (22.3 billion KRW), 2007 (11.5 billion KRW) and 
2001 (8.4 billion KRW), with low or no losses in 2004–2006 and 2008–2011.  In particular, there were about 
13 million individual finfish and shellfish mortalities in 2003.  Overall, high fisheries losses occurred in years 
when the bloom intensity of C. polykrikoides was comparatively high (< 9 points).  
 
 
Fig. 5 Direct losses to aquaculture farms due to Cochlodinium blooms from 2001–2012. 
 
 
Associated economic losses due to HABs 
 
Bloom mitigation measures include several techniques such as: direct control of harmful algae by physical, 
biological and chemical methods, injection of liquefied oxygen into the culture tanks/cages to increase 
dissolved oxygen levels, thereby preventing suffocation of fish, and withholding feeding to minimize the 
oxygen requirement for fish (NFRDI, 2005; Park et al., 2013).  Clay dispersal is the major HAB mitigation 
technique in Korea, primarily because yellow clay is relatively inexpensive with high removal efficiency and is 
easy to apply in the field without serious impacts on aquatic organisms (Yu et al., 2004; Seo et al., 2008; Lee 
et al., 2013a).  
 
In this report, additional economic losses by HABs were calculated to include the expenses for clay control 
activities by local governments who are in charge of mitigation during blooms.  In 2012, it was estimated that 
local governments spent approximately one billion Korean Won (equivalent to about one million USD) for 
clay control activities (mostly for purchase, transport/shipping and field dispersal of clay).  
 
Aquaculturists’ expenses to minimize fish kill against HABs go towards purchasing/running mitigation 
equipment (bubblers, oxygen suppliers including liquefied oxygen, algae filtration units, motors for deep water 
pumping into cages, etc.), and mitigation activities to dilute and control algal patches by boats.  Moreover, it is 
inevitable for aquaculturists to have economic losses due to retarded fish growth resulting from reduced or no 
feeding during HABs.  Income to fisheries villages is also reduced due to the decrease in numbers of visitors 
participating in marine recreational activities along the coasts, including sports fishing during HAB events.  
Accordingly, such indirect economic losses should be considered in the estimation of total economic losses 
due to HABs.  However, indirect economic losses were not included in this report even though they may be 
considerable. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
'01 '02 '03 '04 '05 '06 '07 08 09 00 01 12
8.4 
4.8 
22.3 
0.12 
1 
0.7 
11.5 
0 0 
0 0 
4.4 
Economic loss (Billion KRW) 
Year 
Lee et al.  Republic of Korea 
40  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
Summary 
From 2001 to 2012, direct fisheries losses to aquaculture farms by HABs exceeded 53 billion Korean Won 
(equivalent to about 52 million USD). Cochlodinium polykrikoides was responsible for fish kills in Korea 
during this period.  High fisheries losses occurred in 2003 and 2007 when the bloom intensity of  
C. polykrikoides was remarkably high.  It was estimated that local governments spent approximately one 
billion Korean Won (equivalent to about one million USD) for clay control activities in 2012. 
References 
Lee, C.K., Kim, W.S., Park, Y.T. and Jo, Q. 2013a. Effect of yellow clay on oxygen consumption rate of Korean rockfish, 
Sebastes schlegelii. J. Kor. Soc. Mar. Environ. Safety 19: 241–247. 
Lee, C.K., Park, T.G., Park, Y.T. and Lim, W.A. 2013b. Monitoring and trends in harmful algal blooms and red tides in 
Korean coastal waters, with emphasis on Cochlodinium polykrikoides. Harmful Algae 30S: S3–S14. 
Lim, H.K. 2006. Korean aquaculture: Status and future directions. Aquaculture Research Team, Report. National Fisheries 
Research and Development Institute, Republic of Korea. 
Kim, H.G. 1997. Recent harmful algal blooms and mitigation strategies in Korea. Ocean Res. 19: 185–192. 
Kim, C.S., Jee, B.Y. and Bae, H.M. 2002a. Structural alterations in the gill of the red sea bream, Pagrus major, exposed to 
the harmful dinoflagellate Cochlodinium polykrikoides. J. Fish. Sci. Tech. 5: 75–78. 
Kim, C.S., Lee, S.G., Lee, C.K., Kim, H.G. and Jung, J. 1999. Reactive oxygen species as causative agents in the 
ichthyotoxicity of the red tide dinoflagellate Cochlodinium polykrikoides. J. Plankton Res. 21: 2105–2115. 
Kim, C.S., Lee, S.G. and Kim, H.G. 2000. Biochemical responses of fish exposed to a harmful dinoflagellate 
Cochlodinium polykrikoides. J. Exper. Mar. Biol. Ecol. 254: 131–141.  
Kim, C.S., Lee, S.G., Kim, H.G. and Lee, J.S. 2001. Screening for toxic compounds in the red tide dinoflagellate 
Cochlodinium polykrikoides: Is it toxic plankton? Algae 16: 457–462. 
Kim, D., Oda, T., Muramatsu, T., Kim, D., Matsuyama, Y. and Honjo, T. 2002b. Possible factors responsible for the fish-
killing mechanism of the red tide phytoplankton, Chattonella marina and Cochlodinium polykrikoides, pp. 245–268 in 
Coastal Environmental Ecosystem Issues of the East China Sea edited by A. Ishimatsu, and H.J. Lie, TERRAPUB and 
Nagasaki University, Tokyo and Nagasaki. 
KOSTAT (Statistics Korea). 2013. Statistics of finfish production in Korea. Korean Statistical Information Service 
(http://kosis.kr/statisticsList).  
MOF (Ministry of Oceans and Fisheries). 2012. Counter plan for red tide mitigation. 2012 meeting report of MOF for 
HAB measure. Seoul, Korea.  
NFRDI (National Fisheries Research and Development Institute). 2005. Guideline for HAB mitigation in the field. 15 pp. 
Busan, Korea.  
NFRDI. 2010. Monitoring, management and mitigation of red tide. Annual Report of NFRDI on red tide of Korea. Busan, 
Korea.  
Park, T.G., Lim, W.A., Park, Y.T., Lee, C.K. and Jeong, H.J. 2013. Economic impact, management and mitigation of red 
tides in Korea. Harmful Algae 30S: S131–S143. 
Seo, K.S., Lee, C.K., Park, Y.T. and Lee, Y. 2008. Effect of yellow clay on respiration and phytoplankton uptake of 
bivalves. Fish. Sci. 74: 120–127. 
Yoon, G.H. 2008. Aquaculture in Korea. Aquaculture News 34: 16–17. 
Yu, Z., Sengco, M.R. and Anderson, D.M. 2004. Flocculation and removal of the brown tide organism Aureococcus 
anophagefferens (Chrysophyceae), using clays. J. Appl. Phycol. 16: 101–110. 
 
 
Russia  Orlova et al. 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  41 
Harmful algal blooms on the Russian east coast and their possible 
economic impacts 
Tatiana Orlova
1
, Tatiana Morozova
1
, Polina Kameneva
1
 and Olga Shevchenko
1,2
 
1 
A.V. Zhirmunsky Institute of Marine Biology of the Far Eastern Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Vladivostok, Russia 
2 
Research and Educational Center “Primorsky Aquarium” of the Far eastern Branch of the Russian Academy of 
Sciences, Vladivostok, Russia 
 
Introduction 
Harmful algal blooms (HABs) have serious economic impacts on fisheries and cause harm to people’s health 
in countries of the PICES region, including the northern Russian Pacific region.  A monitoring program aimed 
to analyze the presence of HAB species in the coastal waters of Primorsky Krai and screen for phycotoxins in 
shellfish was launched in 2007.  Data from this monitoring program revealed a real threat of diarrhetic 
shellfish poisoning, from measurements of okadaic acid and dinophysistoxins in shellfish in excess of their 
guidance limit.  Nevertheless, there is no effective governmental monitoring of HABs and phycotoxins in 
Russia, although there is a law on appropriate concentrations of phycotoxins in seafood.  There are no routine 
measurements of phycotoxins as part of a sanitation program and as a consequence, these toxins are not 
diagnosed or recorded by medical or sanitary organizations.  These are the primary reasons for not having 
formal data on the economic impacts of HABs, as well as their harm on people’s health in Primorsky Krai and 
for the whole Far Eastern region of Russia.  In this report, we will make a first attempt to estimate the potential 
economic impacts and harm to people’s health caused by HABs based on analysis of data obtained by the 
Center for Monitoring of Harmful Algal Blooms and Biotoxicity in Coastal Waters, Institute of Marine 
Biology of the Far Eastern Branch of the Russian Academy of Science (IMB FEB RAS; see www.imb.dvo.ru/
misc/toxicalgae/index.htm). 
Toxic microlgae and phycotoxins in the coastal waters of Primorsky Krai 
Research on HABs started at the beginning of the 1990s at the Institute of Marine Biology FEB RAS 
(Konovalova, 1993; Orlova et al., 2002).  However, potentially harmful microalgae were detected previously 
by phytoplankton monitoring programs (Ostroumoff, 1924; Kisselew, 1950; Gail, 1959).  Microalgal toxins 
are known to concentrate in shellfish, and can cause the toxic syndromes paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP), 
amnesic shellfish poisoning (ASP) and diarrhetic shellfish poisoning (DSP) when ingested by people.  The 
microalgae that produce these toxins are not only common but are capable of causing dense blooms in the Far 
Eastern Seas of Russia, including the coast of Primorsky Krai (Orlova, 2014).  Microalgae isolated from 
Russian waters have been shown to have the ability to produce toxins in culture (Orlova et al., 2007; Orlova et 
al., 2008), and contamination of bivalves by paralytic shellfish toxins (PSTs) was detected in Aniva Bay 
(Mogilnikova et al., 2007).  Cases of DSP are believed to be common for Primorsky Krai; however, cases of 
DSP intoxication have not been confirmed by sanitary control officials.  Symptoms of DSP, including nausea, 
vomiting and diarrhea have been reported by many people after eating mussels and clams during summer 
months (S.I. Maslennikov, V.V. Ivin, D.I. Vyshkvartsev, E.V. Lebedev and others, pers. comm.).  This is a 
Orlova et al.  Russia 
42  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
common situation in many coastal regions, but due to the complexity in diagnosing DSP, and the difficulty in 
establishing causal links between the consumption and contamination of shellfish by phycotoxins, cases of 
confirmed DSP are rarely reported.  A massive poisoning event was registered in 2012 in the Khasan 
recreational area in Primorsky Krai, when 30 tourists were hospitalized with symptoms of diarrhea and 
vomiting.  Their first symptoms were felt after eating seafood purchased from one of the beach shops 
(http://primamedia.ru/news/14.08.2012/221993/).  Etiologies of intestinal infections have not been defined, but 
according to the Russian Federal Sanitary Control Service, a rise in incidence of intestinal diseases associated 
with seafood is recorded annually in Primorsky Krai during the period from mid-August to mid-September. 
 
Monitoring for toxin-producing microalgae and phycotoxins in bivalves has been conducted by the Center for 
Monitoring of Harmful Algal Blooms and Biotoxicity of Russian Far Eastern Coastal Waters since 2007.  
Toxin concentrations, both in samples of mussels and microalgae cultures isolated from Peter the Great Bay, 
were quantified by Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) and high performance liquid 
chromatography (HPLC) methods. Monitoring in the coastal waters of Primorye from 2007 to 2012 revealed 
the presence of 30 known biotoxin-producing species that can form blooms (Table 1).  Potentially toxic 
species belong to four groups of phytoplankton: Bacillariophyta, Dinophyta, Haptophyta and Raphidophyta.  
Diatoms of the genus Pseudo-nitzschia are producers of domoic acid, which causes ASP, and species of the 
genera Dinophysis and Prorocentrum, capable of producing diarrhetic toxins, were observed in the study area.  
Species of the genus Alexandrium, known as producers of saxitoxins that cause PSP, also were found.  
Monitoring revealed the potentially toxic species Protoceratium reticulatum, Gonyaulax spinifera and 
Lingulodinium polyedra which can produce yessotoxins.  Raphydophytes, haptophytes and diatoms of the 
genus Chaetoceros are known fish killers.  
  
ASP causative species 
 
Pseudo-nitzschia is one of the most widespread and abundant microalgae groups capable of toxin production in 
the coastal waters of Primorsky Krai.  Seven potentially toxic Pseudo-nitzschia species, P. calliantha,  
P. delicatissima, P. fraudulenta, P. multiseries, P. multistriata, P. pungens and P. seriata were found in 
Primorsky Krai coastal waters (Stonik et al., 2011a; Stonik and Orlova, 2013).  Blooms of P. calliantha,  
P. multiseries, P. multistriata and P. pungens have been observed in summer and autumn months with 
abundances exceeding 1 million cells/L and constituting 75–98% of the total density of the phytoplankton 
assemblage (Orlova et al., 1996; Stonik et al., 2011a).  Analysis of domoic acid (DA) by HPLC was performed 
on a culture of P. multiseries (clone PM02, analyzed at day 27 in culture).  This culture, which was isolated from 
the coastal waters of Vladivostok, showed an extremely high concentration of DA, at 7000 ng/ml (Orlova et al., 
2008).  Concentrations of DA (up to 0.5 pg/cell), determined using the “ASP direct ELISA” kit (Biosense 
Laboratories AS, Norway, AOAC official method 2006.02), were measured in cultures of 4 species:  
P. calliantha, P. delicatissima, P. multistriata and P. pungens, (Stonik et al., 2011b; Stonik, unpubl. data).  
The monitoring of DA concentrations in mollusks collected from Amursky, Ussuriisky, Golden Horn and 
Vostok bays from 2009 to 2013 showed that concentrations in tissues of the bivalves Mytilus trossulus, 
Crenomytilus grayanus and Mizuhopecten yessoensis in summer, autumn, and winter ranged from 0.01 to 0.5 
mg DA/kg, well below the permissible regulatory limit of 20 mg/kg (Stonik and Orlova, 2012).  No human 
poisonings due to DA in shellfish have been reported.  The relatively high concentrations of several Pseudo-
nitzschia species able to produce DA suggest the potential threat of ASP in Primorsky Krai. 
 
PSP causative species  
 
Dinoflagellates known to produce PSP toxins were observed in Peter the Great Bay.  Species of Alexandrium 
produce saxitoxin and its analogues, which are transferred up food chains, causing intoxication of people and 
massive mortalities of aquatic warm-blooded animals.  Four potentially harmful species were identified in the 
coastal waters of Primorsky Krai (Table 1).  The abundances of these species can reach more than 500 cells/L in 
the summer–autumn period.  When the concentration of these microalgae reaches threshold concentrations in the 
European Union (EU), the Sanitary Control Services in the EU prohibit the harvest and consumption of shellfish 
in the region.  Maximum concentrations of Alexandrium in the coastal waters of Vladivostok can reach up to 
Russia  Orlova et al. 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  43 
10,000 cells/L, well above the EU threshold value.  Strains of potentially toxic species of A. tamarense, obtained 
by germinating resting cysts from the marine sediments of Primorye, were screened for biotoxins by HPLC.  
Results showed that all isolated strains contained saxitoxin and its derivatives as well as high concentrations of 
C1, C2, neosaxitoxin and gonyautoxin-5 (Orlova et al., 2007). 
 
 
Table 1 Toxic microalgae in the coastal waters of Primorye. 
Species 
Type of 
poisoning Toxin 
Maximum 
concentration 
of microalgae 
(thousands 
cells/L) Reference 
Bacillariophyta 
Chaetoceros concavicornis Mangin   FM* – 10 Shevchenko et al., 2006 
Chaetoceros convolutus Castracane FM – 1 Shevchenko et al., 2006 
Pseudo-nitzschia pungens (Grunow ex 
P.T. Cleve, 1897) Hasle 
ASP DA 11,000 Orlova et al., 1996 
Pseudo-nitzschia multiseries (Hasle, 
1974) Hasle 
ASP DA 11,000 Orlova et al., 1996 
Pseudo-nitzschia calliantha Lundholm, 
Moestrup & Hasle 
ASP DA 2,700 Orlova et al., 2008 
Pseudo-nitzschia delicatissima (P.T. 
Cleve, 1897) Heiden 
ASP DA 200 Stonik et al., 2011a 
Pseudo-nitzschia fraudulenta  (P.T. 
Cleve, 1897) Hasle 
ASP DA 450 Stonik et al., 2011a 
Pseudo-nitzschia multistriata (Takano, 
1993) Takano 
ASP DA 1,500 Stonik et al., 2011a 
Pseudo-nitzschia seriata (P.T. Cleve, 
1883) H. Pera-gallo in H. & M. Peragallo 
ASP DA 230 Stonik et al., 2011a 
Dinophyta 
Alexandrium acatenella (Whedon & 
Kofoid, 1936) Balech 
PSP STX 0.2 Konovalova and Selina, 2010 
A. ostenfeldii (Paulsen, 1904) Balech & 
Tangen 
PSP STX, SP 0.2 Konovalova and Selina, 2010 
Alexandrium tamarense (Lebour, 1925) 
Balech 
PSP STX 10 Orlova et al., 2007 
Alexandrium pseudogonyaulax 
(Biecheler) Horiguchi ex Yuki et Fukuyo 
CT GA 5.6 Morozova et al., 2002 
Dinophysis acuminata Claparède & 
Lachmann 
DSP 
OA, 
DTX–1,2 
11 Orlova et al., 2013 
Dinophysis acuta Ehrenberg DSP 
OA, 
DTX–1,2 
0.2 Orlova et al., 2002 
Dinophysis caudata Saville-Kent DSP 
OA, 
PTX–2 
0.1 Konovalova and Selina, 2010 
Dinophysis fortii Pavillard DSP 
OA, DTX–1, 
PTX–2 
3 Orlova et al., 2002 
Dinophysis norvegica Claparède & 
Lachmann 
DSP 
OA, 
DTX–1 
5 Konovalova and Selina, 2010 
Orlova et al.  Russia 
44  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
Table 1 Continued. 
Species 
Type of 
poisoning Toxin 
Maximum 
concentration 
of microalgae 
(thousands 
cells/L) Reference 
Dinophyta 
Dinophysis rotundata Claparède & 
Lachmann 
DSP DTX–1 0.1 Konovalova and Selina, 2010 
Dinophysis sacculus Stein DSP OA 0.1 Konovalova et al., 1989 
Gonyaulax spinifera (Claparède & 
Lachmann, 1859) Diesing 
DSP? YTX 0.5 Konovalova and Selina, 2010 
Lingulodinium polyedra (F. Stein) J.D. 
Dodge 
DSP?, FM YTX 0.2 
Gail, 1950; Konovalova and 
Selina, 2010 
Prorocentrum lima (Ehrenberg, 1860) 
Stein 
DSP 
OA, DTX-1,2,4 
FAT, PR 
0.2 Konovalova and Selina, 2010 
Prorocentrum minimum (Pavillard, 
1916) Schiller 
FM, IM – 8,000 Stonik, 1994 
Protoceratium reticulatum (Claparède 
& Lachmann, 1859) Bütschli 
DSP? YTX 10 Orlova et al., 2009 
Raphidophyta 
Chattonella marina (Subrahmanyan) 
Hara & Chihara 
FM ROS 15,000 Simakova et al., 1990 
Fibrocapsa japonica Toriumi et 
Takano 
FM ROS 1.5 Selina, 1993 
Heterosigma akashiwo (Y. Hada) 
Y.Hada ex Y. Hara & M. Chihara 
FM ROS 309,100 Orlova et al., 2002 
Haptophyta 
Pseudohaptolina birgerii (G. Hällfors 
& Hiemi) Stonik, Efimova & Orlova 
FM? ROS? 275,000 Orlova et al. (in press) 
Chrysochromulina sp. FM ROS – Konovalova et al., 1989 
*Abbreviations: ASP – amnesic shellfish poisoning; DSP – diarrhetic shellfish poisoning; PSP – paralytic shellfish 
poisoning; FM – fish mortality; IM – invertebrate mortality; CT – cytotoxicity, FAT – fast acting toxins; DA – domoic 
acid; YTX – yessotoxins; STX – saxitoxins; SP – spirolids; GTX – goniotoxins; NSTX – neosaxitoxin; GA – goniodomin 
A; OA – okadaic acid; DTX – dinophysistoxins; PTX – pectenotoxin; PR – prorocentrolide; ROS – reactive oxygen 
species. 
 
 
  
Russia  Orlova et al. 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  45 
DSP causative species  
 
Routine monitoring of phytoplankton showed that species of the genus Dinophysis, known to produce DSTs, 
are common and abundant in the summer–autumn period in the coastal waters of Primorsky Krai.  Eleven 
species of Dinophysis and Prorocentrum (Table 1), known worldwide as DSP producers, were found in the 
region of investigation.  Total abundance of dangerous species of Dinophysis in the coastal waters of 
Primorsky Krai can reach several thousand cells per liter of water (Fig. 1) in the summer period.  This is  
10 times higher than the EU regulatory limit (Andersen, 1996). 
 
During the period of investigation, several blooms of D. acuminata were observed.  In 1993, a bloom of  
D. acuminata was detected, at a concentration of 6.2 × 10
4
 cells/L in the central part of Amursky Bay (I.V. 
Stonik, pers. comm.).  In June 2006, a bloom of D. acuminata, at a concentration of 6.3 × 10
5 
cells/L, was 
recorded in an artificial lagoon in Amursky Bay (A. Begun, pers. comm.).  
 
 
 
Fig. 1 Water temperature and total Dinophysis abundance in Vladivostok coastal waters. 
 
 
As a result of high Dinophysis cell densities, concentrations of toxins in bivalves have also exceeded the 
regulatory guidance limit.  The maximum concentration of DSTs in mussels was 22.92 μg/100 g (Fig. 2; 
Orlova et al., 2013).  Qualitative analysis revealed the toxin profile, which has DTX–1 as a major toxin 
isoform (94–100%) with okadaic acid (0–6%) as a minor isoform.  Trace amounts of yessotoxin (YTX), 
pectenotoxin-2 (PTX–2) and azaspiracid-2 (AZA–2) also were observed.  This documents the detection of 
PTX–2 and AZA-2 in Russian waters for the first time. 
 
Gonyaulax spinifera, Protoceratium reticulatum and Lingulodinium polyedra have been identified in Peter the 
Great Bay. These microalgae are known YTX producers (Table 1).  Other potential YTX producers recently 
have been observed in low abundance in the region of investigation.  The most abundant is P. reticulatum, 
which can reach a density of up to many thousands cells per liter. 
  
In summary, the human consumption of bivalves may cause diarrhetic and amnesic poisoning.  The absence of 
defined phycotoxin control measures in mariculture facilities may have irrecoverable consequences for the 
fisheries and tourist economies as well as people’s health.  
 
Orlova et al.  Russia 
46  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
 
Fig. 2 Spatial distribution of Dinophysis (circles, cells/L) and DSTs (numbers, μg/100 g; EU regulatory closure level is 
16 μg/100 g) in the coastal waters of Vladivostok.  Concentrations of DSTs were determined by Abraxis ELISA. 
 
 
Species responsible for fish and invertebrates mortalities  
 
In Primorsky Krai, 8 species responsible for massive fish and invertebrate kills have been identified.  Those 
microalgae belong to four taxonomic groups: Bacillariophyta (2 species), Dinophyta (1 species), Haptophyta  
(2 species) and Raphidophyta (3 species). 
  
Two species of diatoms causing concern are Chaetoceros convolutus and C. concavicornis, organisms which 
are widespread in Primorsky Krai coastal waters from January through May at densities up to 10,000 cells/L.  
These diatoms are included in summer bloom-forming assemblages (Konovalova et al., 1989). 
  
The dinoflagellate Prorocentrum minimum has been considered potentially toxic to humans via ingestion of its 
toxins accumulated in shellfish, although reported associations between P. minimum blooms and human 
toxicity are rare (Tangen, 1983; Taylor et al., 2003).  P. minimum was found from April to December in the 
coastal waters of Primorye, and may form strong blooms in the summer, with maximum concentration up to  
8 × 10
6 
cells/L
 
in August (Stonik, 1994). 
 
Raphidophyte flagellates are well known for their allelopathy and ichthyotoxic blooms which pose a serious 
global threat to fish farming (Imai and Yamaguchi, 2012).  There are three potentially toxic raphidophyte 
genera in Primorye: Chattonella, Fibrocapsa and Heterosigma. Heterosigma akashiwo is a harmful bloom-
forming alga that inhabits temperate coastal waters around the world and can cause kills of both wild and 
cultured fish.  Fish have been observed to die when H. akashiwo concentrations exceed millions of cells per 
liter (Taylor and Haigh, 1993).  H. akashiwo is the most common bloom-forming raphidophyte in the coastal 
waters of Primorsky Krai.  This species was found from April to September.  The maximum concentration 
(“yellow tide”) of H. akashiwo up to 100 million
 
cells/L
 
was observed in June 2010 in the coastal waters of 
Vladivostok when water temperatures reached 22ºC. 
 
Russia  Orlova et al. 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  47 
Chattonella marina is known as a bloom-forming fish killing species. This species was observed in the coastal 
waters of Primorye from July to October when water temperature ranged from 14–22ºC.  Red tides caused by 
Chattonella marina were observed in Amursky Bay in October 1987, followed by fish deaths (Simakova et al., 
1990). 
 
Haptophytes are a major component in marine pico- and nanoplankton communities, occurring in all seas as 
important primary producers (Thomsen et al., 1994).  Blooms of haptophytes cause fish kills (Edvardsen and 
Paasche, 1998) and may have a major impact on ecosystems.  The two potentially toxic genera 
Pseudohaptolina and Chrysochromulina sp. were found in the coastal waters of Primorsky Krai (Table 1). 
Chrysochromulina sp. is common but not abundant in the coastal waters of Primorsky Krai (Konovalova et al., 
1989).  The brown tide haptophyte Pseudohaptolina birgerii (G. Hällfors and Hiemi) Stonik, Efimova and 
Orlova (basyonim Chrysochromulina birgerii G. Hällfors and Hiemi) was observed in early spring (March–
April), with a maximum concentration of 275 × 10
6 
cells/L, under ice in the coastal waters of Vladivostok. 
 
These results demonstrate that almost the whole territory of Peter the Great Bay is under threat of HAB 
development and toxin poisoning in the summer–autumn period.  The concentrations of toxins in shellfish and 
densities of dangerous microalgae species are comparable with recommended thresholds for fish farms and 
harvest closures in the EU and Asia-Pacific countries.  Consumption of bivalves during observed blooms may 
cause DSP, PSP or ASP. Absence of phycotoxin control in mariculture facilities may have irrecoverable 
consequences for the economy and people’s health.  The following activities pose the biggest risk of 
phycotoxin exposure to consumers: 
  
• Purchase of phycotoxin-poisoned seafood products  
 Potentially toxic seafood products can be purchased in shops, at local markets, from unauthorized 
distributors, and from salespeople.  Seafood from local sea farms is widely distributed throughout the 
region without a requirement for sanitary certification.  
 
• Restaurants and cafes  
 In local cafes and restaurants, seafood dishes may be cooked from products purchased from local sea 
farms or from salespeople.  There is no requirement to have a sanitary certification that the seafood is 
phycotoxin-free (GOST R ISO 22000: 2007).  
 
• Through dietary supplements from seafood  
 Seafood is a known source of biologically active substances.  In Primorsky Krai, there are several 
companies that produce dietary supplements from seafood stock materials.  Extracts are prepared from 
mussels purchased from local sea farms. Certification that the seafood is phycotoxin-free is not required.  
 
• Individual seafood harvest  
 In the summer period, it is popular for people to harvest and cook seafood from Peter the Great Bay for 
consumption on the beach.  A license for seafood harvest is not required.  
Hygienic requirements of seafood safety in the Russian Federation 
The main documents regulating the allowable levels of phycotoxins in products are the Federal Law #52 
“Sanitary and epidemiological welfare of the population” and the “Charter of the Russian Federal Sanitary 
Control Service”, which define the rules and standards of phycotoxin presence in different products. 
 
In terms of seafood, and especially bivalves, guidance limits differ depending on the nature of the toxins and 
type of seafood.  A Commission, specified in the Federal Law #52, has developed several documents with the 
general name “Sanitary Regulations and Norms #2.3.4.050-96 and 2.3.2.2401-08”, specifically for fish harvest 
and farming.  These contain regulations about phycotoxins and specify that for DSP toxins, the total 
concentrations of all derivatives should not exceed 160 µg/kg mussel tissue. For ASP toxins, the concentration 
Orlova et al.  Russia 
48  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
should not exceed 20 mg/kg mussel tissue and 30 µg/kg crab meat.  For PSP toxins, the concentration should 
not exceed 80 µg/100g shellfish.  These standards are similar to the EU regulatory toxin levels based on 
European research (European Union Reference Laboratory for Marine Biotoxins (EU-RL-MB)).  For different 
population groups, regulations are different.  It is specified that in case of children’s health, the regulations 
should be more stringent. According to the Federal Law #52, fish and seafood prepared for pre-school and 
school-age children’s nutrition must contain no phycotoxins. 
  
Even though monitoring programs are dictated according to Federal Law, the effectiveness of this program is a 
serious issue.  A major problem is the lack of research and field studies needed for the establishment of 
effective Sanitary Regulations and Norms for Russia. For example, in the current Federal Law #52, the ELISA 
test-kit “DSP-Check” by Parapharm Laboratories Co., Ltd., Japan, is recommended for okadaic acid 
determination.  However, only the ELISA test-kit “Okadaic Acid ELISA” manufactured by Abraxis, USA, is 
available but difficult to purchase for a reasonable cost because there is the only one licensed distributor 
(Kovcheg Technologies) of these kits in Moscow.  Even so, none of the recommended ELISA kits are suitable 
for measuring the DSTs in Primorsky Krai because the major toxin, DTX–1, has only 50% cross-reactivity 
with the antibody used in the kit.  The use of ELISA in DST determination will, therefore, underestimate the 
toxin concentrations in shellfish, putting people’s health at great risk.  Results of our research reveal that the 
Russian Sanitation Program for the sanitary control of shellfish produced and sold for human consumption 
needs to be altered with appropriate guidance for testing methods for DSTs.  The current standard regulatory 
protocol for DSTs in the EU and USA is liquid chromatography mass spectroscopy, a method that should be 
implemented in Russia. 
Aquaculture – Products, scale and regions 
The Far Eastern region is proud to be the main fishery region in Russia.  The fish yield is more than 
2.5 million tons per year, which is 60% of all Russian fish catches.  Around the world, fish farming and fish 
production aquaculture account for 50% of the total yield.  However, in comparison with Asian and European 
countries, fish farming does not play a crucial role in Russian markets and accounts for only for 5% in total 
fish production due to the fact that most fish are harvested from the wild.  The Far Eastern region of Russia is 
in a leading position in fish farming due to high resource potential, good climate conditions, and easy access to 
bays.  Development of fish farming facilities is one of the goals of the region (Maslennikov, 2008). 
  
The total ratio of Far Eastern production to the total production in the whole country is salmon (99%), flatfish 
(more than 90%), herring (more than 40%), crab (100%), bivalves (about 60%), trepang (100%) and algae 
(about 90%).  The development of fish farming started in 1972 in the southern part of Primorsky Krai.  In the 
mid-1970s, the methods of artificial cultivation of clams, mussels, oysters and Laminaria were developed, 
taking into account the cultivation conditions of the Far Eastern region with the help of Japanese and Korean 
experts.  Before 2000, there was a period of long stagnation in fish farm production in the region but after that 
year, the production rate grew exponentially, increasing more than 10-fold in 5 years (Fig. 3). 
 
Nowadays, Primorsky Krai is an absolute leader in aquaculture farming in Russia.  In August 2010 there were 
34 facilities, having a total production area of 12 thousand hectares (Fig. 4).  Taking into account resource 
potential, it would be possible to expand aquaculture facilities up to 376 thousands hectares, which is more 
than 30 times larger than the current facilities (Markovtsev, 2008; Maslennikov, 2008). 
 
The current level of aquaculture does not appear to have any influence on the environment, does not compete 
with any other sector of agriculture, and is not a subject of limitations for water usage and land parcels. 
However, as we can see from the experience of countries with developed aquaculture, such problems may 
become serious issues if development is allowed to occur without planning.  In Primorsky Krai, facilities are 
spread unequally along the coastline.  More than 70% of the fish farms are located in the southern part of the 
region.  
 
Russia  Orlova et al. 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  49 
The specialization of aquaculture facilities is changing from the south to the north in the region (Fig. 4; Gaivan 
et al., 2012).  The southern areas are suitable for clam and mussel cultivation, whereas the more northern parts 
are specialized in Laminaria production.  Many farms grow multiple species.  The most common combination 
is mussels, clams and Laminaria. 
 
 
 
Fig.  3 Dynamics of aquaculture production in Primorsky Krai over the past 30 years. 
 
 
 
Fig. 4 Location and specialization of aquaculture facilities in Primorsky Krai. 
 
 
Increasing numbers of aquaculture facilities have led to increased seafood production during the last decade.  
In 2006, aquaculture facilities produced 500 tons of clams, 820 tons of Laminaria and 42 tons of mussels.  In 
2010, a record 1736.5 tons of clams were grown.  Laminaria constituted 10–40% of the total production, 
whereas mussels and oysters constituted about 2%, with sea cucumber less than 1% (Table 2).   
Orlova et al.  Russia 
50  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
Table 2 Amount of aquaculture production in 2010 (Fishery complex of Primorsky Krai, 2012). 
Cultivated species 2010 
Total production  3509.2 
Japanese scallop, Mizuhopecten yessoensis  1736.5 
Kelp, Laminaria japonica  1540.4 
Blue mussel, Mytilus trossulus  150.6 
Sea urchin, Strongylocentrotus intermedius  63.6 
Sea cucumber, Apostichopus japonicus  10.2 
Pacific oyster, Crassostrea gigas  7.9 
 
 
A feature of the harvest and processing of mussels is that its harvest time is very short: quality mussels can be 
collected from April to early May.  In April, the mussel spawning season changes the taste of the product.  In 
the remaining period of the year, mussels are not harvested. 
  
An economic estimate of losses due to phycotoxin poisoning resulting in withholding the seafood product from 
circulation suggests a figure of up to 10 million dollars USD (clams – $8.65 million USD, mussels – $0.1 
million USD) per year, given the purchase price of clams at $5.7 USD/kg and mussels at $3 USD/kg. 
How important are shellfish as an important source of protein to people in remote areas (not 
accessible to grocery stores)? 
Based on marketing research by the consulting company, “AMICO”, seafood is one of the most rapidly 
expanding markets in Russia.  The annual growth of the seafood market is 30–40% (AMICO, 2007). 
 
Surprisingly, currently there is little demand for aquaculture products in the local market of Primorsky Krai. 
The total consumption of seafood products is about 10% of total fish harvest (Table 3).  
 
 
Table 3 Fish production (tons) in Primorsky Krai in 2010–2012 (Analytical Reports Primorskstat, 2012).  
Type of seafood 2010 2011 2012 
Live, fresh or frozen fish  56,494  76,839 83,363.9 
Non-frozen invertebrates  4,841  6,494 7,905.4 
Other seafood products  531  1,581 1,642.1 
 
 
A survey of Primorsky Krai citizens (Gaivan et al., 2012) showed that seafood is not considered a main dietary 
product (Fig. 5).  About 1/3 of the population does not consume seafood products at all, and about 45% of 
respondents indicated that they consume seafood products just a few times a year.  The reason is the high price 
of these products.  
 
The majority of people who eat seafood products relatively often prefer the cheapest product – Laminaria.  
The second most popular product is the clam.  In the remote areas, where the indigenous ethnic groups live, the 
main source of protein is fish and the amount of seafood consumed is even lower than the Primorsky Krai 
average. 
Russia  Orlova et al. 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  51 
It is also interesting to compare the cultural traditions of seafood consumption.  In South Asian countries, 60% 
of the clam is eaten (mantle, gonads, muscle) but in Russia, only muscle (10–14%) is considered edible. 
Muscle is known to be the organ where the least amount of phycotoxins is found (Gaivan et al., 2012).  A 
similar situation is noted for mussel consumption in Russia.  In general, traditional seafood consumption 
patterns in Russia help to minimize the threat of phycotoxin poisoning. 
 
 
 
Fig. 5 Results from the survey question, “How often do you eat seafood?”.  Primorsky Krai citizens survey ratio (Gaivan 
et al., 2012).   
How big are the recreational shellfish areas? Are any shellfish sold for commercial purposes? 
Primorsky Krai is one of the favorite tourist destinations in Russia.  The majority of tourists come from the 
nearest regions: Khabarovsky Krai and Jewish Autonomous Region.  The tourist season in Primorsky Krai is 
from the end of June until the beginning of October, when beach-related recreation is common.  The main 
recreational zone is located in the southern part of the region (Fig. 6, recreation area 3).  There are more than  
34 beach zones with 32 resorts (7 are year-round resorts), 1 health resort, 12 children camps, and  
8 campgrounds.  All of these facilities together are capable of accommodating 230,000 tourists at the same time. 
 
Based on data from the Department of International Cooperation and Development of Tourism of Primorsky 
Krai Administration, in 2012 the number of beach tourists in Primorye was 600 thousand people 
(http://primorsky.ru/authorities/executive-agencies/departments/tourism/).  The Nakhodka coastal area is the 
most popular place for summer tourism (200 thousand tourists per summer).  Another popular destination is 
the Khasan recreational area (Fig. 6, recreation area 1), where every year 60 thousand tourists spend their 
summer vacations. 
 
Almost all tourists consume food in local cafes and restaurants near their resorts or cook seafood collected 
from the beaches.  Seafood served in the restaurants is often harvested from the nearest bay and is not 
subjected to obligatory certification.  Cases of poisoning are common; however, determining the reasons for 
intoxication and etiology are not common due to the lack of toxin testing.  Thus there is a risk of poisoning 
beach tourists (more than half a million people) during the summer.  
 
Another way people become intoxicated is by consuming mollusks that are driven ashore during storms and 
typhoons.  Those convulsions of nature do not occur often, but during these events the number of mollusks that 
come ashore is comparable with the annual yield of a small aquaculture farm.  One example of such a 
cataclysm happened in August 2012 after typhoon “Bolaven”, when several tons of aquatic organisms were 
washed up, the majority of which were bivalves.  People actively collected these mussels for consumption 
(Fig. 7). 
Orlova et al.  Russia 
52  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
 
Fig.  6 Map of recreational zones in Primorsky Krai with number of tourists in 2012. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7 Lazurnaya Bay (biggest beach near Vladivostok) after typhoon “Bolaven” (http://ptr-vlad.ru/2012/08/31/posle-
tayfuna-bolevan-na-plyazh-shamory-vybrosilo.html). 
Russia  Orlova et al. 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  53 
Potential damage to the fish breeding field in Primorsky Krai caused by HABs 
Phytoflagellates are among the most ichthyotoxic species known, responsible for potentially high economic 
losses due to fish kills in Primorsky Krai coastal waters.  Cases of massive mortalities of released hatchings in 
the coastal waters have been registered in some fish farms in Primorsky Krai.  In 1993, massive mortalities of 
juvenile fish were reported at the Ryazanovsky fish farm.  Research results showed that water samples 
collected during this period contained unidentified small flagellates (1.1 million cells/L) and the raphidophytes 
(0.9 million cells/L) Chattonella sp. and Heterosigma akashiwo.  It is known that fish farms that cultivate 
different fish species by cage culture methods suffer the most harm from ichthyotoxic algae blooms.  However, 
because currently there are no fish farms in Primorsky Krai which use this technology for fish breeding, there 
are no projected losses to date from raphidophyte HABs. 
  
However, there is a real threat for the fish-farming companies specializing in salmon hatchling cultivation for 
the purposes of maintaining biological diversity and increasing salmon yields in coastal waters.  Annual 
release of Pacific salmon smolts usually begins in mid-April.  The number of smolts released can reach up to 
30 million individual fishes (Fig. 8).  Therefore, there is potential harm from ichthyotoxic blooms to young 
fish.  For example, the most vulnerable fish farm is “Lidovsky” in the north of Primorsky Krai (Fig. 8), where 
the cycle of fish breeding includes incubation and feeding of hatchlings in tanks followed by further growth in 
natural maturation ponds.  If it is assumed that the prime cost for 1 salmon hatchling is $1 USD, then the total 
economic loss of 100% hatchlings will be $30 million USD. 
 
 
 
Fig. 8  Annual release of young salmon by fish farms in Primorsky Krai.  
Potential damage to the natural ecosystems of Primorsky Krai caused by HABs 
Cases of massive mortality of aquatic animals, including fish, crabs, prawns, starfish, seals (Phoca largha), 
and whales (Balaenoptera acutorostrata) are registered annually.  The environmental prosecutor’s office 
conducts an investigation of each case, which includes screening for pesticides, oil products or heavy metals. 
However, in the majority of cases, the reason for death remains unknown.  We assume that HABs are a 
potential contributor to some mortality events, but there has been no research to prove this. The following are 
events that obtained intense media coverage. 
Orlova et al.  Russia 
54  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
• September 15, 2008  
The massive mortality of candlefish (Osmerus mordax) on the western part of a Russian island was 
reported. There were no signs of oil pollution.  The assumed reason for the fish kill was chemical or 
biological pollution (http://news.vl.ru/vlad/2008/09/15/gibel/). 
 
• May 26, 2011  
Near the coast of Vladivostok, a massive kill of flathead mullet (Mugil cephalus) was reported.  The total 
number was hard to calculate.  Fish sample analysis showed no evidence of pesticides, oil products or 
heavy metals. Histological and chemical analysis of dead fish did not reveal the reasons of death.  
However, it was noted that water samples contained a lot of organic matter and the concentration of 
phytoplankton was elevated (http://www.km.ru/v-rossii/2011/06/14/ekologiya-i-okhrana-prirodnykh-
bogatstv-rossii/nedostatok-kisloroda-stal-prichin). 
 
• September 10, 2011  
Hundreds of anchovies (Engraulis japonicus), as well as starfish and small crabs, were driven ashore near 
the Kungasny Peninsula in Vladivostok.  The reason for that case was not identified but it was not a 
consequence of an oil spill in the Amursky Bay (Fig. 9). 
 
• June 2, 2013  
In the northern part of Amursky Bay, the body of an adult seal (Phoca largha) was discovered (Fig. 10) 
together with 2000 individual dead flathead mullet (Mugil cephalus).  The reason for the deaths remains 
unknown. 
 
 
 
Fig. 9 Masses of dead fish on Kungasnii Peninsula (http://newsland.com/news/detail/id/779801/). 
 
 
 
Russia  Orlova et al. 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  55 
 
Fig. 10 Body of an adult seal Phoca largha in Amursky Bay (http://www.newsvl.ru/photos/2013/06/05/112859/).  
Conclusions  
Even though the impact of harmful algal blooms appears small due to a lack of developed technologies for fish 
farming and the small role of seafood in people’s diets, the cases of fish and sea mammal mortality and acute 
intoxication of people after the consumption of mollusks show evidence of a real threat to both the economy 
and human health. 
  
The absence of a federal monitoring program for HABs and phycotoxins is a huge disadvantage, which leads 
to an underestimation of the actual scale of the negative impact of HABs in ecosystem health, economic losses 
to aquaculture, and harm to human health.  The absence of obligatory screening for phycotoxins prevents the 
effective analysis of possible reasons for massive fish mortalities in the region.  Currently, the Russian Federal 
Sanitary Control Service has no guidance for PTXs, AZAs and YTXs. In addition, there is no recommendation 
for microalgae monitoring in regions with the most fish farms.  These are just some of the drawbacks to the 
current legislation directing HAB monitoring efforts in Russia. 
 
The only permanent monitoring program in the Far East of Russia is organized by the Center for Monitoring of 
Harmful Algal Blooms and Biotoxicity in Coastal Waters, IMB FEB RAS. The initial purposes for the creation 
of the Center were to: 
• Provide permanent monitoring of potentially harmful microalgae, which cause HABs and can produce 
toxic substances harmful to marine animals and humans; 
• Investigate toxin biodeposits (seawater, benthos); 
• Monitor resting cysts as potential initiators of HABs; 
• Develop analytical methods to help predict HABs; 
• Participate in developing analytical methods for toxin identification and application of these methods for 
providing a healthy environment; 
• Educate school and university students, as well as authorities, about the problem of HABs and phycotoxins. 
Important results from Center work include the description of several harmful species, investigation of the 
periods of their massive development, and the study of mechanisms of toxin transport to marine animals.  
Orlova et al.  Russia 
56  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
These results have importance for local residents and for the global science community.  The significance of 
these results for scientists all over the world is an enhanced understanding of microalgae migration patterns, 
with analysis of how various environmental conditions can influence the toxicity of microalgae.  These 
Russian Far Eastern data may be used for global predictions and estimations.  On the local level, this 
information is used to raise people’s awareness about the severity of HAB problem and to prevent possible 
intoxications.  Each summer, information is provided by Center workers to the mass media about the 
possibility of poisoning by eating uncertified seafood, which helps people understand the risk of shellfish 
harvest.  
 
The Center also plays a huge educational role in preventing the illness of people caused by phycotoxins. 
Center staff give lectures at science festivals, organize seminars for school students of different ages, provide 
consultations for sanitary officers and representatives of people’s health protection organizations, and 
participate in local conferences where scientists, administrators and business representatives meet to discuss 
environmental problems.  Multiple analytical reports on HABs have been prepared by the Center showing the 
absolute need for developing an effective phycotoxin food safety monitoring program which should help not 
only protect people from possible intoxication, but also will improve the competitiveness of Russian seafood 
products on the international market.  This, in turn, would be very beneficial for the development of fish farms 
and the regional economy. 
  
The Center for Monitoring of Harmful Algal Blooms and Biotoxicity in Coastal Waters, IMB FEB RAS is 
taking all possible actions to improve the current protocols for toxin testing.  Collaboration with sanitary 
control authorities resulted in signing an agreement to establish a mutually beneficial research program, which 
aimed to change the recommended screening method for DSP from ELISA to LS/MS and to make the 
connection between microalgae monitoring and the prevention of phycotoxin poisoning.  This is a complex 
process that is best achieved through cooperation between science, medical organizations and government.  
We hope that our research program will be a critical first step in understanding the distribution of toxins and 
the causative species, providing a framework for the better understanding and detection of potential threats 
from phycotoxins. 
References 
AMICO. 2007. Seafood marketing research.  64 pp. (in Russian). 
Analytical Reports Primorskstat, Fishery Primorsky Krai. 2012. 318 pp. Available online at http://hubofdata.ru/dataset/esi
mo_ru_poi_159. 
Andersen, P. 1996. Design and Implementation of Some Harmful Algal Monitoring Systems. IOC Tech. Ser. No. 44, 
UNESCO, Paris, 102 pp. 
Edvardsen, B. and Paasche, E. 1998. Bloom dynamics and physiology of Prymnesium and Chrysochromulina, pp. 193–
208 in The Physiological Ecology of Harmful Algal Blooms edited by D.M. Anderson, A.D. Cembella and G.M. 
Hallegraeff, NATO ASI Series Vol. G 41, Springer Verlag, Berlin. 
European Union Reference Laboratory for Marine Biotoxins (EU-RL-MB). Agencia Espoñola de Seguridad Alimentaria y 
Nutrición (AESAN), Vigo, Spain. EU-Harmonized Standard Operation Procedure for Determination of Lipophilic 
Marine Biotoxins in Molluscs by LC MS/MS, Version 4. 2011. Available online at http://www.aesan.msps.es/CRLMB
/docs/docs/metodos_analiticos_de_desarrollo/EU-Harmonised-SOP-LIPO-LCMSMS_Version4.pdf (accessed on 10 
May 2013). 
Fishery complex of Primorsky Krai, 2011/Primorskstat. 2012.  318 pp. (in Russian). 
Gail, G.I. 1959. Phytoplankton of the Sea of Japan. Izvestiya TINRO 33: 3–177 (in Russian).  
Gaivan, E.A., Zemtsov, S.P. and Mazurova, A.A. 2012. Mariculture of Primorye. Potential Development of the Industry 
within the Aqua Territorial Regional Systems. Lap Lambert Academic Publishing GmbH & Co., Germany, 146 pp. 
GOST R ISO 22000. 2007. System of food safety management. Requirements for any organization involved in the 
development of food products. 36 pp. (in Russian).  
Imai, I. and Yamaguchi, M. 2012. Life cycle, physiology, ecology and red tide occurrences of the fish-killing 
raphidophyte Chattonella. Harmful Algae 14: 46–70. 
Kisselew, I.A. 1950. Pantsirnye zhgutikonostsy (Dinoflagellates). Izdatelstvo AN SSSR, Moscow, Leningrad, 279 pp.  
Konovalova, G.V. 1993. Toxic and potentially toxic dinoflagellates from the Far East coastal waters of Russia, pp. 275–
279 in Toxic Phytoplankton Blooms in the Sea edited by T.J. Smayda and Y. Shimizu. Elsevier, Amsterdam.  
Russia  Orlova et al. 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  57 
Konovalova, G.V. and Selina, M.S. 2010. Dinophyta in Biota of the Russian Waters of the Sea of Japan edited by A.V. 
Adrianov, Dalnauka 8, Vladivostok, 351 pp. (in Russian). 
Konovalova, G.V., Orlova, T.Yu. and Pautova, L.A. 1989. Guide on Phytoplankton of the Sea of Japan. Dalnauka, 
Vladivostok, 173 pp. (in Russian). 
Markovtsev, V.G. 2008. Mariculture and ecological aspects its development in Primorye. Dalnevostochnii Region. Ribnoe 
Hozyaistvo 3: 4–9 (in Russian). 
Maslennikov, S.I. 2008.  Coastal marine bioresources of Far East of Russia and its rational use in terms of ecology and 
economy, pp. 89–125 in Energy and Environment in Slavic Eurasia: Toward the Establishment of the Network of 
Environmental Studies in the Pan-Okhotsk Region edited by T. Shinichiro, Hokkaido University, Sapporo. 
Mogilnikova, T.A., Motilkova, I.V. and Konovalova, N.V. 2007.Toxic phytoplankton and phykotoxins in scallop tissue 
Mizuhopecten yessoensis (Jay) in coastal waters of Sakhalin Island (Aniva Bay). Trudi SakhNIRO 9: 207–222 (in 
Russian). 
Morozova, T.V., Orlova, T.Yu. and Selina, M.S. 2002. Phytoplankton in the scallop culture area in Minonosok Bight 
(Pos’eta Bay, Sea of Japan). Russian J.  Mar. Biol. 28: 94–99. 
Orlova, T.Yu. 2014. Diversity of potentially toxic microalgae on the east coast of Russia, pp. 77–91 in Marine 
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Dynamics of the North-Western Pacific Ocean edited by S. Song, A.V. Adrianov, K.A. 
Lutaenko and S. Xiaoxia, Science Press, Beijing.  
Orlova, T.Yu., Zhukova, N.V. and Stonik, I.V. 1996. Bloom-forming diatom Pseudo-nitzschia pungens in the Amurskiy 
Bay (the Sea of Japan): morphology, ecology and biochemistry, pp. 147–150 in Harmful and Toxic Algal Blooms 
edited by T. Yasumoto, Y. Oshima and Y. Fukuyo, Intergovernmental Oceanography Commission of UNESCO, Paris. 
Orlova, T.Yu., Konovalova, G.V., Selina, M.S., Stonik, I.V., Мorozova, T.V. and Shevchenko, O.G. 2002. Harmful algae 
blooms on the eastern coast of Russia, pp. 47–73 in Harmful Algal Blooms in the PICES Region of the North Pacific 
edited by F.J. Taylor and V.L. Trainer, PICES Scientific Report No. 23, North Pacific Marine Science Organization. 
Orlova, T.Yu., Selina, M.S., Lilly, E.L., Kulis, D.M. and Anderson, D.M. 2007. Morphogenetic and toxin composition 
variability of Alexandrium tamarense (Dinophyceae) from the east coast of Russia. Phycologia 46: 534–548. 
Orlova, T.Yu., Stonik, I.V., Aizdaicher, N.A., Bates, S.S., Leger, C. and Fehling, J. 2008. Toxicity, morphology and 
distribution of Pseudo-nitzschia calliantha, P. multistriata and P. multiseries (Bacillariophyta) from the northwestern 
Sea of Japan. Botanica Marina 51: 297–306. 
Orlova, T.Yu., Stonik, I.V. and Shevchenko, O.G. 2009. Species composition of planktonic microalgae in Amursky Bay, 
Sea of Japan. Russian J. Mar. Biol. 35: 48–61. 
Orlova, T.Yu., Stonik, I.V., Popkova, P.A., Morozova, T.V., Trainer, V.L., Moore, L. and Eberhart, B.-T.L. 2013. 
Diarhetic shellfish toxins in Primorye, Russian Federation. p. 217. Program and Abstracts PICES-2013, Com-
municating forecasts, uncertainty and consequences of ecosystem change, October 11–20, 2013, Nanaimo, BC, 
Canada.  
Orlova, T.Yu., Stonik, I.V., Efimova, K.V., Yakovleva, I.M., Ponomareva, A.A., Kharlamenko, V.I. and Begun, A.A. 
Brown tide caused by Pseudohaptolina birgerii (G. Hällfors & Hiemi) Stonik, Efimova & Orlova comb. nov. 
(Haptophyta) under ice in Amursky Bay in the Sea of Japan. Harmful Algae (in press). 
Ostroumoff, A. 1924. Noctiluca miliaris in Symbiose mit grunen. Algen. Zool. Anz. 68: 162. 
Selina, M.S. 1993. Raphydophyta from Peter the Great Bay. Algologia 3: 60–65. 
Shevchenko, O.G., Orlova, T.Yu. and Hernandez-Becerril, D.U. 2006. The genus Chaetoceros (Bacillariophyta) from 
Peter the Great Bay, Sea of Japan. Botanica Mar. 49: 236–258. 
Simakova, N.K., Orlova, T.Yu. and Selina, M.S. 1990. “Red tide”, caused by raphydophytes Chattonella sp. in Amursky 
Bay, Sea of Japan. Russian J. Mar. Biol. 5: 77–78.  
Stonik, I.V. 1994. Potentially toxic dinoflagellate Prorocentrum minimum in Amursky Bay, the Sea of Japan. Russian J. 
Mar. Biol. 20: 416–420. 
Stonik, I.V. and Orlova, T.Yu. 2013. The species composition and quantitative distribution of the diatom genus Pseudo-
nitzschia H. Peragallo, 1990 in Russian waters of the Sea of Japan and the Sea of Okhotsk. Russian J. Mar. Biol. 39: 
238–245. 
Stonik, I.V., Orlova, T.Yu. and Lundholm, N. 2011a. Diversity of Pseudo-nitzschia H. Peragallo from the western North 
Pacific. Diatom Res. 26: 121–134. 
Stonik, I.V., Orlova, T.Yu., Chikalovetz, I.V. and Chernikov, O.V. 2011b. Diatoms from the northwestern part the Sea of 
Japan as producers of domoic acid, p. 41. Abstracts of 9th IST Asia Pacific Meeting on Animal, Plant and Microbial 
Toxins, International Society on Toxinology, IST, September 4–8, 2011, Vladivostok, Russia.  
Stonik, I.V. and Orlova, T.Yu. 2012. Population dynamics and toxicity of the diatom species of the genus Pseudo-
nitzschia in Peter the Great Bay, the northwestern part of the Sea of Japan, p. 311. Program and Abstracts PICES-2012, 
Effects of natural and anthropogenic stressors in the North Pacific ecosystems, October 12–21, 2012, Hiroshima, 
Japan.  
Tangen, K. 1983. Shellfish poisoning and the occurrence of potentially toxic dinoflagellates in Norwegian waters. Sarsia 
68: 1–7. 
Orlova et al.  Russia 
58  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
Taylor, F.J.R. and Haigh, R. 1993. The ecology of fish-killing blooms of the chloromonad flagellate Heterosigma in the 
Strait of Georgia and adjacent waters, pp. 705–771 in Toxic Phytoplankton Blooms in the Sea edited by T.J. Smayda 
and Y. Shimizu, Elsevier Science, New York.  
Taylor, F.J.R., Fukuyo, Y., Larsen, J. and Hallegraeff, G.M. 2003.Taxonomy of harmful dinoflagellates, pp. 389–482 in 
Manual on Harmful Marine Microalgae edited by G.M. Hallegraeff, D.M. Anderson and A.D. Cembella, UNESCO 
Publishing, Paris. 
Thomsen, H.A., Buck, K.R. and Chavez, F.P. 1994. Haptophytes as components of marine phytoplankton, pp. 187–208 in 
The Haptophyte Algae edited by J.C. Green and B.S.C. Leadbeater, Clarendon Press, Oxford.  
 
 
USA  Huppert and Trainer 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  59 
Economics of razor clam fishery closures due to harmful algal 
blooms in Washington State 
Daniel D. Huppert
1
 and Vera L. Trainer
2
 
 
1
 School of Marine and Environmental Affairs, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA 
2 
Marine Biotoxins Program, Northwest Fisheries Science Center, National Marine Fisheries Service, National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Seattle, Washington, USA 
Abstract 
Several times in the last two decades Washington State recreational and commercial razor clam fisheries have 
been interrupted by closures due to the spread of harmful algal blooms (HABs) that threaten the health of 
humans.  The closures due to HABs, and measures to avoid human contact with HABs, can have economic 
consequences in at least four categories:  (1) the economic costs of illness and death caused by HABs, (2) the 
economic impacts to coastal incomes and employment due to fishery closures, (3) the net economic loss 
suffered by clammers due to fishery closures, and (4) costs of monitoring and enforcing closures due to HABs.  
There have been a few studies focused on the economic cost of sickness due to HABs (category 1) dealing 
with costs associated with sickness and death in the United States from ciguatera fish poisoning.  In this paper 
we focus on the categories 2 and 3, using a survey completed in April of 2008 on four recreational clamming 
beaches on the Pacific coast of Washington State, and related information concerning a small commercial fishery 
for razor clams.  Our estimates of coastal income impacts focus on a range of possibilities, from single beach 
closures of one recreational dig over a 3- to 4-day “clam opener” to full four-beach closures for the entire year.  
Economic impacts on the recreational razor clam fishery range from a loss of 3 to 339 full-time job equivalents 
and from $110 thousand to $10.57 million
1
 in coastal income loss, depending upon the extent of the closures.  
Similar estimates for the Quinault Indian Nation commercial fishery range from close to $117 thousand for a 
half-year single beach closure to $1.42 million for a full-year all beach closure.  Closure of the smaller 
commercial fishery on the Willapa Spit could cause a coastal income loss of up to $514 thousand for a year-
long closure.  These are estimated changes in coastal community incomes associated with reduced clamming 
opportunities.  Here, we estimate the amount that recreational clammers would be willing to pay to reduce 
beach closures to one or less per year. Based upon responses to a survey conducted in April 2008, this value is 
estimated at $662 thousand.  This estimate of the net economic benefit of the available razor clam recreational 
fishery greatly exceeds the $150 thousand currently allocated for the phytoplankton monitoring system that 
provides early warning of HAB events, under the Olympic Region Harmful Algal Bloom (ORHAB) 
partnership.  Using weekly microscope analysis of phytoplankton in water samples collected from razor 
clamming beaches, the ORHAB program has prevented coastwide closures of the razor clam fishery since 2005. 
Introduction 
The Washington State razor clam supports a large recreational fishery, averaging about 250,000 digger trips 
per year to the southwest Washington counties where tourist and fisher spending (e.g., motels, food, gasoline, 
                                                           
1
 All monetary values in U.S. dollars (USD). 
Huppert and Trainer  USA 
60  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
souvenirs) has a significant economic impact on the coastal communities.  There is also a modest-sized 
commercial razor clam fishery off the Washington coast.  The Pacific razor clam (Siliqua patula) is an 
exceptionally meaty shellfish ranging from California to Alaska.  However, the largest population of 
harvestable razor clams is found in Washington State.  In Washington waters, razor clams are found primarily 
on the intertidal coastal beaches that are exposed from a +3 foot level to a –2 foot tide level.  The Washington 
Department of Fish and Wildlife (WDFW) divides the coastal harvest areas into five major management zones 
(Fig. 1):  
(1) Long Beach:  from the Columbia River north to the mouth of the Willapa Bay,  
(2) Twin Harbors: from Willapa Bay north to the south jetty at the mouth of Grays Harbor,  
(3) Copalis Beach:  from the north jetty at the mouth of Grays Harbor to the Copalis River,  
(4) Mocrocks Beach:  from the Copalis River to the south boundary of the Quinault Indian Reservation,  
(5) Kalaloch Beach:  from the South Beach campground north to the Olympic National Park Beach Trail 3.  
 
 
 
Fig. 1 Map of Washington State razor clam beaches. 
 
 
During certain times of the year, marine toxins, produced by some species of harmful algae are filter fed by 
razor clams and concentrated in their tissues.  When ingested, these toxins can cause illness and, at very high 
concentrations, can be fatal to humans.  The WDFW, in cooperation with the Washington Department of 
Health (DOH), samples clams on a routine basis for HAB management purposes.  If high toxin levels from 
HABs are detected, razor clam seasons are delayed or closed.  
 
The Olympic Regional Harmful Algal Bloom (ORHAB) program, a multiagency partnership, was established 
in the year 2000 to provide early warning of HAB events on the Washington Pacific coast based on optimized 
phytoplankton and rapid toxin-testing.  In 2005, ORHAB transitioned from five years of funding from 
NOAA’s National Center for Coastal Ocean Science to funding from Washington State, through legislation 
USA  Huppert and Trainer 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  61 
(RCW 77.32.555) that established $150,000 annual funding for the program through a surcharge to shellfish 
and seaweed licenses.  Specifically, the surcharges to license fees were as follows: three dollars per resident 
and nonresident for annual shellfish and seaweed licenses, $2 for annual resident and nonresident (Chadsey et 
al., 2011) razor clam licenses, and $1 for a three-day razor clam license.  These funds were applied toward 
salaries of HAB specialists at the WDFW who monitor the Washington State southern beaches (Twin Harbors 
and Long Beach) and the University of Washington’s Olympic Natural Resource Center which monitors the 
central beaches (Kalaloch Beach and Ocean Shores) and oversees the program.  The Quinault Indian Nation, 
the Quileute Tribe, and the Makah Tribe have also participated in the program, although their contributions 
have not been supported through the tax on state license fees.  
 
The amount of support that should be devoted to monitoring and determination of HAB risk is constantly 
debated by funding agencies.  One issue is whether the economic benefit of improved HAB monitoring and 
protection of seafood safety exceeds its costs.  There are at least four categories of economic impacts of HAB 
outbreaks that must be considered in order to fully assess their impacts and the value of monitoring:  
(1)   the economic costs of illness and death caused by HABs,  
(2)   the economic impacts to coastal incomes and employment due to fishery closures,  
(3)   the net economic loss suffered by clammers due to fishery closures, and  
(4)   costs of monitoring and enforcing closures due to HABs.   
Each research area applies specific methodologies and concepts, and careful utilization of these economic 
studies requires a basic understanding of the economic concepts.  This section briefly reviews the concepts and 
findings of some published studies.  
 
There have been a few studies focused on category 1, the economic costs of sickness due to HABs.  For 
example, Hoagland and collaborators (Hoagland et al., 2002) discussed the costs of ciguatera fish poisoning in 
the U.S.  In another example, the costs of illness for hospital emergency department treatment for illness 
associated with Karenia brevis blooms in Sarasota County, Florida, were estimated at $0.5 to 4.0 million 
(Hoagland et al., 2009).  In an expanded analysis (Hoagland, et al., 2014), the annual costs were estimated at 
$60 thousand to $700 thousand annually.  No such studies have been pursued concerning the cost of HAB-
related illnesses in Washington State. 
 
The local income and employment economic impacts (category 2, economic impacts) are usually driven by 
reduced commercial fishery harvest, reduced aquaculture harvest, and/or reduced participation in, and 
expenditures on, marine recreation.  As explained by Radtke et al. (1987), a simple estimate of economic 
impact can be calculated using a regional economic model (typically an Input-Output model) to calculate the 
“direct impact” of reduced fishing or recreational activity, the “indirect impacts” caused by reduced purchases 
of supplies and inputs by the directly impacted sectors, and the “induced impact” resulting from decreased 
purchases of consumer goods and services due to the combined direct and indirect reductions in regional 
incomes.  The Input-Output (I-O) model is a simple linear model of regional economy that documents the 
aggregate outputs of each economic sector, the inter-sectoral transactions, and the resulting regional incomes 
(Miernyk, 1965).  A regional I-O model (developed by Beyers, et al., 2008) was used to estimate changes in 
regional income, regional employment, and overall gross expenditures in the Washington coastal counties 
where clams are harvested. 
   
However, while these local economic impacts can be relevant to policy makers, the income and employment 
impacts are not strictly measures of economic benefits or costs.  This is because reduced clamming in the 
coastal counties will typically result in the money not spent at the coast being spent elsewhere, leaving the 
broader State or Northwest regional expenditures and incomes about the same.  So, the beach-oriented local 
economic impact is informative about economic effects on beach-clamming counties, but is not an accurate 
measure of the net economic loss associated with beach closures.  A measure of net economic loss due to lost 
clamming could be represented by the amount that clammers would be willing to pay to avoid closures.  
  
Category 3, net economic loss to clammers due to closures, reflects the value that clammers place on the 
activity, over and above the costs of clamming.  This is the net benefit concept typically addressed in a cost-
Huppert and Trainer  USA 
62  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
benefit analysis.  Both recreational clammers and commercial operations can be expected to experience some 
net economic benefits of clamming, or some benefits of reduced closures due to more precise monitoring of 
HAB occurrences.  An estimate of this value for recreational clamming was based upon data collected in a 
survey of Washington coastal clammers executed in 2008.  The final economic impact, category 4, costs of 
monitoring and enforcing closures of the clam fishery, assesses the benefit and cost of monitoring HABs 
compared to the estimated value of reduced closures.  This issue is explored by Jin and Hoagland (2008), but 
has rarely been addressed.  Economic impact categories 2, 3, and 4 will be discussed in detail below for the 
Washington State razor clam fishery. 
Regional impacts of HABs due to reduced recreational fishing 
A recent study by Dyson and Huppert (2010) estimated the regional impacts of a various types of closures at 
the four Washington coast razor clam beaches due to Pseudo-nitzschia blooms.  For example, it was estimated 
that a full season closure of all the beaches would cause an $11.36 million per year reduction in coastal county 
incomes due to reduced recreational activity, and a nearly $2 million per year reduction in incomes due to lack 
of tribal and non-tribal commercial harvest of razor clams.  Much lower impacts are estimated for single beach 
or shorter lasting closures.  For example, an annual closure of the popular Long Beach peninsula razor clam 
fishery would have a regional income impact of negative $4.4 million.  If the closure included only one clam 
fishery opening (typically 2–5 days), the negative income impact would be $1.4 million (Dyson and Huppert, 
2010, p. 30).  These are hypothetical impacts that could be used in assessing the effects of avoiding beach 
closures through better monitoring of HABs. 
 
To calculate the economic impacts of closures in the Washington coastal razor clam fisheries, the reduced 
harvest is translated into a reduction in value of clams harvested based upon recent average annual values, and 
then these are converted to estimated coastal income impacts based upon regional input-output (I-O) models. 
For the recreational fisheries, a regional I-O model for the Grays Harbor and Pacific county region is based 
upon the I-O coefficients from the existing Washington State input-output model. 
  
We collected data documenting the level of expenditure by recreational razor clammers using a mail-back 
survey questionnaire distributed by the WDFW during a recreational clam fishery opening on April 19–20, 
2008.  For the smaller commercial razor clam fisheries on the southern Washington coast, we utilized the 
existing Fishery Economic Assessment Model commonly used by the Pacific Fishery Management Council to 
gauge impacts of fishery closures in the Willapa Spit and Quinault tribal commercial fisheries. 
   
To implement either of the I-O models for recreational or commercial fisheries, we had to determine how the 
fishers are likely to react to beach closures.  For recreational fisheries, we made assumptions about how 
clammers change their patterns of beach visits and expenditures in response to closure of ocean beaches.  The 
simplest approach assumes that any planned beach visits during a closure would be cancelled and the 
economic impact would be proportional to the reduced recreational expenditures in the beach area.  The more 
complicated approach utilizes information gained in the razor clam survey to estimate the proportion of 
clammers that would visit the beach even if the fishery is closed, and to estimate the proportion to clammers 
that would shift from a particular beach to a different beach when a specific beach, or group of beaches, is 
closed.  These latter estimates of impact incorporate more subtle behavior which is typical of recreationists’ 
choice sites to visit.  In both the simpler and more complicated approaches to estimating impacts of 
recreational closures, the expenditures per clammer per day were taken from the April 2008 razor clam survey.  
The size and nature of the survey are illustrated in Table 1. 
 
The overall coastal income impact of razor clam trip expenditures in Pacific and Grays Harbor counties in 
2008 is estimated to be $13.5 million.  As shown in Table 2, the estimated economic impacts on labor income 
in the two-county region for closures of a single scheduled opening of a single recreational beach ranges from 
$110 thousand (at Mocrocks Beach) to $1.2 million (at Long Beach) as indicated.  For a full year closure of the 
individual beaches, the estimated income impacts range from $350 thousand to $4.40 million.  A full-year all-
USA  Huppert and Trainer 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  63 
beach closure has an estimated labor income impact of $10.57 million.  This latter estimate is less than the 
overall estimated impact of expenditures by razor clammers ($13.5 million) because some clammers indicate 
they would continue to visit the beaches for recreation even when the clam fishery is closed. 
 
 
Table 1 Participation data, selected survey data, and average expenditures per party for four razor clamming beaches 
(Mocrocks Beach, Copalis Beach, Twin Harbors, and Long Beach) on Washington’s outer coast.  Expenditures are in 
2008 dollars. 
      Mocrocks Copalis Twin Harbors Long Beach 
 Fishery participation in 2008 
Annual participants 22,247 42,376 65,253 112,442 
Days open  11 13 39 22 
Average no. of clammers/day 2022 3260 1673 5111 
   Survey overview and averages 
No. of respondents 66 53 51 70 
No. of people/party 4.09 (0.27) 4.42 (0.47) 3.46 (0.30) 3.81 (0.30) 
No. of clammers/party 3.71 (0.23) 3.98 (0.39) 3.10 (0.21) 3.29 (0.23) 
% staying overnight 36% 65% 64% 67% 
No. of nights spent 1.06 (0.14) 1.44 (0.15) 3.06 (0.84) 2.62 (0.39) 
No. of days clammer/trip 1.21 1.35 1.99 1.41 
Miles traveled, one way 116 (13) 127 (11) 111 (14) 106 (18) 
% who cancelled a trip  in past due 
to HABS 
45% 35% 34% 40% 
   Average $ spent per party per trip 
Hotel    85.67  115.77  73.10  84.27 
Camping    9.36  6.19  18.18  14.48 
Restaurant   57.42  78.44  75.04  87.45 
Groceries    29.71  38.37  65.50  62.50 
Gas and oil   69.49  107.15  111.43  116.14 
Ferry tolls   1.18  0.23  0.66  0.00 
Other transport   1.16  0.96  0.80  10.61 
All other    14.79  28.75  25.21  37.21 
Total expenditure    $268.77  $375.87  $368.91  $412.67 
  
Huppert and Trainer  USA 
64  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
Table 2 Local (two-county) economic impacts due to HABs-related beach closures for (a) one opening (typically 2–5 
days) and (b) a full year.  Expenditures, sales impact, and income are in millions of 2008 dollars, and employment is 
number of full-time equivalent jobs affected. 
          
 (a) One-Opening Closure 
Beach 
Sales 
foregone ($) 
Total sales 
impact ($) 
Employment 
impact 
Labor income 
impact ($) 
Mocrocks Beach 0.19 0.29 3 0.11 
Copalis Beach 0.36 0.54 6 0.20 
Northern beaches* 1.10 1.64 20 0.60 
Twin Harbors 0.88 1.19 14 0.43 
Long Beach 2.31 3.29 38 1.20 
Southern beaches 2.69 3.77 44 1.37 
All four beaches# 4.02 5.75 67 2.10 
 
(b) Full Year Closure 
Beach 
Sales 
foregone ($) 
Total sales 
impact ($) 
Employment 
impact 
Labor income 
impact ($) 
Mocrocks 0.63 0.94 11 0.35 
Copalis 1.37 2.05 24 0.75 
Northern beaches 3.98 5.26 65 1.93 
Twin Harbors 2.20 2.97 35 1.08 
Long Beach 8.52 12.07 140 4.40 
Southern beaches 15.95 21.85 253 7.97 
All four beaches 20.42 28.97 339 10.57 
* Northern beaches = Mocrocks + Copalis; Southern beaches = Twin Harbors + Long Beach.  
# The impacts on separate beaches will not add up to the impact on combined beaches for north or south beach summaries. 
Similarly, the total for north plus south beaches will not equal the total for the coastal region because when one beach 
closes, the number of fishing days occurring at the other beaches is affected.  Clammers shift from beach to beach in 
response to closures, e.g., if Mocrocks is closed, some of the clammers will shift to Copalis or one of the southern beaches. 
Regional impacts of commercial fisheries  
The economic impacts of commercial fisheries on the Pacific coast have long been evaluated using the 
Fisheries Economics Assessment Model (FEAM) developed by The Research Group of Corvallis, Oregon, for 
the Pacific Fishery Management Council (PFMC).  This is a well-developed I-O model adapted to the coastal 
fisheries using extensive interviews and surveys of coastal fishing businesses in California, Oregon and 
Washington.  The fisheries-specific information provided the basis for adding rows (industries) to the 1998 
IMPLAN model, a commonly-used national and state-level I-O model (see Minnesota IMPLAN Group at 
http://www.implan.com/).  
 
USA  Huppert and Trainer 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  65 
To assess the income impacts of the commercial razor clam fisheries, we focused on the FEAM model 
developed for PFMC’s 2003 Final Environmental Impact State for proposed groundfish plan amendments 
(PFMC, 2003).  The detailed model developed for the southwest coast of Washington was obtained from 
PFMC to assess the impact of the Quinault tribal fishery on Copalis and Mocrocks beaches and the 
commercial fishery on the Willapa Spit.  The specific FEAM fisheries sector relevant to the clam fishery is 
titled “clams and mussels”.  We inserted a five-year average harvest, harvest revenue, and wholesale revenue 
(in 2007 dollars) for the two fisheries into the FEAM model to generate the estimated coastal income impacts 
in Table 3.  
 
The five-year period chosen for the Quinault fishery consisted of the years 2003–2007.  The resulting impact 
represents an estimate of the annual average income generated in the coastal region by fully open Quinault 
commercial razor clam fisheries.  To assess impacts of closures due to HABs, we would need to judge the 
likely length of the closures and the impact that these will have on the ability of the fisheries to take the annual 
harvestable amounts of clams in the two geographic areas. Since the tribal fishery (like the recreational fishery) 
occurs during low tides between September and June 1 each year, a lengthy closure is likely to limit the ability 
to harvest the total amount of clams available.  As shown in Table 4, resulting coastal income impacts range 
from almost $117 thousand for a half-year single beach closure to $1.4 million for an all-year all beach 
closure. 
 
 
Table 3 Five-year average coastal income impact of commercial razor clam fisheries. 
 
(a) Quinault Tribal Fishery 
2003–2007 average harvest with beach price of $1.25 and wholesale 
price of $4.24 
  Total weight of clams (pounds)  376,623 
  Landed value (beach price)  $470,779 
  Value-added by processor  $1,126,103 
  Wholesale value  $1,596,882 
  Coastal income impact  $1,421,225 
 
(b) Willapa Spit Fishery 
2002 plus 2004–2007 average harvest with landed price of $1.46 and 
wholesale price of $4.24 
  Total weight of clams (pounds)  136,264 
  Landed value  $198,971 
  Value-added by processors  $378,814 
  Wholesale value   $577,759 
  Coastal income impact  $514,206 
 
 
 
  
Huppert and Trainer  USA 
66  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
Table 4 Economic impacts of various types of closures of the Quinault commercial fishery.  Based upon average annual 
harvest of during 2003–2007.  
Closure Type Harvest decline (pounds) Negative Income Impact ($) 
Year-long, all northern beaches  376,623  1,421,225  
Year-long, Copalis Beach  165,407  624,180  
Year-long, Mocrocks Beach  149,224  563,112  
Year-long, Point Grenville  61,992  233,933  
Half-year, all northern beaches  188,312  710,614  
Half-year, Copalis Beach  82,704  312,090  
Half-year, Mocrocks Beach  74,612  281,556  
Half-year, Point Grenville  30,996  116,967  
 
 
The Willapa Spit razor clam fishery is managed by the WDFW using licenses and seasons.  It typically begins 
in May or June after the recreational fishery is completed.  Historically, the clams harvested in this fishery 
were frozen and sold for bait in the winter Dungeness crab fishery.  In recent years, a growing percentage of 
the clams are being used for human consumption, and these are bringing a higher price.  Before and during the 
commercial fishery, the clams are tested for biotoxins to assure safety for human consumption.  Domoic acid 
outbreaks can occur during May–June.  For example, the May–June period was closed in 2003 for this reason. 
The fishery was re-opened in August but the harvest was much reduced as fewer people participated.  Many of 
the usual participants were engaged in other, more lucrative fisheries (e.g., albacore tuna) at that time, or they 
could not adjust other work commitments to participate in the delayed clam fishery.  Hence, the impact shown 
in Table 5 is based upon the five-year average harvest and revenue during 2002 plus 2004–2007 for the 
Willapa Spit fishery.  The year 2003 was left out of the calculation for Willapa Spit because the fishery was 
closed during the usual fishing period of June–July due to a HAB outbreak.  To calculate the coastal income 
impacts, we used the average price paid to harvesters (based on WDFW data) and, since we had no direct 
information on the wholesale value for the Willapa fishery, we assumed that these clams would bring the same 
average wholesale price as the Quinault razor clams.  As shown in Table 5, we estimate the negative income 
impact of a full closure (May–September) as $514,206, and the negative impact of a spring closure (May–
June) as $448,266. 
 
The commercial fishery is clearly a smaller economic driver of the coastal economies than the recreational 
fishery.  Nevertheless, the overall impacts of two fisheries likely represent significant contributions to the 
communities involved in those fisheries.  Closures of portions or of the whole tribal commercial clam fishing 
season is reckoned to cause negative economic impacts to coastal incomes proportional to the reductions in the 
fishery seasons.  
 
 
Table 5 Economic impacts of various types of closures at Willapa Spit in the southern Washington coastal region.  
May–September closure impact is based upon average annual harvest and value during five recent fishing years (2002 and 
2004–2007).  May–-June closure impact is based upon the difference between the five-year average and 2003 harvest and 
value.  
Closure scenario Harvest decline (pounds) Negative income impact ($) 
 Spring–Summer closure (May–September) 136,264    514,206 
 Spring closure (May–June) 118,790    448,266 
  
USA  Huppert and Trainer 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  67 
Assessing the recreational value of reduced beach closures  
The last item in the 2008 survey was a question eliciting respondent “willingness to pay” (WTP) for reduced 
razor clam closures.  This was the first attempt to estimate the value of reduced beach closures to recreational 
clammers.  The purpose of estimating was to have a benefit measure that could be compared to the cost of 
HAB monitoring at razor clam beaches.  A single question on the survey addressed this issue: 
 
12.   If the State had additional funds available to test for algae blooms more often, it might be possible to 
reduce the number of beach closures to 1 or less per year. To benefit from the additional HAB testing, 
would you be willing to pay more than the current price of  $8.21 for an annual resident Razor Clam 
permit? 
 □  No   □  Yes →   If so, how much more would you be willing to spend? 
 □ $2 □ $4 □ $6 □ $8 □ $10 □ $15 □ $20 □ $25 □ $30  
 
The question was completed by 220 respondents, 84 of whom checked “No”, while 126 checked “Yes”.  As 
shown in Table 6, the average amount of WTP for all responders was $5.17 more than the current price of 
$8.21.  
 
We wanted to estimate an average WTP across the population of clammers at large – that is, an average per 
clammer, not per clammer trip.  The survey data represent a proportional sample of participants on a few days 
in April 2008. Hence, the individuals are represented in the sample in proportion to their level of participation. 
A clammer who participated 10 times a year is represented 10 times more in the sample than a clammer who 
participated only once per year.  A reasonable approach to estimating a value per individual rather than per trip 
is to calculate a weighted average where the weights are inversely proportional to the number of trips per 
individual for the year.  
 
The weight adjustment for value per clammer versus value per respondent was developed (lower part in  
Table 6.  The weights applied to observations at each level of participation (from 1 trip up to 20 trips for the 
year) were first calculated simply as the inverse of the trip number.  Then these were each divided by the sum 
of the inverse numbers, yielding the set of weights that add up to 1 over the range of trips taken by the 
clammers.  These weights were multiplied by the average values observed within each trip category (1 through 
20) resulting in the overall average value shown in Table 7.  Similarly, the average number of trips by 
clammers was calculated from the sample using the same weights applied to the survey answers regarding the 
number of trips taken during the 2007–2008 season by the respondents.  A summary of the results is displayed 
in Table 7. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 6 Results from question 12 on “Willingness to Pay” to fund research that would help the State reduce the number of closures to no more than 1 per year. 
Number of trips (i) 
Answer All 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 10 15 20 SUM 
No 84 29 19 12 10 4 6 0 2 2 0 0 84 
Yes 126 48 30 17 8 8 8 1 1 4 1 1 126 
Sum of Yes $ 325.0 276.0 185.00   72.0  105.0  38.0 2.0 2.0 35. 0 2000 25.0 1,085.0 
Avg Yes $ 
 
8.61 
6.77 9.20 10.88 9.00 13.13 4.75 2.00 2.00 8.75 20.0 25.0 
 
Avg All $ 5.17 4.22 5.63 6.38 4.00 8.75 2.71 2.00 0.67 5.83 20.0 25.0 
 
              
Weighting each value for number of trips component                Sum 
w=(Yes + No)/210 0.3667 0.2333 0.1381 0.0857 0.0571 0.0667 0.0048 0.0143 0.0286 0.0048 0.0048 
 
wt1 = w*(1/i) 0.3667 0.1167 0.0460 0.0214 0.0114 0.0111 0.0007 0.0018 0.0029 0.0003 0.0002 0.5790 
wt*=wt1/Sumwt1 0.6333 0.2015 0.0795 0.0370 0.0197 0.0192 0.0012 0.0031 0.0049 0.0005 0.0004 1.0000 
wt*x Avg All 
 
$2.67 $1.14 $0.51 $0.15 $0.17 $0.05 $0.00 $0.00 $0.03 $0.01 $0.01 $4.74 
wt*x No. Trips 0.6333 0.4030 0.2385 0.1480 0.0987 0.1151 0.0082 0.0247 0.0493 0.0082 0.0082 1.74 
 
Huppert and Trainer USA
68 PICES Scientific Report No. 47
USA  Huppert and Trainer 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47   69 
Table 7 Summary of estimated Willingness to Pay (WTP) for reducing closures to no more than 1 per year. 
Weighted average WTP value per angler $4.74 
Weighted average trips per clammer  1.74 
Total number of clammer-days during 2007–2008 clamming sea on 242,318 
Divided by weighted average of number of trips = number of individuals 139,631 
Number of individuals × avg. value = total WTP to avoid closures  $662,205 
 
 
These estimates are based upon a relatively small sample of clammers during a single season.  However, the 
estimates seem reasonable, and they should help to assess whether or not the cost of maintaining or increasing 
the costs of ORHAB monitoring would be justifiable on a cost-benefit basis.  The WTP estimate of $662 
thousand exceeds the current cost of ORHAB monitoring which currently is fixed at $150 thousand from the 
State legislature.  These funds are provided from a tax to Puget Sound shellfish and seaweed licenses and 
Pacific coast razor clam licenses.  The average annual funds from the surcharge to licenses is >$500 thousand.  
All funding above and beyond the $150 thousand to ORHAB goes to the WDOH for biotoxin monitoring.  As 
ORHAB program costs for salaries and supplies continue to increase, a proposal has been made to approach 
the legislature for an additional surcharge that is justified by the WTP data presented here. 
Conclusions 
The economic impacts of closures in the Washington coastal razor clam fisheries have been estimated based 
upon assumed reductions in the harvests due to full-year and partial-year closures of the recreational and 
commercial fisheries.  In each case, the reduced harvest is translated into a reduction in value of clams 
harvested based upon recent average annual values, and then these are converted to estimated coastal income 
impacts based upon regional input-output (I-O) models.  For the recreational fisheries, we developed, with 
major assistance from Prof. William Beyers (University of Washington), a regional I-O model for the Grays 
Harbor and Pacific county region based upon the I-O coefficients from the existing Washington State input-
output model.  Data documenting the level of expenditure by recreational razor clammers were collected using 
a mail-back survey questionnaire distributed by the WDFW during a recreational clam fishery opening on 
April 19–20, 2008.  For the smaller commercial razor clam fisheries on the southern Washington coast, we 
utilized the existing Fishery Economic Assessment Model (FEAM) commonly used by the Pacific Fishery 
Management Council to gauge impacts of fishery closures in the Willapa Spit and Quinault tribal commercial 
fisheries.   
 
The overall coastal income impact in Pacific and Grays Harbor counties of razor clam trip expenditures in 
2008 is estimated to be $13.5 million.  The estimated economic impacts on labor income in the two-county 
region for closures of a single scheduled opening of a single recreational beach ranges from $110 thousand (at 
Mocrocks Beach) to $1.20 million (at Long Beach).  For a full year closure of the individual beaches, the 
estimated income impacts range from $350 thousand to $4.4 million.  A full-year, all beach closure has an 
estimated labor income impact of $10.57 million.  This latter estimate is less than the overall estimated impact 
of razor clam expenditures ($13.5 million) because some clammers claim they would continue to visit the 
beach for recreation even if the clam fishery is closed. 
 
The commercial fishery is clearly a smaller economic driver of the coastal economies than the recreational 
fishery. Nevertheless, the overall impacts of these two fisheries ($1.42 million for the Quinault tribal fishery 
and $514 thousand for the Willapa Spit fishery) likely represent significant contributions to the communities 
involved in those fisheries.  Closures of portions, or all of the tribal commercial clam fishing season will cause 
negative economic impacts to coastal incomes proportional to the reductions in the fishery seasons.  The 
impact of a partial Willapa Spit fishery closure is more complicated because the fishing participants typically 
Huppert and Trainer  USA 
70  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
plan on shifting to other fisheries after the usual May–June season. Hence, a shut-down in May–June, even if 
the fishery is opened later in the summer, will tend to cause a reduction in the economic contribution of the 
fishery, perhaps as much as $448 thousand. 
 
Beyond the coastal beaches focused on in this paper, shellfish harvesting trips to Puget Sound beaches are 
estimated at 125,000 per year by the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife, providing a net 
economic of $5.4 million to the region (Washington Shellfish Initiative publication, 2011).  Washington State 
leads the country in aquaculture of clams, oysters and mussels with an annual value of >$107 million. 
Recently, new emerging HAB problems, including the first documented case of diarrhetic shellfish poisoning 
(DSP, Trainer et al., 2013), are challenging the State monitoring programs with the requirement of a large 
number of additional shellfish samples to be analyzed in order to protect public health.  A phytoplankton 
monitoring program, modeled after ORHAB, was established in 2006 to assist the WDOH by providing an 
early warning of HABs.  This program, called SoundToxins, is jointly managed by the Northwest Fisheries 
Science Center and Washington State SeaGrant and is composed solely of volunteers from the general public, 
shellfish farms, environmental learning centers, and Native Tribes.  It is increasingly challenging to maintain 
SoundToxins without dedicated funding.  In particular, because the current shellfish surcharge brings in 
funding from licenses sold for recreational harvesting in Puget Sound, a proposal will be made to include 
SoundToxins in the permanent funding for monitoring HABs Statewide. 
 
In summary, phytoplankton monitoring provided by programs such as ORHAB and SoundToxins help reduce 
the number of beach closures to shellfish harvesting.  The economic value of reduced closures made possible 
by the current State allocation for monitoring by the ORHAB partnership exceeds the $150 thousand cost of 
monitoring the HABs.  Without monitoring, beaches would likely be closed to shellfish harvesting more often 
and for longer periods.  In this paper, we estimate that razor clam diggers are willing to pay $625 thousand to 
avoid frequent closures of the recreational razor clam fishery on the Pacific coast of Washington.  The 
commercial fishery would experience reduced closures as well, a factor that is not included in the WTP 
estimate above.  Greater attention should be paid toward optimizing important phytoplankton monitoring 
programs that have successfully mitigated significant human health impacts and reduced the length of closures 
of beaches to Washington State shellfish harvesters. 
 
Acknowledgements   We thank Scott Mazzone, Marine Fish and Shellfish Biologist of the Quinault Indian 
Nation, for reviewing an earlier draft of this manuscript and for providing helpful comments. 
References 
Beyers, W., Lefberg, I. and Lin, T. 2008. The 2002 Washington Input-Output Model. Office of Financial Management, 
State of Washington. Available online at http://www.ofm.wa.gov/economy/io/2002/default.asp. 
Chadsey, M., Trainer, V.L. and Leschine T.M. 2011. Cooperation of Science and Management for Harmful Algal Blooms:  
Domoic Acid and the Washington Coast Razor Clam Fishery. Coast. Mngmt. 40: 33–54. 
Dyson, K. and Huppert, D.D. 2010. Regional economic impacts of razor clam beach closures due to harmful algal blooms 
(HABs) on the Pacific coast of Washington. Harmful Algae 9: 264–271. 
Hoagland, P., Anderson, D.M., Kaoru, Y. and White, A.W. 2002. The economic effect of harmful algal blooms in the 
United States: estimates, assessment issues, and information needs. Estuaries 25: 819–837. 
Hoagland, P., Jin, D., Polansky, L.Y., Kirkpatrick, B., Kirkpatrick, G., Fleming, L.E., Reich, A., Watkins, S.M., Ullmann, 
S.G. and Backer L.C. 2009. The costs of respiratory illnesses arriving from Florida Gulf Coast Karenia brevis blooms. 
Environ. Health Perspect. 117: 1239–1243. 
Hoagland, P., Jin, D., Beet, A., Kirkpatrick, B., Reich, A., Ullmann, S., Fleming, L.E. and Kirkpatrick, G. 2014. The 
human health effects of Florida red tide (FRT) blooms: An expanded analysis. Environ. Intl. 68: 144–153. 
Jin, D. and Hoagland, P. 2008. The value of HAB predictions to the commercial shellfish fishery in the Gulf of Maine. 
Harmful Algae 7: 772–781. 
Miernyk, W.H. 1965. The Elements of Input-Output Analysis. New York: Random House, 156 pp. 
PFMC (Pacific Fishery Management Council) 2003. Pacific Coast Salmon Plan (as revised through Amendment 14).  
Adopted March 1999. Portland, OR. 
USA  Huppert and Trainer 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47   71 
Trainer, V.L., Moore, L., Bill, B.D., Adams, N.G., Harrington, N., Borchert, J., da Silva, D.A.M. and Eberhart, B.T.L. 
2013. Diarrhetic shellfish toxins and other polyether toxins of human health concern in Washington State. Mar. Drugs 
11: 1–22, doi:10.3390/md110x000x. 
Radtke, H., Dewees, C.M. and Smith, F.J. 1987.  The fishing industry and Pacific coastal communities:  Understanding the 
assessment of economic impacts.  Pacific Sea Grant College Program.  University of California. Marine Advisory 
Program Publication - UCSGMAP-97-1. 
Washington Shellfish Initiative. 2011. From the website: http://www.psp.wa.gov/shellfish.php. 
Yoshida and Kumagai  NOWPAP 
72  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
Economic impacts of harmful algal blooms in the NOWPAP region 
Takafumi Yoshida and Kazuya Kumagai 
 
Northwest Pacific Action Plan, Special Monitoring and Coastal Environmental Assessment Regional Activity Centre, 
Toyama City, Toyama, Japan 
About NOWPAP  
The Northwest Pacific Action Plan (NOWPAP) is part of the Regional Seas Programme of the United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP), which aims to address the accelerating degradation of the world’s oceans 
and coastal areas.  The program goals are sustainable management and use of the marine and coastal 
environment through engagement of neighboring countries in comprehensive and specific actions to protect 
their shared marine environment. China, Japan, Korea and Russia are member states of NOWPAP and four 
Regional Activity Centres (RACs) implement activities for marine environmental conservation in the 
NOWPAP region. 
 
 
 
Fig. 1 NOWPAP geographical scope. 
 
 
  
NOWPAP  Yoshida and Kumagai 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47   73 
The Special Monitoring and Coastal Environmental Assessment Regional Activity Centre (CEARAC), one of 
four RACs of NOWPAP, is responsible for coordination of regional activities for assessment of the state of the 
marine, coastal and associated freshwater environments, including assessment of pollutant input for 
comparison with monitoring results. CEARAC also develops tools for environmental planning and 
management, based on the results of assessments, including monitoring of biological effects of pollutants and 
special monitoring programs using remote sensing techniques in areas which cannot be covered by routine in 
situ pollution monitoring. 
 
In these activities of CEARAC, monitoring Harmful Algal Blooms (HAB) is important. As HAB frequently 
cause serious economic impacts in member states, each country conducts regular monitoring in coastal areas of 
frequent HAB occurrence with a goal of sharing information on HAB type, number and distribution.  The 
selected areas of routine monitoring are: the coastal areas of Qingdao and Dalian in China; the northwest sea 
area of the Kyushu region and Ariake Sea in Japan; the south coast of Korea; and Amurskii Bay, Vostok Bay 
and Aniva Bay in Russia (Fig. 2).  To understand and assess the HAB situation in the NOWPAP region, 
CEARAC has summarized the information on HAB in member states and published regional reports in 2005 
and 2011 (NOWPAP CEARAC 2005, 2011).  This article is based on the information from these reports with 
some additional current information for the NOWPAP region. In this report, information on HAB is presented 
as red tides and toxin-producing plankton, respectively.  
  
 
    
Fig. 2 Selected sea areas where HAB information was collected by NOWPAP member states. 
 
Red tide occurrences in the NOWPAP region 
Figure 3 shows the number of red tide events in the selected sea areas of member states from 1995 to 2008. 
Red tide events have been continuously recorded along the coastal areas, with some annual and spatial 
variations.  Intensive fishery and aquaculture areas tend to have numerous red tide occurrences.  
 
To date, about 100 red tide producing plankton species have been recorded in the NOWPAP region.  Two 
flagellate species, Heterosigma akashiwo and Noctiluca scintillans, and one diatom species, Skeletonema 
costatum, have been recorded in the coastal waters of all NOWPAP member states, and these flagellate species 
have caused extensive damage to local fisheries.  Other common and economically damaging species include 
Karenia mikimotoi, Akashiwo sanguinea and Prorocentrum micans, all flagellates.  In addition, Cochlodinium 
polykrikoides is a flagellate species which has caused serious damage to fisheries in Japan and Korea. 
  
 
Qingdao coastal 
area 
Dalian coastal 
area 
South coast of 
Korea 
Northwest Kyushu area 
and Ariake Sea 
Amurskii 
Bay 
Vostok Bay 
Aniva 
Bay 
Yoshida and Kumagai  NOWPAP 
74  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
 
 
 
Fig. 3 Number of red tide events in the NOWPAP member states. 
 
Fishery damage by red tide and its causative species 
In China, 50 red tide events were reported from 1990 to 2009, of which 2 events led to economic damage to 
scallop aquaculture in the Dalian coastal area.  Economic damage was estimated at 20 million Chinese Yuan  
(3 million USD) and 120 million Chinese Yuan (20 million USD) in 1990 and 2000, respectively.  In Japan, 
1,407 red tide events were recorded from 1979 to 2008, of which 122 events caused fisheries damage off 
northern Kyushu Island and Ariake Sea.  In Korea, 873 red tide events were recorded from 1995 to 2009, of 
which 209 events led to fish kills along the whole Korean coast.  In Russia, 41 red tide events were recorded 
from 1991 to 2010; however, all events were recorded as harmless and caused no apparent damage.  
 
In Japan and Korea, serious economic impacts on fisheries were reported. In 1999, approximately 7 million US 
dollars (USD) of fisheries damage was recorded in Imari Bay, Kyushu, Japan.  Even greater economic losses 
were recorded in Korea in 1995 and 2003, worth approximately 95 million USD and 19 million USD, 
respectively.  Since 2005, the number of occurrences and damage to fisheries by C. polykrikoides had 
decreased until in 2012 when C. polykrikoides formed blooms along the western and southern coasts of Korea 
for two months.  The economic losses to aquacultured rockfish and parrot fish industries reached 3.3 million 
USD.  
 
In Japan, Chattonella antiqua and Karenia mikimotoi cause huge economic losses to aquaculture.  Since 2008, 
fisheries damage caused by C. antiqua has been severe in the Yatsushiro Sea, Kyushu, due to the impacts of 
these HAB on many farms of aquacultured Japanese amberjack, striped jack and yellowtail amberjack.  In 
2008, the amount of fisheries damage was 1.8 million USD, and increased to 29 million USD in 2009, then 
almost doubled to 53 million USD in 2010.  In the Bungo Strait, located in the Seto Inland Sea, huge economic 
losses (13 million USD in terms of fishery damage) due to K. mikimotoi impacts on aquacultured Japanese 
amberjack and red seabream occurred in 2012.  The Bungo Strait is outside of the NOWPAP region; however, 
it is connected to the NOWPAP region through the Kanmon Strait and contains many aquaculture farms.  
 
  
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Russia
Korea
Japan
China
NOWPAP  Yoshida and Kumagai 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47   75 
Economic damage by massive blooms of green macroalgae Ulva prolifera 
Green tides, which are caused by huge volumes of green macroalgae, are not directly harmful to fisheries or 
human health, but macroalgae often grow rapidly and huge volumes can become stranded on the coast.  During 
green tide events, stakeholders have to remove algae in order to keep the coast clean and safe.  In recent years, 
such macroalgae blooms have become one of the marine environmental concerns throughout the world. 
 
In 2008, massive green macroalgae blooms occurred in the Yellow Sea and the East China Sea, including the 
coastal area of Qingdao.  One particular bloom covered an area of about 2,400 km
2
 and the total volume 
removed reached 1 million tons (Hu and He, 2008).  The removal and treatment of such a large volume of 
macroalgae cost more than 100 million USD. Such massive blooms have occurred every year in Chinese 
coastal areas since 2007 (Zhao et al., 2013), becoming a serious environmental issue in the NOWPAP region. 
Toxin-producing plankton and shipment stoppage in the NOWPAP region 
All NOWPAP member states regularly monitor the status of shellfish toxins produced by phytoplankton 
species and causing syndromes in humans called paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP), diarrhetic shellfish 
poisoning (DSP) and amnesic shellfish poisoning (ASP).  In the NOWPAP region, six species, including 
Alexandrium spp. and Gymnodinium catenatum are PSP-inducing species.  The most commonly recorded PSP 
species in the member states is A. tamarense.  While no shellfish poisoning was recorded in China, Korea and 
Russia from 2006 to 2012, 21 PSP-poisoning cases were recorded in Japan.  In 12 of these cases, an export 
shipment stoppage was enacted once the toxin levels exceeded the safety limit. 
 
Nine of the 10 DSP species recorded in the NOWPAP region belong to the genus Dinophysis.  The other is 
Exuviaella marina, which was recorded only in China (NOWPAP CEARAC, 2005).  Dinophysis fortii and  
D. acuminata were recorded in all four NOWPAP member states; however, no damage to fishery or human 
health by this poisoning was reported in the region. 
 
ASP-inducing Pseudo-nitzschia species were recorded mainly in Russia.  In Korea, the only Pseudo-nitzschia 
species observed was Pseudo-nitzschia pungens. In the NOWPAP region, damage caused by ASP has not yet 
been reported. 
Countermeasures related to economic impacts caused by red tide and toxin-producing plankton 
blooms 
All NOWPAP member states have regular red tide and toxin-producing plankton monitoring programs to 
detect the presence of HAB species.  Regular monitoring and early detection is one of the basic 
countermeasures for minimizing fishery damages. In China, after starting regular monitoring in 2002, the 
number of early detections of HAB increased and fishery damage and associated economic losses decreased 
accordingly.  The positive economic effect from monitoring, resulting in reduction of fishery damage, was 
90 million Chinese Yuan (about 14.7 million USD) in 2002 (Ministry of Environmental Protection, China, 2002). 
 
Furthermore, each member state has set warning and advisory standards in order to prevent specific fisheries 
damage caused by various HAB species.  Target species and threshold numbers of cells that result in 
advisories or warnings vary among countries and regions (Table 1).  When the in situ observed cell number of 
target species exceeds the advisory limit, monitoring organizations alert fishermen.  Then, when target species 
abundance increases above the warning standard level, monitoring organizations encourage fishermen to take 
countermeasures, such as feed withdrawal or relocation of fish cages. 
 
Japan and Russia monitor toxin-producing plankton species to mitigate the effects of shellfish toxins and damage 
to human health.  All NOWPAP member states set warning and advisory standards for cell density of toxin- 
producing plankton, Alexandrium spp., Gymnodinium catenatum, Dinophysis spp. and Pseudo-nitzschia spp. 
Yoshida and Kumagai  NOWPAP 
76  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
 
 
 
Table 1 Warning and advisory standards for each causative species. 
Country Species name 
Warning/action standards (cell/ml) 
Advisory standard Warning standard 
China 
 
 
 
Mirionecta rubra 
Noctiluca scintillans 
Skeletonema costatum 
Heterosigma akashiwo 
Eucampa. zodianus 
Chattonella marina 
Alexandrium tamarense 
 500 
 50 
 5,000 
50,000 
 100 
 100 
 1,000 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
Japan 
 
 
Chattonella antiqua 
C. marina  
Karenia mikimotoi 
Cochlodinium polykrikoides 
Heterosigma akashiwo 
Heterocapsa circularisquama 
 1 
 1 
 100 
 50 
 1,000 
 10 
 10 
 10 
 500 
 500 
 10,000 
 50 
Korea 
 
 
 
Chattonella spp. 
Cochlodinium polykrikoides 
Gyrodinium sp. 
Karenia mikimotoi 
Other dinoflagellates 
Diatoms 
Mixed blooms 
 2,500 
 300 
 500 
 1,000 
 30,000 
 50,000 
 40,000 
 5,000 
 1,000 
 2,000 
 3,000 
 50,000 
100,000 
 80,000 
Russia 
 
 
Pseudo-nitzschia callianth 
P . delicatissima 
P . fraudulenta 
P . multistriata 
P . multiseries 
Alexandrium tamarense 
Dinophysis acuminate 
D. acuta 
D. fortii 
D. norvegica 
D. rotundata 
Protoceratium reticulatum 
 500 
 500 
 500 
 500 
 500 
0.5 
0.5 
0.5 
0.5 
0.5 
0.5 
 500 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
– 
 
 
  
NOWPAP  Yoshida and Kumagai 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47   77 
In order to reduce fisheries damage, detecting HAB at an early stage and conducting timely countermeasures is 
important.  Early detection can lead to early warning and give fishermen sufficient time to implement 
countermeasures. 
  
There are some methods for detecting HAB at an early stage, including using remote sensing techniques and 
molecular genetic techniques as well as information sharing and communication technology: 
 
Remote sensing techniques 
 
Satellites are useful tools for red tide monitoring and offer the ability to obtain information from large areas. 
Although there are some challenges, such as size differences between the actual red tide and the resolution of 
the satellite image, interference from clouds, and the inability of satellites to distinguish phytoplankton species, 
remote sensing techniques are applied to assist with monitoring red tides in the NOWPAP region (Tang et al., 
2003; Ahn et al., 2006; Ishizaka et al., 2006).  In addition, satellite images are used not only for monitoring but 
also for forecasting the movement of red tides and thereby reducing red tide damage. For example, fisheries 
damage was reduced by forecasting red tide movement using satellite images in Oita Prefecture, Japan (Fig. 4).  
This forecasting system can be applied in aquaculture areas to help fishermen take appropriate 
countermeasures, such as moving fish cages and feed withdrawal to minimize fisheries damage (Oita Pref. 
Agriculture, Forestry and Fishery Research Center, 2012). 
 
 
Fig. 4 Reduced fishery damage estimated using satellite imagery in Oita Prefecture (Oita Prefecture Agri. Forest. Fish. 
Res. Center, 2012). 
 
 
Molecular genetic techniques 
 
The more quickly that species can be identified and abundance can be calculated at a HAB site, the more likely 
that HAB damage can be rapidly mitigated.  At present, a molecular biological approach is applied using 
unique DNA markers for each species.  The Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization (FISH) method, real-time 
Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) and Loop-Mediated Isothermal Amplification (LAMP) methods are useful 
approaches for rapid species detection. 
 
  
Yoshida and Kumagai  NOWPAP 
78  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
Information and communication technology 
 
Information and communication technology is essential for sharing and disseminating information among 
relevant organizations and persons.  In Ehime Prefecture, Japan, a website describing the coastal environment 
was developed by Ehime University supported by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, Japan. 
Various environmental data, such as water temperature, salinity, dissolved oxygen, and red tide occurrence are 
disseminated among concerned parties.  Such rapid information sharing also helps with early detection of red 
tides and can reduce economic fisheries losses.  The cost for development and operation of such a system is 
high (47,000 USD and 4,500 USD, respectively, per year); however, it is estimated that the cost-effectiveness 
of this system is 35,000 USD per year (Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, 2012). 
 
More detailed information is introduced in CEARAC reports which can be downloaded from the CEARAC 
website at http://cearac.nowpap.org/publications /index.html. 
References 
Ahn, Y.-H., Shanmugam, P., Ryu, J.-H. and Jeong, J.-C.  2006. Satellite detection of harmful algal bloom occurrences in 
Korean water. Harmful Algae 5: 213–231. 
Hu C. and He, M.-X. 2008. Origin and offshore extent of floating algae in Olympic sailing area. Eos Trans. 89: 302–303. 
Ishizaka J., Kitaura, Y., Touke, Y., Sasaki, H., Tanaka, A., Murakami, H., Suzuki, T., Matsuda, K. and Nakata, H. 2006. 
Satellite detection of Red Tide in Ariake Sound, 1998–2001. J. Oceanogr. 62: 37–45. 
Ministry of Environmental Protection, the People’s Republic of China. 2002. Report on the State of the Environment in 
China. 
Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications. 2012. Case studies on information and communication technology (in Jap-
anese). http://www.soumu.go.jp/main_sosiki/joho_tsusin/top/local_support/ict/data/jireishu/h24/q093806_jirei_h24.pdf. 
NOWPAP CEARAC. 2005. Integrated Report on Harmful Algal Blooms for the NOWPAP Region, 64 pp., ISBN: 4-
9902809-1-1. 
NOWPAP CEARAC. 2011. Integrated Report on Harmful Algal Blooms for the NOWPAP Region, 97 pp., ISBN: 978-4-
9902809-3-2. 
Oita Prefecture Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Research Center. 2012. (in Japanese). 
Tang D., Kester, D.R., Ni, I., Qi, Y. and Kawamura, H. 2003. In situ and satellite observation of a harmful algal bloom 
and water condition at the Pearl River estuary in the last autumn 1998. Harmful Algae 2: 89–99. 
Zhao J., Jiang, P., Liu, Z.Y., Wei, W., Lin, H.-Z., Li, F.-C., Wang, J.-F. and Qin, S. 2013. The Yellow Sea green tides 
were dominated by one species, Ulva (Enteromorpha) prolifera, from 2007 to 2011. Chinese Sci. Bull. 58: 2298–2302. 
  
Appendix 1  Workshop summary 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  79 
Appendix 1    
Workshop summary from PICES-2013 
 
MEQ Workshop (W6) 
Economic impacts of harmful algal blooms on fisheries and aquaculture 
 
 
Co-Convenors:  Chang Hoon Kim (Korea) and Vera Trainer (USA)  
 
Invited speaker:  Daniel Huppert (University of Washington, USA) 
 
 
Background 
 
Harmful algal blooms (HABs) have adverse economic and social impacts on the aquaculture industry, human 
health, coastal economies, and wild fisheries.  HABs have prompted routine closures of both commercial and 
recreational shellfish harvesting as well as contributing to the death of aquaculture finfish resulting in financial 
losses in coastal communities.  But the economic impacts generated by these events extend far beyond the 
industry itself.  Obtaining more realistic estimates of HAB economic impacts, and the costs of preventing and 
managing them, calls for an integrated assessment approach that comprises the following:  the economic 
impact of HABs on the aquaculture industry, the secondary integrated industries, and consumers, on both local 
and regional scales; some valuation of the costs and benefits of taking any recognized steps to lessen the HAB 
problem (e.g., reducing coastal pollution and other human-related activities); and weighing the costs and 
benefits of enhanced monitoring and surveillance that potentially reduces the magnitude of the impacts (e.g., 
by limiting shellfish harvesting closure windows or alteration in the timing of finfish harvesting).   
 
This workshop comprised two parts, with the first being a presentation of what is known about the economic 
and social impacts of HABs in the eastern and western Pacific, by both HAB researchers and invited speakers 
who could inform on cutting edge approaches and methodologies for assessment of HAB and other marine 
economic impacts (e.g., oil spills).  In the second part, participants identified specific steps for developing 
improved and more comprehensive economic impact assessments of HABs on fisheries and aquaculture in the 
North Pacific. 
 
Summary 
 
The primary goal of the workshop was to provide PICES scientists with a better understanding of the 
economic and social impacts of both toxin-producing and high-biomass blooms in PICES member countries   
It was proposed, due to the quality of presentations and the novel information they contained, that they be 
consolidated into a PICES Scientific Report entitled “Economic impacts of HABs on fisheries and aquaculture 
in PICES member nations”. 
 
The ½-day workshop consisted of six oral presentations and one poster, representing authorship from five 
PICES member countries: Canada, Japan, Korea, Russia, and the United States. There were three last minute 
cancellations primarily due to the U.S. government partial shutdown. Attendance at the meeting was good, 
with approximately 20 participants. The workshop entailed lively discussions and questions among 
participants.  
Workshop summary  Appendix 1 
80  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
Invited speaker, Dr. Dan Huppert (University of Washington, USA), talked about the regional economic 
impacts of razor clam beach closures on Washington State’s Pacific beaches. Closures occur when the risk of 
amnesic shellfish poisoning (ASP) and paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP) is high.  Washington has short razor 
clamming seasons on the weekends.  Dr. Huppert’s work assessed the impacts of HABs from fall 2007 to fall 
2008.   Research questions were: 1. How much do clammers spend in the coastal region? 2. How does 
spending change when razor clam beaches are closed? 3. How does change in spending impact local income 
and employment? A total of 450 surveys were distributed by the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife 
and 240 were returned by mail.  Total expenditures were added, including hotel, camping, restaurant, 
groceries, gas, ferry, and other items.  The average expenditure per clammer day was $100.  Almost $25 
million in total estimated expenditures was estimated for the 2007–2008 clamming season.  Reaction to 
closures included: Only 14% would have stayed at the beach and 67% would go home if there was a closure.  
If more closures occur in the future, 52% would go to the same beach less frequently.  The total expenditure 
for a 1-day opening at all 4 coastal beaches was ~$4,500.  An Input-Output (I-O) model was used to estimate 
income and employment impacts with calculation of direct and indirect impacts.  An example of a direct 
impact is: A clammer spends money and changes local income.  An example of an indirect impact is: Local 
community members spend less because they have less income.  The local economic impact of a 1-year beach 
closure (all beaches) is $11.36 million.  Reduced employment is ~364 jobs.  The net benefit of the clam fishery 
to the coastal community would be calculated differently. 
 
The group discussed how to assess the cultural and social impacts of fisheries closed due to HABs and how to 
assess the true benefit of monitoring. Dr. Takafumi Yoshida (NOWPAP) reviewed HABs in the NOWPAP 
region.  An integrated report on HABs for the NOWPAP region was published in 2011.  It provides 
information on HAB monitoring and HAB occurrences.  The negative impacts of HABs are on 
fisheries/aquaculture, human health, and tourism.  Total economic loss in fisheries from 2006–2012 was $94 
million USD for Korea, Japan, and China.  In the Yatsushiro Sea in 2009 and 2010, there were huge economic 
losses incurred by blooms of Chattonella antiqua.  The losses were $3.3 billion USD in 2009 and $4 billion in 
2010.  In 2013 in South Gyeongsang Province, Korea, $28 million USD was lost by October 2013.  The green 
tide in China has cost $30 million USD for cleanup and $100 million USD in fisheries losses.  To mitigate 
HAB damage, China is conducting regular monitoring to detect red tides in the early stage.  This program has 
reduced economic loss by $14.7 million USD in 2002 (J.People.com).  In Japan, the fisheries cooperatives, 
universities, and local fishery agencies contribute to a portal website.  The result is a reduction in economic 
loss of $35,000 USD per year to no dollars lost, and the number of early red tide detections has increased from 
71 to 181.  The operational cost of this website is $4,500 per year.  
 
Dr. Nicky Haigh (Vancouver Island University, Canada) reviewed the economic losses to the British Columbia 
salmon aquaculture industry due to HABs 2009–2012.  Salmon is the largest agricultural export in British 
Columbia, at $800 million CAD.  There are 130 farm leases with 75–80 usually in operation. Fish killing HAB 
species include raphidophytes (Heterosigma akashiwo, Chatonella cf. marina), dictochophytes (Dictyocha 
speculum, Dictyocha fibula, Pseudochattonella cf. verruculosa), diatoms (Chaetoceros), dinoflagellates 
(Cochlodinium fulvescens, Alexandrium catenella), and haptophytes (Chrysochromulina spp.). The relative 
economic loss is characterized in the following categories: 
 Low: 10s of fish killed, 
 Moderate: 100s of fish killed,  
 High: >1000 fish killed. 
 
High losses are usually due to Heterosigma or Chattonella. 
 Losses due to HABs:  $4.6 million CAD (2009), $1.9 million (2010), $3.1 million (2011), $6.4 million 
(2012),   
 Total direct losses: ~ $16 million CAD (primarily Heterosigma, Chaetoceros, Chattonella marina). 
 
Other losses are due to mitigation including: 
 Lost production: withholding feed during blooms which results in less growth, 
 Mitigation: barrier curtains and upwelling or bubbling equipment, compressors, fuel (Costs $1-2 million 
CAD annually per company).  
Appendix 1  Workshop summary 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  81 
Future needs are to: 
 clearly identify HAB species, 
 elucidate toxins and toxicity.  What makes them toxic? 
 understand the effects of environmental factors on HAB species prevalence, 
 understand the effects of climate change (warming, acidification) on different HAB species 
 use better monitoring methods – especially for small species like Chrysochromulina.  Some species are 
harmful at low levels, i.e., Chattonella cf. marina. 
 
Dr. Meg Chadsey (University of Washington, USA) presented on cooperation of science and management for 
HABs. The Washington State razor clam fishery has 250,000 digger trips to the coast every year. The tribal 
clam harvest is estimated at $7 million per year. The conceptual framework for environmental management 
includes community, scientists, and managers who, through institutional arrangements, seek to mitigate 
environmental problems.  The standard method of management was to collect and analyze shellfish.  This 
method resulted in emergency closures.  The Quileute tribe contacted the University of Washington in 1995 to 
ask for assistance with the HAB problem.  This resulted in convening of a stakeholder meeting in 2000 that 
resulted in the establishment of the Olympic Region Harmful Algal Bloom (ORHAB) partnership.  ORHAB 
objectives were to study bloom dynamics, build credibility for funding, and assess economic impacts of HABs 
on the State’s coastal economies.  The overall goal was to develop local capacity and affordable tools for DA 
monitoring. ORHAB brought agencies together and helped to coordinate information regarding seafood safety. 
In 2003, a tax to shellfish license fees allowed the project to be transitioned to State funding.  The funding 
request was $150 thousand which now is not enough to support all ORHAB costs. “Use inspired basic 
research” resulted in scientific papers responsive to management needs.  
 
Dr. Hao Guo (Dalian Maritime University, China) examined the economic cost of HABs in China from 2008–
2012. China’s coastline is 32,000 km long of which the continental coastline is 18,000 km.  China has 144 
monitoring agencies.  A national HAB monitoring system was established in 2002, and monitoring zones are 
focused in aquaculture areas as well as in ecologically protected areas.  Financial losses due to the frequency 
and scale of red tides reached a high level during 2003–2006.   Over the past 20 years, the occurrence of red 
tides and affected areas is basically stable.   Approximately 57% of HABs are in the East China Sea, and large-
scale HABs occur near the Yangtze River.  The majority of HABs occur in May and June.   The total economic 
loss from HABs in China during the years 2008–2012 was $364 million USD.  The East China Sea has 
suffered the largest direct economic effect (91%) in the last 5 years.  Noctiluca scintillans has caused disasters 
through high levels of ammonia, resulting in mass mortalities of cultivated shellfish.  Prorocentrum 
donghaiense, common in the East China Sea, has led to problems with reproduction, survival and hatching 
rates in fish and scallops.  Recurrent blooms of Karenia mikimotoi have been associated with massive deaths 
of fish and shellfish.  In 2012, these blooms caused massive damage to abalone, with a direct economic loss of 
more than $330 million USD.  In 2010, Mesodinium rubrum spread to a 20 km
2
 area, resulting in a great 
economic loss.  Cochlodinium geminatum produced ichthyotoxins causing major losses in fisheries and 
shellfisheries.  Approximately $500,000 million USD was lost in August 2011 due to this organism.  From 
2009–2012, the Aureococcus anophagefferens brown tide caused damage to scallop culture in Hebei Province 
by causing loss of feeding.  A total of $364 million USD was lost due to HAB occurrences encompassing a 
total area of 53,000 km
2
 from 2008–2012.  The worst hit species were cultivated abalone and fish. 
 
Shigeru Itakura explored the economic impacts of HABs on fisheries and aquaculture in western Japan.  The 
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF) collects economic impact data in Japan for both toxic 
blooms and red tides.  Extensive damage has been caused by HABs in Japan.   From 1972 to the present, there 
have been many HABs, including Chattonella, Karenia, Heterocapsa, Cochlodinium, and diatoms which affect 
yellowtail, red sea bream, pearl oyster, oyster, and porphyra.  Chattonella is the most harmful algae in Japan, and 
was responsible for causing the most damage to fisheries in the Seto Inland Sea from 1980–2008.  Heterocapsa 
and Cochlodinium became problem HABs starting in 1995, and diatoms became a problem after 1990.  The 
amount of fisheries damage on the Kyushu coast increased up to 1999, then appeared to decrease. Cochlodinium 
damage appears to be decreasing in recent years.  The economic loss due to toxic red tides is difficult to quantify 
but includes such factors as:  unrecognized financial losses, halts in hiring, damage of wild aquatic resources, 
reluctance to buy fisheries products due to rumors, and the cost of countermeasures and mitigation. 
Workshop summary  Appendix 1 
82  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
List of papers 
 
Oral presentations 
Karen Dyson and Daniel D. Huppert (Invited)  
Regional economic impacts of razor clam beach closures due to Harmful Algal Blooms (HABs) on the Pacific coast of 
Washington  
Takafumi Yoshida and Hiroshi Ono  
Economic impacts of Harmful Algal Blooms in the NOWPAP region  
Nicola Haigh and Svetlana Esenkulova  
Economic losses to the British Columbia salmon aquaculture industry due to Harmful Algal Blooms 2009–2012  
Hao Guo, Dewen Ding and Chunjiang Guan  
The economic cost of Harmful Algal Blooms in China from 2008-2012  
Meg Chadsey, Vera L. Trainer and Thomas Leschine  
Cooperation of science and management for Harmful Algal Blooms: Domoic acid and the Washington Coast razor clam fishery  
Shigeru Itakura and Ichiro Imai  
Economic impacts of Harmful Algal Blooms on fisheries and aquaculture in the western Japan – An overview of interannual 
variability and interspecies comparison  
 
Poster presentation 
Ji A Park, HyeongKyu Kwon, HanSoeb Yang and Seok Jin Oh  
Utilization of different nitrogen sources by the toxic dinoflagellates, Alexandrium tamarense and Alexandrium catenella, isolated 
from Masan Bay, Korea 
 
 
Appendix 2  Workshop participants 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  83 
Appendix 2 
Workshop participants 
 
Canada 
 
Charles Trick  
University of Western Ontario 
Canada 
E-mail: trick@uwo.ca 
 
Christopher Pearce 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada 
Pacific Biological Station 
E-mail: Chris.Pearce@dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
Svetlana Esenkulova  
Vancouver Island University 
Canada 
E-mail: Svetlana.Esenkulova@viu.ca 
 
Nicola Haigh 
Vancouver Island University 
Canada 
E-mail: Nicky.Haigh@viu.ca 
 
 
Japan 
 
Shigeru Itakura  
National Research Institute of Aquaculture 
Fisheries Research Agency 
Japan 
E-mail: itakura@affrc.go.jp 
 
Satoshi Nagai 
National Research Institute of Fisheries Science 
Fisheries Research Agency 
Japan    
E-mail: snagai@affrc.go.jp 
 
Ichiro Imai 
Hokkaido University 
Japan 
E-mail: imai1ro@fish.hokudai.ac.jp 
 
People’s Republic of China 
 
Hao Guo  
Dalian Maritime University/ 
National Marine Environmental Monitoring Center 
SOA 
People’s Republic of China 
E-mail: hguo@nmemc.gov.cn 
 
Chunjiang Guan  
National Marine Environmental Monitoring Center 
SOA 
People’s Republic of China 
E-mail: cjguan@nmemc.gov.cn 
 
 
Republic of Korea 
 
Myung-Soo Han  
Hanyang University 
Republic of Korea 
E-mail: hanms@hanyang.ac.kr 
 
Joo-Hwan Kim 
Hanyang University 
Republic of Korea 
E-mail: chedar@hanyang.ac.kr 
 
Pengbin Wang  
Hanyang University 
Republic of Korea 
E-mail: wpbdavid@163.com 
 
Jin Ho Kim 
Hanyang University 
Republic of Korea 
E-mail: neozin83@naver.com 
 
Chang-Hoon Kim 
Pukyong National University 
Republic of Korea 
E-mail: chkpknu@hanmail.net 
Workshop participants   Appendix 2 
84  PICES Scientific Report No. 47 
Russia 
 
Tatiana V. Morozova  
A.V. Zhirmunsky Institute of Marine Biology 
FEB RAS 
Russia 
E-mail: tatiana_morozova@mail.ru 
 
 
United States of America 
 
Meg Chadsey  
Washington Sea Grant 
USA 
E-mail: mchadsey@uw.edu 
  
Keith Criddle 
University of Alaska, Fairbanks 
USA 
E-mail: kcriddle@alaska.edu 
 
Daniel Huppert  
University of Washington 
USA 
E-mail: huppert@uw.edu 
 
 
NOWPAP 
 
Takafumi Yoshida 
Northwest Pacific Action Plan (NOWPAP)  
Special Monitoring and Coastal Environmental 
    Assessment Regional Activity Centre (CEARAC) 
Japan 
E-mail: yoshida@npec.or.jp 
 
  
Appendix 3  Corresponding authors 
PICES Scientific Report No. 47  85 
Appendix 3   
Corresponding authors 
 
Hao Guo 
Dalian Maritime University/ 
National Marine Environmental Monitoring Center 
State Oceanic Administration 
Dalian, 116026 
People’s Republic of China 
E-mail: hguo@nmemc.gov.cn 
 
Nicola Haigh 
Harmful Algae Monitoring Program 
Vancouver Island University 
900 Fifth St. 
Nanaimo, BC, V9R 5S5 
Canada 
E-mail: Nicky.Haigh@viu.ca 
 
Daniel D. Huppert 
School of Marine and Environmental Affairs 
University of Washington 
3707 Brooklyn Ave. NE 
Seattle, WA 98105 
USA 
E-mail: huppert@u.washington.edu 
 
Ichiro Imai 
Graduate School of Fisheries Sciences  
Hokkaido University 
Minato-cho 
Hakodate 
Hokkaido 041-8611 
Japan 
E-mail: imai1ro@fish.hokudai.ac.jp 
 
Shigeru Itakura 
National Research Institute of Aquaculture 
Fisheries Research Agency 
422-1 Nakatsu-hamaura 
Minami-Isecho, Watarai-gun 
Mie 516-0193 
Japan 
E-mail: itakura@affrc.go.jp 
 
Changkyu Lee 
Fishery and Ocean Information Division 
National Fisheries Research and Development Institute  
Ministry of Oceans and Fisheries 
216 GijangHaean-ro 
Gijang-up, Gijang-gun 
Busan, 619-705 
Republic of Korea 
E-mail: changkl@korea.kr 
 
Tatiana Orlova 
A.V. Zhirmunsky Institute of Marine Biology of the Far 
    Eastern Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences 
17 Palchevskogo St. 
Vladivostok, 690041 
Russia 
E-mail: torlova06@mail.ru 
 
Takafumi Yoshida 
Northwest Pacific Action Plan (NOWPAP) 
Special Monitoring and Coastal Environmental 
    Assessment Regional Activity Centre (CEARAC) 
5-5 Ushijimashin-machi 
Toyama City 
Toyama 930-0856 
Japan 
E-mail: yoshida@npec.or.jp 
 
 
 
Continued from inside back cover 
Jamieson, G. and Zhang, C.-I. (Eds.)  2005.  Report of the 
Study Group on Ecosystem-Based Management Science 
and its Application to the North Pacific.  PICES Sci. 
Rep. No. 29, 77 pp. 
Brodeur, R. and Yamamura, O. (Eds.)  2005.  Micronekton of 
the North Pacific.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 30, 115 pp. 
Takeda, S. and Wong, C.S. (Eds.)  2006.  Report of the 2004 
Workshop on In Situ Iron Enrichment Experiments in the 
Eastern and Western Subarctic Pacific.  PICES Sci. Rep. 
No. 31, 187 pp. 
Miller, C.B. and Ikeda, T. (Eds.)  2006.  Report of the 2005 
Workshop on Ocean Ecodynamics Comparison in the 
Subarctic Pacific.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 32, 103 pp. 
Kruse, G.H., Livingston, P., Overland, J.E., Jamieson, G.S., 
McKinnell, S. and Perry, R.I. (Eds.)  2006.  Report of the 
PICES/NPRB Workshop on Integration of Ecological 
Indicators of the North Pacific with Emphasis on the 
Bering Sea.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 33, 109 pp. 
Hollowed, A.B., Beamish, R.J., Okey, T.A. and Schirripa, 
M.J. (Eds.) 2008.  Forecasting Climate Impacts on Future 
Production of Commercially Exploited Fish and 
Shellfish. PICES Sci. Rep. No. 34, 101 pp. 
Beamish, R.J. (Ed.)  2008.  Impacts of Climate and Climate 
Change on the Key Species in the Fisheries in the North 
Pacific. PICES Sci. Rep. No. 35, 217 pp. 
Kashiwai, M. and Kantakov, G.A. (Eds.) 2009.  Proceedings of 
the Fourth Workshop on the Okhotsk Sea and Adjacent 
Areas.   PICES Sci. Rep. No. 36, 305 pp. 
Jamieson, G., Livingston, P. and Zhang, C.-I. (Eds.)  2010.  
Report of Working Group 19 on Ecosystem-based 
Management Science and its Application to the North 
Pacific.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 37, 166 pp. 
Pakhomov, E. and Yamamura, O. (Eds.)  2010.  Report of the 
Advisory Panel on Micronekton Sampling Intercalibration 
Experiment.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 38, 108 pp. 
Makino, M. and Fluharty, D.L. (Eds.) 2011. Report of the 
Study Group on Human Dimensions. PICES Sci. Rep.  
No. 39, 40 pp. 
Foreman, M.G. and Yamanaka, Y. (Eds.) 2011. Report of 
Working Group 20 on Evaluations of Climate Change 
Projections.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 40, 165 pp. 
McKinnell, S.M., Curchitser, E., Groot, C., Kaeriyama, M. 
and Myers, K.W. 2012.  PICES Advisory Report on the 
Decline of Fraser River Sockeye Salmon Oncorhynchus 
nerka (Steller, 1743) in Relation to Marine Ecology. 
PICES Sci. Rep. No. 41, 149 pp. 
Takeda, S., Chai, F. and Nishioka, J. (Eds.) 2013.  Report of 
Working Group 22 on Iron Supply and its Impact on 
Biogeochemistry and Ecosystems in the North Pacific 
Ocean. PICES Sci. Rep. No. 42, 60 pp. 
Shaw, C.T., Peterson, W.T. and Sun, S. (Eds.) 2013.  Report 
of Working Group 23 on Comparative Ecology of Krill in 
Coastal and Oceanic Waters around the Pacific Rim. 
PICES Sci. Rep. No. 43, 100 pp. 
Abo, K., Burgetz, I. and Dumbauld, B. (Eds.) 2013. Report of 
Working Group 24 on Environmental Interactions of 
Marine Aquaculture.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 44, 122 pp. 
Hollowed, A.B., Kim, S., Barange, M. and Loeng, H. (Eds.) 
2013. Report of the PICES/ICES Working Group on 
Forecasting Climate Change Impacts on Fish and Shellfish. 
PICES Sci. Rep. No. 45, 197 pp. 
Ross, P.S. (Ed.) 2013. Report of the Study Group on Marine 
Pollutants. PICES Sci. Rep. No. 46, 49 pp. 
Trainer, V.L. and Yoshida, T. (Eds.) 2014. Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Economic Impacts of Harmful Algal Blooms 
on Fisheries and Aquaculture. PICES Sci. Rep. No. 47, 
85 pp. 
 
 
 
Continued on inside back page 
PICES Scientific Reports 
 
 
Hargreaves, N.B., Hunter, J.R., Sugimoto, T. and Wada, T. 
(Eds.) 1993.  Coastal Pelagic Fishes (Report of 
Working Group 3); Subarctic Gyre (Report of Working 
Group 6).  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 1, 130 pp. 
Talley, L.D. and Nagata, Y. (Eds.) 1995.  The Okhotsk Sea 
and Oyashio Region (Report of Working Group 1).  
PICES Sci. Rep. No. 2, 227 pp. 
Anonymous. 1995.  Report of the PICES-STA Workshop 
on Monitoring Subarctic North Pacific Variability.  
PICES Sci. Rep. No. 3, 94 pp. 
Hargreaves, N.B. (Ed.) 1996. Science Plan, Implementation 
Plan (Report of the PICES-GLOBEC International 
Program on Climate Change and Carrying Capacity).  
PICES Sci. Rep. No. 4, 64 pp. 
LeBlond, P.H. and Endoh, M. (Eds.) 1996.  Modelling of 
the Subarctic North Pacific Circulation (Report of 
Working Group 7).  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 5, 91 pp. 
Anonymous. 1996. Proceedings of the Workshop on the 
Okhotsk Sea and Adjacent Areas.  PICES Sci. Rep. 
No. 6, 426 pp. 
Beamish, R.J., Hollowed, A.B., Perry, R.I., Radchenko, 
V.I., Yoo, S. and Terazaki, M. (Eds.) 1997.  Summary 
of the Workshop on Conceptual/Theoretical Studies and 
Model Development and the 1996 MODEL, BASS and 
REX Task Team Reports.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 7,  
93 pp. 
Nagata, Y. and Lobanov, V.B. (Eds.) 1998.  Multilingual 
Nomenclature of Place and Oceanographic Names in 
the Region of the Okhotsk Sea.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 
8, 57 pp. (Reprint from MIRC Science Report, No. 1, 
1998) 
Hollowed, A.B., Ikeda, T., Radchenko, V.I. and Wada, T. 
(Organizers) 1998.  PICES Climate Change and 
Carrying Capacity Workshop on the Development of 
Cooperative Research in Coastal Regions of the North 
Pacific.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 9, 59 pp. 
Freeland, H.J., Peterson, W.T. and Tyler, A. (Eds.) 1999.  
Proceedings of the 1998 Science Board Symposium on 
The Impacts of the 1997/98 El Niño Event on the North 
Pacific Ocean and Its Marginal Seas.  PICES Sci. Rep. 
No. 10, 110 pp. 
Dugdale, R.C., Hay, D.E., McFarlane, G.A., Taft, B.A. and 
Yoo, S. (Eds.) 1999.  PICES-GLOBEC International 
Program on Climate Change and Carrying Capacity:  
Summary of the 1998 MODEL, MONITOR and REX 
Workshops, and Task Team Reports.  PICES Sci. Rep. 
No. 11, 88 pp. 
Lobanov, V.B., Nagata, Y. and Riser, S.C. (Eds.) 1999.  
Proceedings of the Second PICES Workshop on the 
Okhotsk Sea and Adjacent Areas.  PICES Sci. Rep. 
No. 12, 203 pp. 
Danchenkov, M.A., Aubrey, D.G. and Hong, G.H. 2000.  
Bibliography of the Oceanography of the Japan/East 
Sea.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 13, 99 pp. 
Hunt, G.L. Jr., Kato, H. and McKinnell, S.M. (Eds.) 2000. 
Predation by Marine Birds and Mammals in the 
Subarctic North Pacific Ocean.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 
14, 168 pp. 
Megrey, B.A., Taft, B.A. and Peterson, W.T. (Eds.) 2000.  
PICES-GLOBEC International Program on Climate Change 
and Carrying Capacity:  Report of the 1999 MONITOR and 
REX Workshops, and the 2000 MODEL Workshop on Lower 
Trophic Level Modelling.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 15, 148 pp. 
Stehr, C.M. and Horiguchi, T. (Eds.) 2001.  Environmental 
Assessment of Vancouver Harbour Data Report for the 
PICES MEQ Practical Workshop.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 
16, 213 pp. 
Megrey, B.A., Taft, B.A. and Peterson, W.T. (Eds.) 2001.  
PICES-GLOBEC International Program on Climate Change 
and Carrying Capacity:  Report of the 2000 BASS, MODEL, 
MONITOR and REX Workshops, and the 2001 
BASS/MODEL Workshop.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 17, 125 pp. 
Alexander, V., Bychkov, A.S., Livingston, P. and McKinnell, 
S.M. (Eds.) 2001.  Proceedings of the PICES/CoML/IPRC 
Workshop on “Impact of Climate Variability on 
Observation and Prediction of Ecosystem and Biodiversity 
Changes in the North Pacific”.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 18, 
210 pp. 
Otto, R.S. and Jamieson, G.S. (Eds.) 2001.  Commercially 
Important Crabs, Shrimps and Lobsters of the North Pacific 
Ocean.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 19, 79 pp. 
Batchelder, H.P., McFarlane, G.A., Megrey, B.A., Mackas, 
D.L. and Peterson, W.T. (Eds.) 2002.  PICES-GLOBEC 
International Program on Climate Change and Carrying 
Capacity: Report of the 2001 BASS/MODEL, MONITOR 
and REX Workshops, and the 2002 MODEL/REX 
Workshop.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 20, 176 pp. 
Miller, C.B. (Ed.) 2002.  PICES-GLOBEC International 
Program on Climate Change and Carrying Capacity:  
Report of the PICES 2002 Volunteer Observing Ship 
Workshop.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 21, 38 pp. 
Perry, R.I., Livingston, P. and Bychkov, A.S. (Eds.) 2002.  
PICES Science: The First Ten Years and a Look to the 
Future.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 22, 102 pp. 
Taylor, F.J.R. and Trainer, V.L. (Eds.) 2002.  Harmful Algal 
Blooms in the PICES Region of the North Pacific.  PICES 
Sci. Rep. No. 23, 152 pp. 
Feely, R.A. (Ed.) 2003.  CO
2
 in the North Pacific Ocean 
(Working Group 13 Final Report).  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 
24, 49 pp. 
Aydin, K.Y., McFarlane, G.A., King, J.R. and Megrey, B.A. 
(Eds.)  2003. PICES-GLOBEC International Program on 
Climate Change and Carrying Capacity:  The BASS/ 
MODEL Report on Trophic Models of the Subarctic Pacific 
Basin Ecosystems.  PICES Sci. Rep. No. 25, 93 pp. 
McKinnell, S.M. (Ed.) 2004.  Proceedings of the Third 
Workshop on the Okhotsk Sea and Adjacent Areas.  PICES 
Sci. Rep. No. 26, 275 pp. 
Kishi, M.J. (Ed.) 2004.  Report of the MODEL Task Team 
Second Workshop to Develop a Marine Ecosystem Model 
of the North Pacific Ocean including Pelagic Fishes. 
PICES Sci. Rep. No. 27, 49 pp. 
King, J.R. (Ed.)  2005.  Report of the Study Group on the 
Fisheries and Ecosystem Responses to Recent Regime 
Shifts. PICES Sci. Rep. No. 28, 162 pp. 
 
 
PICES SCIENTIFIC REPORTS 
 
 
 
Published since 1993, the PICES Scientific Report series includes proceedings of PICES workshops, final 
reports of PICES expert groups, data reports and reports of planning activities.  Formal peer reviews of the 
scientific content of these publications are not generally conducted. 
 
Printed copies of Scientific Reports are available upon request from 
 
PICES Secretariat 
P.O. Box 6000 
Sidney, British Columbia 
Canada.  V8L 4B2 
E-mail:  secretariat@pices.int 
 
 
On-line versions of PICES Scientific Reports can be found at  
www.pices.int/publications/scientific_reports/default.aspx 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This report was developed under the guidance of the PICES Science Board and its Marine Environmental 
Quality Committee. The views expressed in this report are those of participating scientists under their 
responsibilities. 
 
 
 
This document should be cited as follows: 
 
Trainer, V.L. and Yoshida, T. (Eds.) 2014. Proceedings of the Workshop on Economic Impacts of Harmful Algal 
Blooms on Fisheries and Aquaculture. PICES Sci. Rep. No. 47, 85 pp. 
NORTH   PACIFIC   MARINE   SCIENCE   ORGANIZATION
PICES SCIENTIFIC REPORT  
No. 47, 2014
PICES SCIENTIFIC REPORT No. 47,  2014
Proceedings of the Workshop on Economic 
Impacts of Harmful Algal Blooms  
on Fisheries and Aquaculture 
ISBN  978-1-927797-11-2
ISSN 1198-273X
 
 
 
PICES PUBLICATIONS 
 
 
The North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES) was established by an international convention 
in 1992 to promote international cooperative research efforts to solve key scientific problems in the North 
Pacific Ocean. 
 
PICES regularly publishes various types of general, scientific, and technical information in the following 
publications: 
 
 
PICES ANNUAL REPORTS – are major 
products of PICES Annual Meetings which 
document the administrative and scientific activities 
of the Organization, and its formal decisions, by 
calendar year.   
 
PICES SCIENTIFIC REPORTS – include 
proceedings of PICES workshops, final reports of 
PICES expert groups, data reports and planning 
reports. 
 
PICES TECHNICAL REPORTS – are on-line 
reports published on data/monitoring activities that 
require frequent updates. 
 
SPECIAL PUBLICATIONS – are products that 
are destined for general or specific audiences. 
 
JOURNAL SPECIAL ISSUES – are peer-
reviewed publications resulting from symposia 
and Annual Meeting scientific sessions and 
workshops that are published in conjunction with 
commercial scientific journals.   
 
BOOKS – are peer-reviewed, journal-quality 
publications of broad interest. 
 
PICES PRESS – is a semi-annual newsletter 
providing timely updates on the state of the 
ocean/climate in the North Pacific, with highlights of 
current research and associated activities of PICES. 
 
ABSTRACT BOOKS – are prepared for PICES 
Annual Meetings and symposia (co-)organized by 
PICES. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
For further information on our publications, visit the PICES website at www.pices.int. 
 
Front cover figure 
 
A sign posted in Puget Sound, Washington State, USA, by the Washington State Department of Health, 
warning of a ban on shellfish harvest due to high levels of paralytic shellfish toxins.  These toxins have 
severe economic impacts on recreational, commercial and subsistence fisheries. Photo credit: Vera Trainer.      
