 
 
 
 
PICES Scientific Report No. 9 
1998 
 
 
 
 
 
PICES CLIMATE CHANGE AND CARRYING CAPACITY WORKSHOP 
ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF COOPERATIVE RESEARCH  
IN COASTAL REGIONS OF THE NORTH PACIFIC 
 
October 17-18, 1997 
Pusan, Republic of Korea 
 
 
Sponsored by: 
PICES-GLOBEC  
CCCC REX Task Team 
 
 
Organizing Committee: 
Anne B. Hollowed, Tsutomu Ikeda, Vladimir I. Radchenko 
and Tokio Wada 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
August 1998 
Secretariat / Publisher 
North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES) 
c/o Institute of Ocean Sciences, P.O. Box 6000, Sidney, B.C., Canada.  V8L 4B2 
pices@ios.bc.ca  http://pices.ios.bc.ca 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
Introduction ................................................................................................................................................... 1 
GLOBEC Canada - Ecosystem Response to Climate Variability............................................................... 2 
Activities of the China-GLOBEC Program ................................................................................................. 6
GLOBEC-Related Research Programs by Fisheries Research Institutes of Japan ....................... 7 
Korean GLOBEC and GLOBEC-Like Programs......................................................................................   8 
Review of Russian GLOBEC-Like Programs ........................................................................................... 10 
United States GLOBEC and GLOBEC-Like Programs............................................................................ 13
Mid-water and Demersal Fish Breakout Session....................................................................................... 17 
Crustacean Breakout Session...................................................................................................................... 20
Pelagic Fish Breakout Group Recommendations ...................................................................................... 24 
Salmon Breakout Session ........................................................................................................................... 26 
Forcing Breakout Session ........................................................................................................................... 28 
Lower Trophic Level Breakout Session..................................................................................................... 30 
Ecosystem Response Breakout Session ..................................................................................................... 31 
Summary of Ongoing Research Programs by Region............................................................................... 33 
PARTICIPANTS:  REX Task Team.......................................................................................................... 44 
PARTICIPANTS:  CCCC IP and CCCC National Members................................................................... 45 
PARTICIPANTS: General PICES Community ........................................................................................ 46 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
The REX Task Team convened a workshop October 
17 - 18, 1997.  The purpose of the workshop was to 
review the status of national research programs and 
to identify areas for cooperative research 
experiments in support of the CCCC Program.  Over 
50 scientists participated in the workshop 
representing approximately 40 research institutions. 
 
The workshop organizing committee recognized the 
need for application of the scientific method in 
developing regional experiments in support of the 
CCCC Program.  Marine research programs have a 
legacy of resource monitoring followed by 
retrospective studies leading to hypothesis 
generation.  More recently, considerable resources 
have been devoted towards the development of 
simulation models capable of integrating the 
synergistic influences of multiple factors.  These 
models have been used to explore hypothetical 
impacts of changes in ocean conditions on marine 
ecosystems.  Both of these approaches fail to apply 
the basic principles of the scientific method where 
scientists state their hypothesis and design and 
implement experiments to test the validity of their 
hypothesis.  The absence of the scientific method in 
marine research is attributed to two primary factors: 
a) the difficulty isolating a "control" in the 
experimental design, and b) the difficulty in 
obtaining funds to conduct replicate process oriented 
experiments when the process of interest occurs on  
interannual to decadal time scales.  In the REX 
Workshop, we examined the possibility of applying 
the comparative approach to answering the scientific 
questions posed in the Climate Change and Carrying 
Capacity Implementation Plan.  Participants were 
asked to consider the possibility of designing 
experiments that could be conducted in distant 
regions of the North Pacific with the expressed intent 
of testing hypotheses regarding climate impacts on 
the carrying capacity.   
  
The symposium began with a review of the 
GLOBEC and GLOBEC like research programs 
planned, or on-going, in each of the six PICES 
member nations.  Subsequently, participants 
discussed coastal research programs in breakout 
sessions targeting forcing, lower trophic level 
response, higher trophic level response and 
ecosystem response.  The higher trophic level 
response breakout sessions were further divided into 
four major species groups:  salmon, mid-water and 
demersal fish, pelagic fish, and crustaceans.  
 
Participants were asked to review the four key 
scientific questions presented in the CCCC 
Implementation Plan: 
 
1. What are the characteristics of climate 
variability, can interdecadal patterns be 
identified, how and when do they arise? 
 
2. How do primary and secondary producers 
respond in productivity, and in species and size 
composition, to climate variability in different 
ecosystems of the subarctic Pacific? 
  
3. How do life history patterns, distributions, vital 
rates and population dynamics of higher trophic 
level species respond directly and indirectly to 
climate variability? 
 
4. How are subarctic Pacific ecosystems 
structured?  Do higher trophic levels respond to 
climate variability solely as a consequence of 
bottom up forcing?  Are there significant intra-
trophic level and top down effects on lower 
trophic level production and on energy transfer 
efficiencies? 
 
The participants were asked to develop hypotheses 
related to the four CCCC questions as they related to 
the topic of the breakout session.  Participants were 
also asked to discuss existing or potential research 
approaches to test these hypotheses.  The regions 
and target species that would be best suited for 
comparative research experiments were identified.  
Finally, the barriers to implementing the experiment 
were discussed. 
 
1
GLOBEC CANADA - ECOSYSTEM RESPONSE TO CLIMATE VARIABILITY 
David L. Mackas (Presenter) 
 
GLOBEC Canada is a collaborative program funded 
for four years jointly by NSERC (Research 
Partnerships) and DFO (Priority Allocations, A-
base).  GLOBEC is designed to provide very high 
return on investment through more robust 
interpretation and management in the face of 
ecosystem change.  The collaboration involves fifty 
scientists from seven universities (Memorial, 
Dalhousie, Laval, UQAR, Queen's, UBC and UVic), 
five government laboratories (NAFC, BIO, IML, 
IOS and PBS).  Strong links exist with other national 
programs, e.g. in the US and Norway, and with the 
developing GLOBEC International effort. 
 
GLOBEC Canada will examine how living marine 
resources are affected by variability of their physical 
environment.  Marine ecosystems undergo large 
interannual to decadal fluctuations.  These large 
swings affect almost every fishery, and are 
becoming equally apparent in time series of ocean 
climate and plankton indices.  Their time scale is 
such that human impacts, in terms of economic and 
societal dislocation, can be very large.  There is 
much evidence for an underlying causal connection 
through physical environmental forcing of variations 
in ocean productivity.  But timely diagnosis and 
management response are hampered by insufficient 
knowledge of intermediate causal linkages.  For 
example, low productivity and very poor recruitment 
of Atlantic groundfish stocks has coincided with the 
post-1990 cold water anomaly. Conversely, high 
productivity of many Pacific salmon stocks 
coincided with a N. Pacific atmospheric and oceanic 
regime that began in the mid 1970s (but there are 
recent physical and biological indications that the N. 
Pacific is now undergoing another regime shift).  
Understanding the reasons for these episodes of high 
and low productivity is essential to forecasting if and 
when Pacific salmon productivity will decline, and 
whether and when NW Atlantic groundfish will 
return to historic levels of productivity. 
 
The multidisciplinary integration of field and 
modeling studies in GLOBEC Canada will increase 
this causal-level understanding.  The relevance of 
GLOBEC includes, but is not limited to, climate 
change trends associated with global warming.  A 
major focus will be naturally-forced interannual to 
interdecadal fluctuations and their effects on target 
populations through recruitment variability of 
individual species and changes in overall community 
structure.  Simultaneous research programs are 
underway in both the Atlantic and Pacific.  The dual 
coast effort is justified by the need for national 
integration and the unique characteristics of the east 
and west coast ecosystems.  Scientific themes shared 
by both coasts include:  
 
* Importance of seasonality and timing match 
between critical physical and biological events 
(shifts in these are like to be among the strongest 
climate change signals). 
 
* Amount and timing of freshwater inputs, and 
effects on physical mixing and transport 
patterns. 
 
* Importance of advective coupling among 
mesoscale sub-regions and between the open 
ocean and continental margins. 
 
GLOBEC Canada will improve understanding of 
how changes in the physical environment of the 
ocean drive changes in the productivity and species 
composition and trophic structure of marine 
ecosystems.  We know that these climate and 
ecosystem fluctuations exists and frequently covary, 
but in general we do not know how they are 
mechanistically linked.  
 
GLOBEC’s multidisciplinary integration of field and 
modeling studies will increase this cause-level 
understanding.  The relevance of GLOBEC includes, 
but is not limited to, climate change trends 
associated with global warming.  A major focus will 
be naturally-forced interannual to interdecadal 
fluctuations and their effects on target populations 
through recruitment variability of individual species 
and changes in overall community structure. 
 
 
 
2
Rationale for CGLOBEC Pacific research 
 
Pacific Ocean fish and zooplankton communities 
undergo large and ecologically/economically 
significant fluctuations over years to decades.  Stock 
collapses and extreme failures of steady-state 
fisheries forecast models have tended to accompany 
major shifts in the marine climate.  There is 
increasing evidence that these large changes in 
fishery yield are environmentally, rather than purely 
fishery harvest, driven.  Although several important 
west coast fisheries are already managed using 
various proxy indices of ocean conditions (specific 
examples include Barkley Sound sockeye, 
Vancouver Island herring, sablefish, and hake), 
present indices are based on correlations with 
convenient proxy variables.  They incorporate 
minimal verification through knowledge of the 
underlying mechanisms.  Management indices based 
solely on hindcast correlations have a history of 
breaking down over time, either permanently or 
during specific oceanic events.  Consequences are 
often severe: loss or major error of management 
advice, resulting in conservation and social crises 
and the loss of millions of dollars to the Canadian 
economy.  What is needed to make the indices more 
reliable is understanding and quantification of the 
causal processes underlying the correlations. 
 
The Pacific component will study interactions within 
a high nutrient and predominately pelagic 
ecosystem.  The research will emphasize food web 
pathways leading to production of the most 
important (in commercial value and/or ecological 
impact) west coast finfish species: salmon, herring 
and hake.  Target processes and species will include: 
alongshore and cross-shore advection, seasonal cycle 
of upwelling, horizontal currents and water mass 
boundaries (physical environment), euphausiids and 
copepods (zooplankton), and both adult and juvenile 
finfish.  The conceptual model for the west coast 
GLOBEC program three advectively- and 
biologically-linked ecosystems operating at 
increasing spatial scales (west coast of Vancouver 
Island, central and north B.C. coasts, open NE 
Pacific Ocean).  The three regions are highly 
interconnected.  Each has important, seasonally 
variable, and physically-driven exchanges of 
nutrients and plankton with its surroundings.  Each 
also contains large populations of migratory fish.  In 
particular, Pacific salmon integrate, over the course 
of their life cycle, the consequences of ocean 
physical and biological processes occurring in both 
coastal and offshore regions.  For major stocks, 
survival rates during marine life are known to vary 
six-fold (e.g. 5% to 30% for Fraser sockeye). 
 
Project status and progress toward objectives 
 
As of October 1997, GLOBEC Canada is halfway 
through the second year of a 4-year proposal cycle. 
This is an exciting time to be doing this research.  By 
many indications, ocean conditions and ocean 
ecosystems are in an episode of strong and rapid 
change.  For example, in the northeast Pacific, an 
intense developing El Niño is combining with other 
modes of climate variability to produce very strong 
positive temperature anomalies.  In the northwest 
Atlantic, coastal ocean temperatures remain cooler 
than normal.  Present opportunities for larger-scale 
examination of these events through international 
cooperation are excellent, especially within PICES 
and ICES GLOBEC programs, and bilaterally with 
the U.S. (their east and west coast GLOBEC 
programs), Japan (Japan GLOBEC), and Norway 
(Mare Cognitum, TASC).  Within Canada, we are 
benefiting from idea- and data-sharing with 
programs such as JGOFS and OCP. 
 
CGLOBEC includes fifteen component projects on 
the Atlantic and Pacific coasts (Pacific projects 
tabulated at the end of this report).  In the first half of 
year two (FY9798), the projects completed 
remaining equipment purchase and staffing and 
moved into active research mode.  We are on track 
for meeting our intended annual "milestones": 
 
From retrospective data, document changes over 
past 15-20 years in east and west coast 
ecosystems (water properties, currents, nutrient 
supply, seasonal cycles of plankton production 
and composition, fish growth and distribution). 
 
Intensive field process studies of circulation/ 
biology interactions (to be repeated in 1998-99).  
For west coast, spring transition of shelf edge 
currents, upwelling in submarine canyons, and 
interactions with zooplankton and fish 
distributions.  For east coast, effect of autumn 
storms on bank nursery areas. 
3
Other field sampling:  In the Alaska gyre, 
zooplankton time series and salmonid growth 
and distribution. On both coasts, ongoing 
continental margin time series sampling.  
 
Numerical models.  Evaluation & use of 
physical circulation modules.  Time series 
outputs for comparison against retrospective and 
process study data.  Begin to embed biological 
modules. 
 
Data archival and exchange.  Web-based central 
catalog (index & metadata) with links to 
distributed archival sites. 
 
Research activities fall in three main areas: 
retrospective statistical analyses, numerical 
modeling, and "time series" and "process study" 
field sampling. 
 
Retrospective analyses 
 
Retrieval of historical data into accessible databases 
is continuing, and interpretations of seasonal and 
interannual variability have been initiated.  In the 
Pacific, multi-year average seasonal climatologies 
have been calculated for currents, water properties, 
and zooplankton biomass/composition off 
Vancouver Island.  These are now being 
intercompared and used to interpret recruitment of 
plankton and fish.  Time series of offshore and 
coastal wind measurements have been compared to 
pressure-field indices, and are being applied to 
models of upper ocean currents.  A large 
interdecadal change in the life cycle timing of the N. 
Pacific copepod Neocalanus plumchrus was 
identified with data from older published data and 
recent JGOFS, "Strait of Georgia Salmon", and 
GLOBEC surveys. 
 
 
Numerical Modeling 
 
Model development is progressing well, and model 
applications have been initiated on both coasts.  In 
the Pacific, a high-resolution 3-D circulation model 
is being developed for the Vancouver Island  
continental margin.  Applications include coupling 
to a regional trophodynamic model, and examination 
of localized upwelling and zooplankton/fish 
aggregations associated with shelf-break submarine 
canyons.  A very high resolution meteorologic 
model is being used to examine intensification of 
winds and resultant energy transfer to the ocean near 
coastal headlands.  In the Alaska Gyre, nested NPZ, 
mixed layer and basin-scale circulation models are 
being developed to study patterns of primary and 
secondary production, and utilization of open ocean 
habitat by migrating salmon. 
 
Field studies 
 
1997 west coast field sampling has included four 
continental margin cruises (Thomson et al., Allen et 
al.) to deploy moorings, to maintain ongoing 
seasonal time series of water properties, plankton 
and fish distributions, and to examine shelf break 
upwelling/aggregation processes and effects of the 
spring transition on plankton and fish distributions. 
Spring and summer cruises in the Alaska Gyre 
(Welch/Perry, McKinnell/Mackas) examined salmon 
size-at-age, food source, and migratory route, and 
mesozooplankton distribution, developmental 
timing, and sampling methodology. 
 
Program Integration 
 
West and east coast regional workshops took place 
in October 97 (Vancouver and Halifax), and were 
followed by a national meeting in early January 
1998.  
 
Canadian GLOBEC Project Titles and Lead 
Investigators (Pacific Component) 
 
Effects of current patterns on primary 
productivity and zooplankton biomass and 
implications on feeding patterns of larval fish - 
Allen, Foreman, Harrison, Mackas, Perry, 
Thomson, and Whiticar 
 
Hindcast models of currents and temperatures 
along the British Columbia continental margin - 
Crawford and Cummins  
 
Biophysical modelling for the western 
continental margin of Vancouver Island - 
Foreman, Ware, Thomson, and Harrison 
 
4
Sockeye salmon migration and foraging 
behaviours:  Acoustic tracking experiments - 
Hawryshyn  
 
A coupled ocean general circulation and marine 
foodweb model of the subarctic Pacific - Hsieh 
and Denman 
 
Gulf of Alaska zooplankton - McKinnell and 
Mackas 
State-of-the-Ocean time series - Pacific 
continental margin - Thomson, Mackas, Ware, 
Perry, Hargreaves, Harrison, Hyatt, McFarlane, 
Shaw, Stull, and Gower  
 
Zooplankton and oceanographic effects on 
Ocean salmon growth - Welch and Perry 
 
5
ACTIVITIES OF THE CHINA-GLOBEC PROGRAM  
 
Qi-Sheng Tang (Presenter)  
 
The China GLOBEC program is a high priority 
national science program.  The goal of this project is 
to identify how climate change and anthropogenic 
factors influence the dynamics of coastal sea 
ecosystems.  The aim of this project is to predict 
fluctuations in ocean and its living resources.  The 
main research activities in 1997 are on the historic 
data collection and analyses, designing an 
implementation plan, parameter estimation, and field 
surveys.  An outline of these activities is described 
below. 
 
China has initiated a research program on the Bohai 
prawn early life history and key processes in the 
habitat.  As a part of this program, an egg survey 
covering 54 sampling stations is conducted in May.  
The data collected from this survey will lead to an 
assessment of prawns in the habitat.  Physical factors 
such as temperature and salinity are taken.  A second 
survey is conducted on the feeding ground in July.  
This survey covers 23 stations in frontal regions of 
the Bohai Sea.  Three of these stations have 24-hour 
continual observation stations. 
 
A second element of the China GLOBEC program 
focuses on zooplankton population dynamics and 
their controlling role for ecosystem productivity.  In 
1997, information on the vertical movement of 
plankton was studied by collecting continuous 
observations over a 48-hour period at 5 fixed 
locations in the Bohai Bay in June.  The data were 
collected by both vertical plankton trawls, and 
benthic sampling during day and night.  Nutrient 
samples were taken in association with this survey.  
Physical characteristics of the water column were 
obtained using a CTD  
 
China GLOBEC also conducts studies of the 
trophodynamics of the food web and shifts in species 
dominance.  In 1997, a procedure for modeling 
ecological growth efficiency in trophodynamic 
processes at higher trophic levels was developed.  
Larval fish were collected for analyses of food 
habits.  Ecological growth efficiency and feeding 
conversion efficiencies were estimated for read sea 
bream, black sea bream, gobies and black tetra.   
 
A model of  the Bohai sea ecosystem is being 
developed by the China GLOBEC program.  In 
support of this project, collections of benthos and 
geo-chemistry were made in 1997.   
 
6
GLOBEC-RELATED RESEARCH PROGRAMS BY FISHERIES RESEARCH 
INSTITUTES OF JAPAN 
 
Makoto Kashiwai (Presenter) 
 
A comprehensive study of the Variation of the 
oceanic ENvironment and FISH populations in the 
Northwestern Pacific (VENFISH) is currently being 
conducted.  This program is funded through the 
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Research 
Council.  The VENFISH program will be funded 
1997 to 2002.  This research program covers three 
geographical regions; Oyashio region, Transition 
region and Kuroshio region and can be an important 
component of PICES-GLOBEC / CCCC-Program.  
A brief overview of this program follows. 
 
Background: The introduction of Total 
Allowable Catch (TAC) to the fisheries 
resources management in Japanese EEZ 
highlighted the need for improved prediction of 
changes in abundance of important fish 
resources under the effects of climate change 
and ecosystem interactions.  Several studies 
showed a large influence of lower level 
production of the abundance of important 
fisheries resources such as Pacific saury and 
walleye pollock, and a critical importance of 
marine environment on the lower trophic level 
production.  Based on these observations, the 
prediction of abundance of fisheries resources, 
presently performed using catch data and body 
length composition, should be and could be 
improved through the prediction of lower 
trophic level production under the effect of 
environmental variability.   
 
Objective: The objective of the Program is to 
establish technology for precise abundance 
forecast of fisheries resources and to advance 
technology for fisheries resources management 
for representative fish species in the 
Oyashio/Kuroshio region, through developing 
prognostic fish production models based on 
elucidation of the response of fish production to 
variability of environment and plankton 
production.   
Target Species: This Program identifies two target 
species, Pacific saury, the trans-boundary 
migrant of short lifetime, and Walleye pollock, 
the resident on Subarctic shelf of long lifetime.  
Thus the Program has two major components 
integrated by the population dynamic models for 
the two target species, having common feeding 
area of Oyashio shelf region during summer. 
 
Program structure: The Program is structured by 
trophic levels and has following components:   
1. Analysis of the effects of ocean environment on 
plankton biomass   
a. Prediction of phytoplankton biomass   
i. Field studies on the watermass structure 
and primary production   
ii. Development of models for 
phytoplankton biomass dynamics   
b. Prediction of Zooplankton biomass   
i. Responses of Zooplankton to 
environmental variability   
ii. Food web analysis around Zooplankton 
and Micronekton   
iii. Development of models for 
Zooplankton biomass dynamics   
 
2. Development of technology for forecasting 
biomass variability of dominant fishes    
a. Responses of dominant fishes to 
environmental variability   
b. Development of prognostic model for fish 
population dynamics 
 
Participating Institutes: 
Hokkaido National Fisheries Research Institute 
(Kushiro) 
Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute 
(Shiogama) 
National Research Institute of Fisheries Science 
(Yokohama) 
Far Seas National Fisheries Research Institute 
(Shimizu)  
7
National Fisheries University of Fisheries 
Agency (Shimonoseki) 
Department of Fisheries, Hokkaido University 
(Hakodate) 
Department of Agriculture, Tohoku University 
(Sendai)  
 
Program Coordinator:  (Assigned by position)  
Dr. Yasuaki Nakamura 
Director General, Tohoku National Fisheries 
Research Institute  
 
Vice Program Coordinator (Contact Point):  
(Assigned by position)  
Dr. Kuniaki Okuda  
Head, Fisheries Oceanography Division,  
Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute 
Kokuda@myg.affrc.go.jp 
 
Promoting Leader: 
Dr. Yutaka Matsuo 
Head, Biological Oceanography Section 
Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute 
Team Leaders: 
 Primary Production:   
Dr. Katsuyuki Sasaki 
Head, Chemical Oceanography Section 
 Secondary Production: 
Dr. Atsushi Tsuda 
Head, Biological Oceanography Section 
Hokkaido National Fisheries Res. Inst.  
Fish Population Prognostics: 
Dr. Tatsuru Kishida 
Head, Ecosystem Dynamics Section 
National Res. Inst. of Fisheries Science  
 
Informal Regional Coordinator: 
Kuroshio Region:  
Dr. Kuniaki Okuda 
Head, Fisheries Oceanography Division,  
Tohoku National Fisheries Res. Inst. 
Oyashio Region: 
Dr. Makoto Kashiwai  
Head, Fisheries Oceanography Division,  
Hokkaido National Fisheries Res. Inst. 
 
8
KOREAN GLOBEC AND GLOBEC-LIKE PROGRAMS 
 
Chang-Ik Zhang 
 
The Korean GLOBEC committee has been formally 
established in June 1998 as a collaborative national 
committee jointly by National Fisheries Research & 
Development Institute (NFRDI), Korean Ocean 
Research & Development Institute and some ocean- 
and fisheries- related universities  such as, Pukyong 
National University and Seoul National University. 
As an initial program the Korean GLOBEC 
committee is developing a preliminary research 
project (1 year) on the title of ‘Climate Changes and  
Abundances of Fisheries Resources in Korean 
Waters’ as a kind of research action plan.  This one-
year research will be conducted mostly by Korean 
GLOBEC committee members, to figure out the 
frame, direction, and items for the GLOBEC and 
GLOBEC-like future research in Korea by the 
retrospective analyses of all historical data and 
results of related studies. Base upon the results of the 
research program, the Korean GLOBEC and 
GLOBEC-like researches will be much more 
actively conducted thereafter. 
 
In spite of the late formation of the national 
GLOBEC committee in Korea, however, a number 
of GLOBEC-like research programs have ever been 
carried out and also have been being conducted 
currently as shown in the attached summary of 
ongoing research programs by region. At present, six 
research programs are ongoing in the Yellow Sea, 
three, in the East Sea/Japan Sea, and five, in the East 
China Sea. The major funding agencies for these 
programs are the Ministry of Maritime Affairs and 
Fisheries (MAFF), Ministry of Science and 
Engineering (MOST), and Korea Science and 
Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). Besides these 
programs, a lot of small researches are also carried 
out by universities and government research 
institutes.      
 
9
REVIEW OF RUSSIAN GLOBEC-LIKE PROGRAMS  
Vladimir I. Radchenko (Presenter) 
 
Development of Russian GLOBEC-like programs 
was difficult in the early years because the research 
organizations within Russia were not fully 
integrated.  It was a time when the single-objective 
approach predominated.  Research groups were 
basically formed to address a single purpose and 
rather than multipurpose, ecosystem based, research 
projects.  Each research group conducted routine 
studies and produced proposals for discrete projects 
for the following fiscal year.  With further study, the 
objectives became more detailed and sub-divided.  
 
The first multipurpose marine ecosystem research 
programs were undertaken by the institutes of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences.  Dozens of large-
scale expeditions were conducted annually on board 
of the academic fleet in diverse corners of the World 
Ocean.  However, at this time, the Academy did not 
focus on higher trophic level organisms of marine 
ecosystems.  Although these programs did not allow 
a description of the whole ecosystem, they provided 
valuable information on the relationships between 
physical forcing and lower trophic level response.   
 
In early 1950s, Russian scientists attempted to relate 
the fish stock dynamics and climate trends which 
lead to the development of Dr. G. Izhevsky’s system 
approach.  This research showed statistical 
relationships between time series of selected fish 
stocks and physical factors.  Dr. Izhevsyky 
endeavored to formalize these relationships and 
discovered that it was impossible to describe the 
single-species model adequately by mathematical 
means without incorporating ecosystem parameters. 
 
Since 1980 the ecological investigations in the far-
eastern seas have been carried out by the TINRO-
Center.  The composition, structure, inter-annual 
dynamics and function of the pelagic and demersal 
hydrobionts’ communities were studied on a macro-
ecosystem scale.  This work was primarily 
undertaken by the laboratories of Applied 
Biocenology (i.e., ecology) and of Plankton 
Research in the Bering and Okhotsk Seas.  The 
project staff consists of three dozens specialists now 
under the leadership of principal TINRO-Center 
scientist, Prof. V.P. Shuntov. 
 
Ecosystem investigations were included as a part of 
fishery research and were conducted on research 
vessels.  In 1982, the mission of first expedition was 
to assess demersal fishes and invertebrates on the 
western Kamchatka shelf in the Sea of Okhotsk.  
Subsequent expeditions were conducted in the 
Karaginsky Bay in the southwestern Bering Sea in 
1983.  Demersal surveys were conducted until 1983, 
and pelagic surveys started in 1986.  Twelve 
expeditions with pelagic and four with demersal 
surveys have been completed in the Bering Sea and 
Kamchatka Pacific waters.  In the Sea of Okhotsk 
and Kuriles Pacific waters, eighteen pelagic surveys 
and seven demersal surveys have been conducted. 
 
Multipurpose expeditions have been conducted  in 
the Russian far-eastern economic zone and in some 
international waters.  These expeditions encom-
passed multi-disciplinary activities including: 
meteorological studies, hydrology, chemical 
sampling, fish distribution (by trawl-acoustic 
sampling), plankton and ichthyoplankton surveys.  
The distribution, migration, feeding, and physiology 
of nektonic organisms were all studied.  Nekton was 
assessed mainly in the epipelagic (0-200 m) and 
pelagic (0-1000 m) layers, according to data of trawl 
surveys.  Data on primary production, bacteria, and 
protozoa were also collected, examined, and 
processed onboard the research vessels in some 
expeditions. 
 
The original database contains information on basic 
water parameters, species composition, biomass, and 
resources of zooplankton, nekton and benthos from 
more than 6200 oceanographic, plankton and trawl 
stations.  This database includes the results of 
biological analyses of more than 150,000 and 
measurements of 1,400,000 fishes and squids.  The 
feeding habits of tens of thousands of specimens of 
more than fifty nekton and nektobenthos species 
were studied to develop community trophic 
structure.  These data, coupled with a thorough 
10
review of the literature on adjacent areas allowed for 
the derivation of a model for energy and biomass 
flow through the Bering and Okhotsk Seas 
ecosystems.  These models were presented at the 
PICES Workshops in Seattle in 1991 and in 
Vladivostok in 1995. 
 
One of the main results of the FES-LIRES project 
was the prediction and further monitoring of 
substantial reorganization of pelagic communities of 
far-eastern seas that occurred since early 1990s.  It 
was likely related to large changes in global climate 
and oceanographic conditions in the northern North 
Pacific.  Changes in composition and biomass were 
recorded in both plankton and nekton communities. 
 
FES-LIRES specialists analyzed the available data 
and developed a conceptual model of the 
consequences of pollock biomass decline in the far-
eastern seas ecosystem (Shuntov et al., 1997).  
Consumer biomass reduction led to decrease of 
forage pressure on zooplankton communities.  Then, 
the abundance and production of predatory plankton 
organisms grew in early 1990, fueled by the surplus 
plankton production resulting from the pollock 
collapse.  As a consequence, the surplus plankton 
biomass and production decreased under the 
foraging pressure of planktonic predators.  The food 
base for pelagic fishes and other high trophic level 
organisms worsened.  Fish productivity decreased in 
pelagic ecosystems.  At that time, the biomass of 
alternative nekton species begins to grow (for the 
northern North Pacific herring is alternative species 
to pollock).  Herring has very high daily food ration 
during the feeding period and it consists of predatory 
zooplankton (especially chaetognaths) in more 
degree than the pollock ration.  The decrease of 
predatory zooplankton biomass and production 
appeared in these conditions and some increase of 
biomass and production of unpredatory zooplankton 
can be expected.  In late 1990s the increase of fish 
productivity is expected in new physical conditions 
and biological structure of ecosystems.  However, 
the new level of fish productivity will be less than 
such level for 1980s. 
 
Further monitoring of demersal and pelagic 
hydrobionts’ communities is planned.  Despite the 
financial and other difficulties the research 
expeditions continue in the far-eastern seas.  The 
interesting changes in demersal communities on the 
western Kamchatka and Karaginsky Bay shelf zones 
were elucidated.  It is likely related with the rate of 
mud sedimentation there in last years.  Results of 
ecosystem investigations also are widely applied in 
the fisheries forecasting and management, in single-
specific studies. 
 
The Short-Term Fisheries Forecasting (STFF) 
program, encompasses all four of the PICES Central 
Scientific Issues.  Although complex studies have 
been carried out in TINRO-Center since 1979, the 
activity has been sporadic and related to different 
regions.  The STFF project for the Japan Sea started 
in 1996 and was planned for 3 or 4 years.  
(Unfortunately, in late 1997, the program was 
terminated.)  
 
The objective of the STFF program is to identify a 
method for forecasting the location of pelagic 
fisheries for:  common Japanese squid, saury, chub 
mackerel and sardine.  To accomplish this objective, 
an analysis of the spatial distribution pattern of key 
species was performed.  A set of meso-scale 
ecosystem blocks with flexible boundaries 
corresponding to types of water structure were 
monitored.  Retrospective analysis revealed logical 
relationships between environmental conditions and 
living components of ecosystems.  These relation-
ships were formalized by statistical methods.  
Development of models of the seasonal factors that 
account for year-to-year changes should be 
undertaken.  The components of ecosystems which 
are regarded to be important for the forecasting 
procedure include:  air circulation features, water 
temperature, thermocline parameters, large-cell 
phytoplankton biomass, biomass of main 
zooplankton species and communities maturity, 
main fish and squid species population density and 
catches per unit effort.  Thus, the result model will 
not be an ecosystem model on the whole, but the 
model of development of fisheries conditions. 
 
During the first two years the principal relations for 
levels "atmosphere water column", "water 
environment - plankton", "water environment - fish 
and squid", "plankton - fish and squid", "fish - 
squid" were found for some types of ecosystems.  
11
Atmosphere - water column relations are 
asynchronic that allows too elaborate the prognostic 
model.  The extending of these regularities on whole 
deep-sea part of Russian exclusive economic zone 
off Primorie is planned.  Then, all relations should 
be formalized in condition of complete system of 
equations. 
 
A small staff of 7 scientists belonging to the TINRO-
Center laboratories of short-term fisheries forecast 
and of Cephalopod studies was attracted to this 
project.  Dr. Y. Zuenko was its leader. 
 
Far-eastern regional program on Pacific salmon 
marine life study ("Pacific salmon, 1997-2000") can 
be an example of ecosystem approaches in a single-
purpose studies.  It was developed in response to the 
necessity for improved knowledge of the life history 
of Pacific salmon.  Main program objectives are as 
follow: 
 
- Definition of Pacific salmon ecology features 
during the sea and ocean phases, in particular its 
distribution and migrations, trophic linkages, 
growth and maturation rates in relation with 
food supply state and environmental conditions, 
estimations of natural mortality rates for diverse 
salmon species, and its inter-annual dynamics. 
 
- Survey assessment of salmon abundance 
immediately during anadromous run for the 
verification of previous forecasts of magnitude 
and temporal dynamics of its approaches, 
investigation of possibility of the pink salmon 
aggregations to re-distribution between regions 
on the last stage of migration before the 
spawning streams.  
 
- Direct calculations of salmon juveniles during 
oceanward migrations for collection of correct 
information on the generation numbers and 
development of preliminary harvest predictions. 
 
- Further data collection for Pacific salmon stocks 
differentiation, age and population structure 
studies for main species, in particular for 
definition of real ratio of abundance of wild and 
enhanced chum salmon stock on basic areas of 
feeding migration route. 
 
For these goals, the results are applied of complex 
trawl surveys conducted annually in frames of the 
FES-LIRES project in upper epipelagic layer of far-
eastern seas.  Pacific waters off Kamchatka and 
Kurile Islands are also investigated in limits of 
Russian exclusive economic zone.  Observations are 
also executed from the Russian and Japanese driftnet 
vessels during fishery season and in coastal zone 
during fisheries operations by beach and river seines.  
 
The research activities provided by 50-60 specialists 
of regional institutes and divisions of TINRO-Center 
in frames of this regional program annually.  Most of 
them are temporary participants of project.  The 
database including fishery statistics, escapement 
data, biological information on salmon species has 
created at the Laboratory of Biological Forecasts in 
the TINRO-Center.  Contacting persons are V.G. 
Markovtsev, head of TINRO-Center International 
Department and V.I. Radchenko, Deputy Director.
 
12
UNITED STATES GLOBEC AND GLOBEC-LIKE PROGRAMS 
Anne Babcock Hollowed (Presenter) 
 
There are several GLOBEC and GLOBEC like 
programs currently funded in the United States.  The 
purpose of this review is to summarize the present 
status of national research programs and to identify 
areas for cooperative research experiments in 
support of the CCCC Program.  The discussion is 
not a comprehensive summary of all oceanographic 
programs that might contribute to the CCCC 
Program and is limited to large, multi-investigator 
research programs.  However, it should be 
understood that the some of the programs discussed 
below might be supplemented by collaborative 
research projects awarded to individual scientists.  
The following summary begins with programs 
located off the California coast and proceeds north to 
the Bering Sea. 
 
Large scale research programs in the California 
Current South region include the California 
Cooperative Oceanic Fisheries Investigations 
(CalCOFI), the Small Pelagics Fishes and Climate 
Change program (SPACC), the research activities of 
the Southwest Fisheries Science Center (SWFSC), 
the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute 
(MBARI), and research activities at University of 
California Davis (U.C. Davis).  The CalCOFI 
program is jointly funded by the National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the 
University of California, and the California 
Department of Fish and Game.  The CalCOFI 
program has collected a large suite of bio/physical 
data in the California Current since 1949.  Current 
research findings are documented in the CalCOFI 
reports series and are easily accessible on the world 
wide web.  The long time series has provided 
invaluable information on the impacts of climate on 
the distribution and abundance of nutrients, 
phytoplankton and zooplankton in the California 
Current.  The current monitoring region is 
encompasses offshore transects between San Diego 
and Pt. San Luis. 
 
The Small Pelagic Fishes and Climate Change 
(SPACC) program was developed through the 
International GLOBEC programs.  This program 
proposes cooperative research on: the feeding 
behavior, larval distributions, foraging success (prey 
availability) and early life history vital rates of small 
pelagic fishes throughout the world.  The intent of 
this program is to develop coupled bio/physical 
models.  Paleo-oceanographic records will also be 
collected and analyzed to provide a long term 
retrospective perspective of population variability. 
 
The Southwest Fisheries Science Center (SWFSC) 
supports fisheries research in the California Current.  
Target species include small pelagic species as well 
as groundfish.  The SWFSC Tiburon laboratory 
conducts research on juvenile rockfish.  This 
research project includes seasonal surveys of larval 
and juvenile distribution and abundance, analysis of 
juvenile growth rates and feeding ecology.  Adult 
rockfish are also monitored to determined fecundity 
rates.  Information obtained through this program is 
assimilated in a bio-physical model of the study 
region roughly located between San Francisco and 
Monterey Bay.  The SWFSC Pacific Environmental 
Group (PFEG) provides retrospective studies of 
climate variability, access to physical oceanographic 
data, develops bio-physical models of the California 
Current system.  
 
The California Department of Fish and Game 
(CDF&G) supports fisheries research in waters off 
the coast of California.  Research programs target a 
variety of fish species including:  small pelagic 
species (e.g. sardine, mackerel and pacific herring), 
nearshore rockfish, Pacific salmon, lingcod and 
market squid.  Oceanic research surveys are 
intermittent and focused on specific research needs.  
Sea bird surveys are also conducted through the 
CDF&G as part of the oil spill response team 
activities.  Ocean surveys planned for 1999 include a 
pelagic survey for adult sardine and mackerel, and a 
market squid survey that will utilize bottom trawl 
and jig gear. 
 
The Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute 
supports a broad research plan that includes the 
development of advancements in remotely operated 
13
vehicles.  On-going research includes a study of 
biochemical responses to changes in climate and 
ocean circulation.  This project utilizes ship board 
surveys, moorings and remote sensing to improve 
our understanding of processes influencing lower 
trophic level responses to climate variability. 
 
The University of California Davis is currently 
involved in Dungeness crab research.  The goal of 
this project is to understand processes influencing 
recruitment of Dungeness crab.  This research 
project provides monitoring of coastal larval 
dispersal.  Survey information is assimilated in 
coupled bio-physical models. 
 
The U.S. GLOBEC Northeast Pacific research 
program was developed to understand the effects of 
climate variability and climate change on the 
distribution, abundance, and production of marine 
animals, particularly juvenile salmon and the 
dominant zooplankton (copepods and euphausiids) 
in the system.  The project contrasts the response of 
juvenile salmon to ocean conditions in the California 
Current region with conditions in the northern Gulf 
of Alaska.  The project started in 1997 and will 
continue for 5 to 7 years.  This project includes an 
examination of linkages in production between 
Coastal Gulf of Alaska and the California Current 
System.  The program will also focus on variability 
in intermediate scale features (e.g. eddies and jets) as 
the main physical factors influencing zooplankton 
dynamics.  Researchers hope to relate juvenile 
salmon survival to interannual and inter-decadal 
changes in physical forcing and changes in 
ecosystem food web dynamics.  Development of 
coupled 3 dimensional bio/physical models for the 
California Current system and Alaskan current 
system are currently being supported by this 
program. 
 
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration’s (NOAA), Coastal Ocean Program 
supports a Pacific Northwest Coastal Ecosystem 
Regional Study (PNCERS).  The long-term 
objective of the PNCERS program is to manage the 
Pacific Northwest Coastal Ecosystem for ecological 
and sociological sustainability.  Short-term 
objectives of this program include: 
 
- Identification of physical and human forcing 
factors that affect the Pacific Northwest Coastal 
Ecosystem (PNCE). 
 
- Defining the relative impacts of significant 
forcing factors on the intrinsic and economic 
outputs provided by the PNCE. 
 
- Determining the socioeconomic consequences 
of changing the provisioning rate and/or 
distribution of system outputs. 
 
- Identify management structures and strategies 
(policy) which can be altered such that the 
PNCE functions sustainably. 
 
The Coastal Ocean Processes (CoOP) program is a 
multi-diciplinary, research projects that is funded by 
the National Science Foundation, the Office of 
Naval Research and the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration.  The CoOP program 
currently has a pilot project on air-sea interactions 
off Monterey, CA.  This project focuses on air-sea 
gas exchange.  
 
The Northwest Fisheries Science Center (NMFS) 
supports fisheries research in coastal waters of 
northern California, Oregon and Washington.  
Research encompasses a broad range of activities 
including monitoring of pollutants, nutrients, 
fisheries surveys, retrospective studies and 
modeling.  Center staff conduct research on habitat 
associations, stock identification, spatial distribution 
and abundance.  The data collected is assimilated 
into stock assessment models and ecosystem models 
to evaluate impacts of different harvest strategies.  
The NWFSC conducts surveys of toxic 
phytoplankton off the coast of Washington, Oregon 
and northern California using ships of opportunity.  
The NWFSC Newport Oregon Laboratory provides 
bi-weekly sampling of zooplankton distribution and 
abundance.  Chlorophyll, zooplankton and ichthyo-
plankton samples are routinely taken.   
 
The International Pacific Halibut Commission is 
located in Seattle, Washington.  The IPHC employs 
an international group of investigators who conduct 
research on Pacific halibut.  The IPHC conducts grid 
surveys using longline gear in the Gulf of Alaska.  
14
Information obtained from these surveys is 
assimilated into stock assessment models.  Research 
activities of the commission include studies of 
changes in life history characteristics of Pacific 
halibut, studies of stock distribution and migratory 
pathways, fisheries monitoring and development of 
models of the functional response between stock 
projection success and bio/physical forcing. 
 
The Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Trustee Council 
(EVOS) oversees research on the coastal ecosystem 
of the Gulf of Alaska.  Three research projects are 
directly relevant to the PICES CCCC Program.  The 
Sound Ecosystem Assessment Program (SEA) is a 
multidisciplinary study of the influence of biological 
and physical processes on production of pink salmon 
and Pacific herring in Prince William Sound.  The 
Nearshore Vertebrate Predator project is focused on 
examination of nutrition and health indicators of top 
trophic level predators (marine mammals and 
seabirds).  The Alaska Predator Ecosystem 
Experiment (APEX) project concentrates on the 
productivity of seabirds based on the availability of 
forage fish.  Principal target species include:  
common murres, pigeon guillemots and black legged 
kittiwakes. 
 
The Alaska Fisheries Science Center supports 
research on marine fish and crabs in Alaskan waters.  
Research activities include a broad range of activities 
and target species.  Bottom trawl and Echo 
Integration Midwater Trawl (Acoustic) surveys are 
conducted along the west coast, Gulf of Alaska and 
Bering Sea.  During these cruises, data is collected to 
evaluate habitat associations, food habits, stock 
identification, spatial distribution and abundance.  
The data collected is assimilated into stock 
assessment models and ecosystem models to 
evaluate impacts of different harvest strategies.  The 
Fisheries Oceanography Coordinated Investigations 
(FOCI) program is a process oriented research 
program that studies the influence of environment on 
the abundance of various commercially important 
fish and shcllfish stocks in Alaskan waters and their 
role in the ecosystem.  The primary focus of the 
FOCI program is the early life stages of walleye 
pollock and their associated ecology.  The Ocean 
Carrying Capacity program is conducted by the 
AFSC, Auke Bay Laboratory.  The OCC program 
provides funds for physical monitoring and transect 
surveys for juvenile salmon using a high speed net.  
Transects lines are broadly spaced throughout the 
Gulf of Alaska.  The data collected by this program 
is used to evaluate:  differences between separate 
salmon stocks, food habits and feeding ecology, 
juvenile condition, and factors influencing the 
distribution and abundance of juvenile salmon.  The 
AFSC Kodiak Laboratory conducts extensive 
research on the distribution and abundance of 
Alaskan crab stocks.  The Alaska Fisheries Science 
Center also houses the National Marine Mammal 
Laboratory.  This research facility conducts research 
on marine mammals in the California Current and 
Alaskan waters.  Ecosystem studies include 
monitoring cruises to evaluate foraging behavior.  
Observational programs (at sea, ground and air) of 
stock abundance and distribution.   
 
Two government agencies conduct research on 
Alaskan seabirds.  The United States Geological 
Survey supports research on Alaskan seabirds in 
Prince William Sound and Glacier Bay.  The project 
supports research on the flight ranges and foraging 
behavior of seabirds.  Research is also conducted on 
the relationship between foraging and reproductive 
success.  The United States Fish and Wildlife 
Service monitors seabird abundance, reproductive 
success and food habits. 
 
The Alaska Department of Fish and Game provides 
scientific support for fisheries research and 
management for the State of Alaska.  Research 
activities within ADF&G encompass a wide range of 
activities including monitoring, modeling, and 
retrospective studies.  Principal target species 
include Pacific herring, crustaceans including crab 
and shrimp, salmon and groundfish.  Scientists 
within ADF&G conduct research on genetic stock 
identification, feeding ecology, resource modeling 
and habitat association.  ADF&G conducts resource 
surveys in the coastal regions of Alaska on a routine 
basis. 
 
The NOAA’s Office of Atmospheric Research 
recently funded an Arctic Research Initiative (ARI).  
The focus of this study is to identify sources of 
natural variability within the Bering Sea and 
Western Arctic ecosystem.  This project will also 
15
support studies of anthropogenic influences on the 
Bering Sea/Western Arctic ecosystem.  Surveys are 
conducted to monitor shelf edge processes and 
physical processes that control variations in 
productivity within the shelf edge region.   
 
NOAA’s Coastal Ocean Program supports a 
Southeast Bering Sea Climate Change and Carrying 
Capacity Regional Study (SEBSCC).  The long-term 
objective of the SEBSCC program is to increase our 
understanding of the Southeast Bering Sea by 
documenting the role of juvenile pollock in the 
ecosystem.  Studies are designed to evaluate the 
effects of climate on lower trophic level production 
within the Bering Sea as well as factors influencing 
juvenile pollock distribution and survival.  Coupled 
3-dimensional bio-physical models are being 
developed by this program. 
 
16
MID-WATER AND DEMERSAL FISH BREAKOUT SESSION 
 
Participants:  Anne B. Hollowed (Co-Chairman), 
Steven Hare (Co-Chairman), Richard D. Beamish, 
James Cohen, Young Kang, Thomas C. Royer, 
Muneharu Tokimura, Warren S. Wooster, Chang-Ik 
Zhang, Vera Alexander, Richard D. Brodeur, Yutaka 
Isoda, Mokoto Kashiwai, Patricia Livingston 
(Rapporteur), Sandy McFarlane, Naonobu Shiga. 
 
Objectives, key questions, and core hypotheses 
 
The objectives of a coordinated research program 
focused on the response of mid-water and demersal 
fish have been outlined in the REX terms of 
reference, the key question posed by the CCCC 
implementation plan and the desirable set of 
program outputs identified in the CCCC 
implementation plan (PICES Scientific Report No. 
4). 
 
The principal mechanisms underlying higher trophic 
level responses to climate variability include: 
starvation, transport, concentration, prey suitability, 
prey type, and predation mortality.  Hypotheses 
linking climate variability and higher trophic level 
response can be stated as follows: 
 
1.  STARVATION:  Survival of mid-water and 
demersal fish larvae is dependent on matching 
hatch dates with the peak zooplankton 
production (i.e. the match mis-match theory).  
Factors that alter the timing of the spring bloom 
can influence the match mis-match" between 
first feeding larvae and prey availability. 
 
2.  STARVATION:  Survival of mid-water and 
demersal fish larvae and juvenile fish is 
dependent on sustained secondary production 
through out the spring and summer months.  
 
3.  TRANSPORT:  Survival of mid-water and 
demersal fish larvae depends on advection to 
favorable nursery grounds. Atmospherically 
driven shifts in large scale circulation patterns 
can impact recruitment success by changing 
larval distributions. 
 
4.  CONCENTRATION:  Survival of mid-water 
and demersal fish larvae depends on mesoscale 
advection patterns that concentrate larvae and 
their prey.  Mesoscale features such as eddies or 
frontal systems concentrate prey and enhance 
larval survival.  
 
5.  PREY SUITABILITY:  Survival of mid-water 
and demersal fish depends on the availability of 
the appropriate prey species at suitable size for 
consumption. 
 
6.  PREDATION MORTALITY:  
 
a.  ADVECTION:  Survival of mid-water and 
demersal fish depends on advection processes 
that separate larvae and juvenile fish from their 
predators. 
 
b.  SIZE DEPENDENT MORTALITY:  Processes 
that enhance larval and juvenile growth rates 
will reduce predation mortality by reducing the 
time when larval or juvenile fish are vulnerable 
to predation. 
 
c.  PREDATOR / PREY OVERLAP:  Processes 
that separate upper trophic levels species from 
juvenile midwater and demersal fish influences 
the amount of predation mortality. 
 
Data requirements 
 
The following data sets would be required to 
evaluate these hypotheses: 
  
Physical Data:  Sea ice extent, large-scale advection, 
and location and duration of mesoscale circulation 
features (eddies and fronts), mixing (nutrient flux). 
 
Lower Trophic Level Data:  timing of spring bloom, 
zooplankton distribution and abundance, 
zooplankton species composition, and zooplankton 
size distribution, surface to bottom ocean 
temperatures.  
 
17
Higher Trophic Level Data:  Ichthyoplankton 
distribution and abundance, larval and juvenile 
growth rates.  Distribution and abundance of 
predators.  Larval and juvenile prey preferences. 
 
The availability of information for testing these 
hypotheses and the source of the information is 
summarized in Table 1.  Most of the information 
summarized in Table 1 has only recently become 
available.  Thus, process oriented research programs 
could be proposed for inter-regional comparisons.  
Differentiating between competing hypotheses 
requires a coordinated sampling scheme that utilizes 
comparable sampling protocols.   This level of 
coordination should be the responsibility of 
individuals directly involved in the research 
programs.  The REX Task Team could facilitate 
initial contacts between investigators by maintaining 
a list of program contacts and web sites. 
 
Our group entertained the possibility that the rules 
that govern recruitment success or failure 
interannually, may change when a climatic regime 
shift occurs.  A regime shift is a large scale shift in 
ocean properties typically associated with shifts in 
atmospheric forcing, that influences the species mix 
and/or distribution of species within an ecosystem.  
It was recognized that the data in support of large-
scale shifts in higher trophic level distributions or 
abundance have not been rigorously tested. 
 
CCCC higher trophic level response hypotheses 
 
We identified seven hypotheses to explain perceived 
changes in higher trophic level abundance and 
distribution before and after the regime shift.  These 
seven hypotheses are extensions of the key 
hypotheses introduced above.  
 
1.  The regime shift had no effect on mid-water or 
demersal fish production or distribution. 
 
2.  The regime shift altered the timing of the spring 
bloom, which altered larval survival.  This is an 
extension of the STARVATION hypothesis. 
 
3.  The regime shift influenced advection in the 
North Pacific and adjacent seas, which altered 
larval survival.  This is an extension of the 
mesoscale and large-scale TRANSPORT 
hypotheses. 
 
4.  The regime shift altered species dominance 
leading to differences in PREDATION mortality 
rates. 
 
5.  The regime shift altered the amount of suitable 
thermal habitat leading to shifts in feeding and 
spawning distributions.  Shifts in spawning 
distributions could impact recruitment success 
by changing the probability of favorable 
advection to nursery grounds, changing the 
probability of successful encounters with prey of 
suitable size and concentration, or by changing 
the probability of encounters with predators.  
Shifts in feeding distributions could impact the 
prey fields within a region. 
 
6.  The regime shift influenced the frequency and 
intensity of storm events in the north Pacific and 
adjacent seas resulting in different mesoscale 
circulation patterns.  Shifts in mesoscale 
circulation patterns altered survival by changing 
the probability of encountering mesoscale 
features such as eddies or frontal systems that 
concentrate prey and enhance larval survival.  
An extension of the CONCENTRATION 
hypothesis. 
 
7.  The regime shift changed large-scale circulation 
and the mixed layer depth in the North Pacific 
and adjacent seas.  Shifts in water column 
properties led to changes in zooplankton 
production.  An extension of the STARVA-
TION hypothesis.  
 
The availability of information to evaluate the seven 
regime shift hypotheses is summarized in Table 2.  
The data sets required to test the match mis-match 
hypothesis (e.g. shifts in the timing of the spring 
bloom) were available in a limited number of PICES 
regions (Regions 1, 2, and 4, see PICES Scientific 
Report #4 for definition) (Table 2).  In contrast, 
models of large scale advection required to evaluate 
the impact of the regime shift on transport are 
available for most of the PICES regions.  However, 
the quality of the model generated advective fields 
was questioned due to the limited number of field 
18
samples taken in some regions during the late 1960s 
and early 1970s.  Information on water column 
properties and storm frequency is available in most 
regions.  Models of mesoscale circulation features 
required to concentrate larvae and their prey are 
available for Regions 1 and 2.  Field samples 
required to evaluate long-term changes in the 
suitability of prey and prey diversity are only 
available for Region 1. 
 
Recommendations 
 
1. Conduct inter-regional comparative studies to 
evaluate the recent role of climate-variability on 
key processes such as:  starvation, transport, 
concentration, prey suitability and predation 
mortality. 
 
2. Ensure the data are comparable across regions to 
facilitate inter-regional comparisons.  Principal 
Investigators of process oriented field programs 
are encouraged to contact PIs in other regions to 
discuss similarities and differences in sampling 
protocols. 
 
3. Compare recruitment indices of fish to confirm 
perceived changes in higher trophic level 
responses to the regime shift.  These studies 
should evaluate the frequency of strong year 
classes, the amplitude of strong year classes and 
the synchrony of strong year classes. 
 
4. Compare adult spawning and feeding 
distributions before and after the regime shift. 
 
5. Compare growth rate (length and weight) of 
mid-water and demersal fish before and after the 
regime shift. 
 
6. Compare storm frequency and intensity and 
water column properties before and after the 
regime shift. 
 
7. Compare large-scale advective pathways and 
water column properties before and after the 
regime shift. 
   
8. Compare timing and intensity of the spring 
bloom.
 
19
Table 1.  Summary of current informatin required to evaluate hypotheses regarding climate variability and mid-water or demersal fish recruitment. 
 
Measurement China Korea Japan Russia 
JSES 
Russia 
SO 
Russia 
WB 
USA 
BS 
USA 
GOA 
USA 
CCS 
Canada 
Phyto. dist. and abund. F/S/M? F/S/M? F/S/M F/M F F/S F/S/M F/S/M F/S/M F/S/M 
Phyto. sust. avail. ? F/B F/B F F  F/B F/B F/B F/B 
Large scale advection CM/X CM/TN/R/
X 
CM/TN/R
/X 
CM/TN/R/
X 
CM/TN/R/
X 
CM/TN/R/
X 
CM/TN/
R/X/D 
CM/TN/
R/X/D 
CM/TN/
R/X/D 
CM/TN/R/X/
D 
Meso scale advection CM/X CM/TN/R/
X 
CM/TN/R
/X 
CM/TN/R/
X 
CM/TN/R/
X 
CM/TN/R/
X 
CM/TN/
R/X/D 
CM/TN/
R/X/D 
CM/TN/
R/X/D 
CM/TN/R/X/
D 
Zoop. size fraction F/M/A/
CPR 
F/M/A/CP
R/OPC 
F/M F/M F/M F F/M/A F/M/A F/M/A/O
PC 
F/M/A 
Zoop. dist. abund. F/M F/M F/M F/M F/M F F/M F/M F/M  
Zoop. species comp. F F F F F F F F F F 
Zoop. production F/M F/M F/M F/M F/M F/M FM F/M F/M F/M 
Ichthyoplankton data Fo/G Fo/Fd/G Fo/G/FH Fo/Fd/G/F
H 
Fo/Fd/G/F
H 
Fo/Fd/G/F
H 
Fo/Fd/G/
FH 
Fo/Fd/G/
FH 
Fo/Fd/G/
FH 
Fo/Fd/G/FH 
Legend:  JSES = Japan Sea East Sea; SO = Sea of Okhotsk; WB = Western Bering Sea; BS = Bering Sea; GOA = Gulf of Alaska; CCS = California Current 
System.  Phyto. = phytoplankton; dist. = distribution; abund. = abundance; Sust. = Sustained; Zoop. = zooplankton.  F = Field sampling; S = satellite data;  
M = model; B = buoy; CM = coupled bio-physical models; TN = transport of nutrients; R = retrospective study;  X = hydrocasts; D = Drifter;  A = acoustics; 
CPR = continuous plankton recorder; OPC = optical plankton counter; Fo = oblique sampling; Fd = depth stratified sampling; G = growth rate; FH = food habits. 
 
Table 2.  Summary of availability of information pre and post 1997 regime shift. 
Measurement China Korea Japan Russia 
JSES 
Russia 
SO 
Russia 
WB 
USA 
BS 
USA 
GOA 
USA 
CCS 
Canada 
Phyto. dist. and abund. Pre-regime Starts in 
1994 
Starts in 
1990 
Starts in 
1980s 
Starts in 
1980s 
Unknown Pre-regime Starts in 
1980s 
Pre-regime Pre-regime 
Large scale advection Unknown Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime 
Storm frequency Unknown Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime 
Water column properties Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime 
Zoop. Distribution       Unknown  Pre-regime Pre-regime 
Zoop. Size.         P r e - r e g i m e P r e - r e g i m e 
Zoop. species comp.         P r e - r e g i m e P r e - r e g i m e 
Recruitment indices Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime 
Adult fish distributions Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime 
Adult fish growth  Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime Pre-regime 
Ichthyoplankton data         P r e - r e g i m e  
Legend:  Pre-regime = data prior to 1977 regime shift. 
 
CRUSTACEAN BREAKOUT SESSION 
 
PARTICIPANTS:  Robert S. Otto  (WG 12 Co-
Chairman, Discussion leader), Tsutomu Ikeda (BIO), 
David L. Mackas (BIO), Ian Perry (CCCC), 
Naonobu Shiga, Akira Taniguchi (BIO), Atsushi 
Tsuda (BIO), Sung-Yun Hong (BIO, WG 8 & 12), 
In-Ja Yeon (WG 12), Ling Tong (TCODE) and 
Rong Wang (BIO). 
 
Introduction 
 
Breakout Group C (crustaceans) met during the 
afternoon of October 17 to identify potential areas 
for research under the CCCC Program.  In so doing 
the group reviewed some results of the Working 
Group 12 (Crabs and Shrimps) interim meeting.  
This provided a means to quickly identify stocks of 
crabs and shrimps in the PICES region and to review 
trends in abundance.  
 
The group noted that crustacean issues would 
involve a great deal more than crabs and shrimps, 
particularly various planktonic groups as well as 
numerous benthic crustaceans for which there was 
little information.  Discussions emphasized crabs 
and shrimps realizing that any planktonic 
crustaceans would be discussed in the context of 
breakout sessions for Lower Trophic Level 
Response and for Ecosystem Response. 
 
Hypotheses 
 
The group reviewed the four key CCCC questions 
relative to crustaceans by considering trends in crab 
and shrimp stocks in each zoogeographic province 
and discussing hypotheses that might be considered, 
or potential areas for experimentation.   
 
1. There appears to be no particular climatic or 
oceanographic patterns that are unique to 
crustaceans as opposed to finfish, further the 
same zoogeographic regions that have been 
differentiated for finfish are largely applicable, 
at least, to macrobenthic crustaceans.  These 
correspond well with the 10 PICES-GLOBEC 
CCCC Program Components and seem to derive 
from large-scale oceanographic features. It is 
noted however that these zoogeographic 
provinces may change with increasing depths. 
 
The group noted also that there were 
intraspecific as well as interspecific differences 
in life history mechanisms that related to these 
regions and hence may provide natural clines or 
dichotomies that could be exploited for 
experiments.  For example, in some regions 
euphausids may be highly seasonal in their 
reproduction while in others they may have 
protracted or aseasonal spawning.  Experi-
mentation might deal with contrasting growth 
and mortality between such regions. 
 
2. Primary and secondary production in planktonic 
communities are translated to meroplanktonic 
larval stages of macrobenthic crustaceans and 
may be related to year-class strength through 
match-mis-masmatch mechanisms relating to the 
timing of phytoplankton blooms relative to 
larval release.  Detritus from upper levels feeds 
into secondary production of benthic infauna 
that serve as primary food sources for crabs and 
shrimps as well as other epibenthic fauna.  Also, 
many shrimps make nocturnal vertical 
migrations in order to feed on zooplankton. 
 
 Physical properties of the bottom and ecological 
relationships within the benthos have probably 
not been considered very heavily in CCCC 
deliberations but are inescapably important 
relative to crabs and shrimps and other benthic 
crustaceans.  
 
 The group notes that crabs and shrimps are 
much less mobile than finfish and hypothetically 
less able to adjust their times and places of 
spawning relative to productivity or other 
conditions in the euphotic zone that might affect 
larval survival.  Hypothetically this could lead to 
greater variability in recruitment for crabs and 
shrimps as opposed to finfishes. 
 
3. Climatic variability may affect crustacean 
populations directly through recruitment 
20
processes as noted above.  In much of the Gulf 
of Alaska and eastern Bering Sea, effects may 
have been mediated through predation.  For 
example the regime shift that occurred in the late 
1970s produced strong year classes of several 
groundfishes which in turn may have resulted in 
decreased shrimp abundance through predation 
and or competition. 
 
 Because many of the region's groundfish are 
long lived, there is a certain inertia in species 
dominance within a region.  A regime shift may 
result from short-term climatic or oceano-
graphic phenomena, but produce long-term 
ecological effects. 
 
4. Top down versus bottom up control of species 
composition and relative abundance is likely 
very different between pelagic and benthic 
crustacean habitats. 
 
 Most crabs and shrimps in the region have 
relatively long larval periods (as much as 90 
days) during which they are meroplankton.  It is 
not clear how meroplankton might be controlled 
or influenced by the holoplankton community 
through competition or predation.  Interactions 
between the two groups certainly provide a 
broad topic of research and experimentation. 
 
 Hypothetically, if both meroplankton and 
phytoplankton abundance were controlled by the 
dynamics of primary productivity then there 
may be a way to use information on primary 
productivity to model year-class success through 
the larval phases.   
 
 Bottom up control may involve the rate of 
transfer of primary productivity to the bottom as 
detritus.  One hypothesis is that warmer 
conditions are conducive to greater zooplankton 
abundance or diversity and greater respiration in 
the upper water column.  Since more energy 
would be consumed in upper layers less could 
become available to lower layers or the bottom 
where detritus may be consumed by filter 
feeders that in turn become food for 
macrobenthic crustaceans. 
 
 Top down control through predation occurs 
when changes in finfish biomass result in 
increases or decreases in crab and shrimp 
biomass.  The same might be said of certain 
marine mammals.  For example, bay populations 
of Dungeness crab may be controlled by sea 
otter predation. 
 
Stocks and research approaches and 
opportunities for experimentation 
 
Crabs 
 
Dungeness Crab (Cancer magister) have cyclic 
populations north of central California, with peaks 
and troughs every 8-10 years.  Landings 1970-1996: 
minimum 5,000 t (1974) to maximum of 26,000 t 
(1977).  A collapse of central California stock 
occurred 1956-1970 with little recovery since.  
British Columbia landings are more consistent from 
year to year and do not display cyclic patterns 
observed in California to Washington fisheries.  
Alaskan landings are not in synchrony with 
contiguous 48 states of the U.S. or with Canada and 
landings may be market driven over some portions 
of the historical series.  Since patterns differ between 
zoogeographic provinces, comparative studies may 
provide insight into mechanisms of population 
control. 
 
Hypothesized environmental and ecological effects 
include elevated temperatures, nemertean worm 
predation on clutches, salmon predation on larvae, 
and various cyclic phenomena (cannibalism, 
upwelling, wind stress, geostrophic flow, fishing 
effort).  Habitat and fishing impacts that effect stocks 
include dredging to maintain navigation channels 
and for landfills, foreign species introductions (i.e. 
green crab, Carcinus maenus, competition with 
Dungeness), ghost pot fishing and fishery handling 
of sublegal males and females. Fishery selects the 
largest males and there is the possibility of females 
not getting bred.  
 
The list of factors used to explain changes in 
Dungeness crab populations is a fair sampling of 
factors that are thought to control crab populations in 
general.  Additionally, predation on adults, 
parasitism and epizootic diseases are known to be 
21
important in a number of king and Tanner crab 
populations.  
 
Four species of king crabs are subjects of major 
fisheries in the PICES region.  They differ in there 
life history characteristics and hence provide for 
comparative study of the effects of life history 
characteristics on population stability.  For example, 
red king crab (Paralithodes camtschaticus) are 
annual spawners with relatively high fecundity and 
small eggs, while blue King crab (P. platypus) are 
biennial spawners with lesser fecundity and 
somewhat larger eggs.  Both species inhabit the 
Pribilof Islands and other areas where their dynamics 
may be explored.  Throughout most of the Gulf of 
Alaska and eastern Aleutians, red king crab 
populations declined in phase from the late 1970s 
until fisheries were closed in 1983.  Populations 
have been at low levels and fisheries have remained 
closed since 1983.  Populations declines soon after 
the well recognized regime shift of the late 1970's 
and offer opportunities for retrospective study as 
well as comparative study with Asian populations 
that have differing patterns of abundance over time.  
Comparative study of Bristol Bay and west 
Kamchatkan populations may be particularly 
instructive. 
 
Tanner and snow crabs have broad distributions 
across several zoogeographic provinces and provide 
opportunities similar to those for king crabs. 
 
The gazami crab (Portunus trituburculatus) provides 
the largest crab fishery in the PICES area.  It is 
found in the Yellow and East China Sea in close 
association with peneid shrimps.  This part of the 
PICES area has a more tropical fauna than the 
remainder of the region and provides an opportunity 
to compare the dynamics of crustaceans from 
temperate or boreal areas with tropical forms.  The 
two faunal groups are separated only by the Korean 
Peninsula and hence provide a unique opportunity to 
study comparative effects of climatic variables. 
 
Shrimps 
 
Pandalid shrimps are protandric hermaphrodites and 
larger, older individuals that support fisheries are 
mostly mature females.  Two species dominated 
trawl fisheries.  Ocean pink shrimp, P. borealis, are 
distributed from northern California to British 
Columbia and northern pink shrimp, P. borealis, are 
distributed from British Columbia to the Bering sea.  
Alaskan trawl fisheries also included P. goniurus, P. 
hypsinotus, P. platyceros and Pandalopsis dispar. 
 
Pandalid shrimp populations and fisheries in Alaska 
collapsed in the late 1970's and most fisheries remain 
closed. Very small trawl fisheries for side striped 
shrimp, Pandalopsis dispar, and pot fisheries for 
spot prawns, P. platyceros, still persist in some areas.  
Spot prawns also are an economically important 
fishery in British Columbia.  The collapse of the 
pandalid shrimp complex in Alaska was concurrent 
with the late 1970's regime shift and a sharp increase 
in predator populations, particularly Pacific cod 
(Gadus macrocephalus) populations.   Landings of 
ocean pink shrimp also declined sharply in the late 
1970s and reached their lowest levels in 1983, but in 
contrast with northern pandalid shrimps, have 
increased since.  Landings of P. jordani have 
undergone two cycles between 1970 and 1995.  The 
recovery of P. jordani contrasts sharply with 
pandalids to the north and is a good topic for 
retrospective study.  Pandalid shrimps occur in the 
western Bering Sea and in the Sea of Japan as far 
west as Korea providing additional possibilities. 
 
Four species of penaeid shrimps are important in the 
Yellow Sea.  Peneid shrimps differ from pandalids in 
that the are not hermaphroditic, are semilparous 
rather than multiparous and are short lived.  Most 
species complete their life spans in less than two 
years and frequently within one year, while pandalid 
shrimps typically live for at least three years and 
frequently for 7-8 years in northern populations.   
 
There are two stocks of the fleshy prawn, P. 
chinensis, in the Yellow Sea.  The Pho Hai Bay 
stock in Chinese waters and the  Korean coastal 
group both hibernate in the southern Yellow Sea 
during February and March but return their coastal 
spawning grounds in spring.  The Korean coastal 
stock spawns April to June, and is fished from 
September through April.  This stock provided the 
bulk of the Korean shrimp catch during the years 
1987 to 1996.  Other important peneid species (P. 
japonicus, Metapenaeus joyneri, Trachypenaeus 
22
curvirostris) differ considerably in their life history 
patterns and offer opportunities for comparative 
studies of environmental effects on recruitment.  A 
joint Korean-Chinese study of stock recruitment 
relationships in the Yellow Sea is being planned. 
This study would likely be profitable and has the 
advantages of occurring in a well defined semi 
enclosed body of water, and with short lived species 
for which results of comparative studies or 
experiments become available quickly.   
 
Recommendations 
 
1. Crusteaceans exhibit intraspecific and 
interspecific differences in life history traits that 
may be related to the characteristics of regional 
habitats.  Compare reproductive, growth and 
mortality rates between region. 
 
2. Conduct inter-regional studies of the coupling 
between primary and secondary production and 
survival of meroplanktonic larval stages and 
benthic prey production for macrobenthic 
stages. 
3. In some regions, declines in crab or shrimp 
abundance coincide with outbursts of fish 
predators.  Conduct inter-regional comparisons 
of the level of predation mortality. 
 
4. Conduct retrospective studies of the response of 
Bristol Bay and west Kamchatkan populations 
of red King Crab to the late 1970s regime shift. 
 
5. Pandalid shimp population trends in the Gulf of 
Alaska and the U.S. west coast contrast sharply 
and represent good candidates for a retrospective 
studies of bio-physical impacts on population 
trends. 
 
6. There are two stocks of  prawn (P. chinensis) in 
the Yellow Sea.  The timing of spawning differs 
between these two populations providing an 
opportunity to evaluate spawner recruit 
relationships in a well defined semi-enclosed 
body of water. 
 
 
23
PELAGIC FISH BREAKOUT GROUP RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Participants:  Takashige Sugimoto (Chairman), 
Kenji Asano, Kimio Hanawa, Paul Harrison, Suam 
Kim, Jin-Yeong Kim, Michael M. Mullin 
(Rapporteur), Vladimir I. Radchenko, Tokio Wada. 
 
Introduction 
 
The discussion of this group focussed on the 
response of population dynamics of small pelagic 
fish to climate change.  After reviewing the present 
research activities on small pelagic fish in each 
PICES member countries, the group examined on 
potential comparative studies among areas and 
species.  The group also discussed on possible 
research collaboration between the member 
countries and new approaches we should conduct in 
the future studies, and provided following 
recommendations. 
 
Response to climate variability 
 
Based on discussions, it seems likely that species or 
groups of species of small pelagics in different 
regions may respond to climate change in different 
ways.  For example, it seems that the typical pattern 
in the Bering Sea/ Alaska Gyre is for the abundance 
of several species to change in parallel (i.e. several 
are abundant, or rare, in the same years).  In contrast, 
in the eastern and western boundary currents, 
alternation of abundance between species appears to 
be more typical.   
 
The International GLOBEC Small Pelagics and 
Carrying Capacity (SPACC) program has initiated 
efforts to collect and analyze common data sets 
concerning the responses of sardine and anchovy 
(particularly) to climate change or regime shifts. 
 
Recommendations 
 
1. The GLOBEC SPACC efforts focusing on 
sardine and anchovy should be extended to 
include other pelagic species. 
 
2. That comparable efforts be made to collect data 
on North Pacific herring and other Bering Sea / 
Alaska Gyre small pelagic species, together with 
the supporting environmental data. 
 
3. Step b) should be followed by a larger meeting 
to compare the Bering Sea / Alaska Gyre and 
"boundary current" patterns in interannual - 
interdecadal variability, with supporting 
environmental data.  This should however, be 
preceded by agreement on common (i.e. mutual) 
forms of data presentation and analysis. 
 
4. It should be noted that the common squid could 
be considered a small pelagic species, but one 
with a different biology than finfish. 
 
Importance of the East China Sea as a spawning 
ground 
 
We understand that assessment of spawning by 
small pelagic species in the East China Sea is not 
well monitored at present, and that this area is also 
an important spawning ground for the common 
squid. 
 
Therefore, we encourage the development of a 
China-Japan-Korea program of assessment of 
spawning (i.e. egg and larval surveys, plus 
environmental data) by small pelagics in the East 
China Sea and downstream regions of the currents 
for several years.  Survey design should be by 
mutual agreement, and sampling should include 
techniques to assess common squid. 
 
Needs of physiological studies 
 
Many investigations have now shown that 
information on rate of growth and physiological 
health ("condition factor") of larvae can add greatly 
to information on abundance and distribution in 
evaluating possible environmental causes of 
recruitment success or failure.  Yet, routine 
preservation of samples in formalin makes them 
useless for many kinds of analyses.  
Therefore, we recommend that egg and larval 
surveys by PICES nations include samples of larvae 
preserved in alcohol and others quick-frozen, in 
24
addition to formalin preservation.  This will permit 
later studies of growth, date of birth, lipid content, 
RNA/DNA, etc.  Such additional preservation need 
not be done at all stations sampled, but should at 
minimum be done at a subset of stations chosen to 
represent the complete range of environmental 
conditions at which larvae are encountered during a 
cruise.  Curation of such samples, and information 
on their availability to qualified scientists, should be 
considered part of each program's responsibilities. 
 
25
SALMON BREAKOUT SESSION 
 
Participants:  Richard J. Beamish, Michael L. 
Dahlberg, Kenneth L. Denman, Bruce Frost, Brent 
Hargreaves (Chairman), Paul H. LeBlond 
(Rapporteur), Kazuya Nagasawa, Makoto Terazaki 
 
Introduction 
 
The discussion in this group focused on the 
influence of climate change on salmon within coastal 
areas.  After reviewing the salmon research 
programs familiar to participants which are currently 
being conducted or planned by PICES member 
countries, the following hypotheses were identified 
as suitable for comparative studies and experiments.  
 
Hypotheses 
 
H1: The abundance of wild populations of pink, 
chum and sockeye salmon are not related to 
fisheries, as they are now managed. 
 
H2: During periods of declining marine survival, 
hatchery salmon (which usually are larger than 
wild salmon when they enter the ocean) will 
gradually out compete and displace wild stocks. 
 
H3: Wild salmon populations are significantly 
influenced, in terms of growth and survival, by 
climate variability. 
 
H4: Ocean survival rates of salmon populations are 
determined by feeding conditions which they 
encounter during the first few months after 
entering the ocean. 
 
Potential comparative studies 
 
The following topics were identified as important 
areas for comparative study and experiments on 
salmon: 
 
1. A particularly fruitful and appropriate area for 
comparative studies was thought to be the 
influence of ocean environment on feeding (and 
ultimately survival) conditions at the time of 
entry of salmon into the ocean and during the 
early stages of oceanic life.  
 
2. Standardization of sampling gear, data collection 
protocols, and data analyses and presentation.  If 
the results of the observation programs on 
salmon survival, growth and migration routes 
and migration timing in coastal areas are to be 
compared and contrasted, there needs to be some 
compatibility and consistency in the way in 
which samples and data are gathered, analyzed 
and interpreted.  It is recommended that the 
methods used to gather salmon, zooplankton and 
physical oceanographic data in coastal waters 
should be reviewed, discussed and agreed upon. 
 
3. Investigation and determination of the most 
effective and relevant scales of sampling.  
Under-sampling, in time or space, leads to 
aliasing and misinterpretation.  Studies should 
be conducted to determine sampling scales 
required to describe the abundances and 
distributions of salmon and their food sources in 
coastal areas.  It was noted, in particular, that 
sampling of juvenile salmon and associated 
zooplankton should be capable of documenting 
shifts in species and size composition which 
likely accompany both longer-term (e.g. 
decadal) and shorter-term (e.g. El Niño) changes 
in ocean climate. 
 
4. Further monitoring and process studies to 
determine the reasons for the contrast in high 
return rates of hatchery chum salmon on the 
Pacific Ocean side of Japan, compared with the 
low return rates of hatchery chum on the Japan 
(East) Sea side of northern Japan.  
Documentation of food and habitat conditions 
on both coasts of Japan may be useful in 
explaining the observed consistent difference in 
return rate.  Since salmon from both areas likely 
share the same rearing areas in the open Pacific, 
differences must arise in coastal areas, during 
the early sea stages. 
 
26
5. Identification of the factors in coastal waters that 
contribute to the typically high interannual 
variability of survival (return) rates of wild and 
hatchery salmon originating in the eastern North 
Pacific, with the relatively constant return rate 
(3-4%) of Japanese hatchery chum salmon 
originating in the western Pacific.  
 
6. Examination of the out-of-phase relationship 
between environmental variations and survival 
in Alaska and southern B.C., Washington and 
Oregon salmon stocks.  A recent hypothesis by 
Gargett (1997: Fish. Oceanogr. 6:2, 109-117) 
that phytoplankton, and hence subsequently the 
higher trophic levels, may react to interannual 
variations of atmospheric forcing through the 
position of an "optimal stability window" 
deserves further examination as an explanation 
of the out-of-phase relationship. 
 
7. Process studies, aimed at clarifying specific 
mechanisms relating to the interaction between 
climate or the biological environment and 
salmon growth and survival, may be instructive. 
 
8. Comparative studies of the early marine survival 
of salmon in near shore waters of northern 
Japan, Russia (Kamchatka), and North America. 
9. Comparative studies of the methods used to 
identify juvenile salmon stocks in coastal waters. 
 
10. Comparisons of the food compositions of each 
species of salmon at age in coastal waters. 
 
Some Problems and Opportunities 
 
1. "Sleeping samples and data" ... many samples 
(e.g. zooplankton) and data sets are currently in 
archives only and have not been either analyzed 
or published.  These data sources are potentially 
valuable, but necessary resources (especially 
manpower) in some cases are not available to 
make this information available.  
 
2. Standardization of methods for sampling and 
data analyses. 
 
3. Need to separate scientific questions and 
analyses by production type (wild versus 
hatchery) and species groupings (e.g. processes 
of feeding, survival, etc. are likely different for 
chinook and coho, chum, sockeye and pink 
salmon). 
 
27
FORCING BREAKOUT SESSION 
 
Chairman:  Paul H. LeBlond;  Rapporteur:  Steve Hare 
 
The discussion focussed on sampling of the 
environmental variables seen as important forcing 
components of the ecosystem. The following points 
were identified as being relevant and of interest to 
REX programs. 
 
Sampling issues 
 
1.1 As a general principle, sampling resolution in 
space and time must be adapted to the 
phenomena investigated.  Sampling which is too 
coarse misses important phenomena and leads to 
misinterpretation;  too frequent sampling is a 
waste of effort. 
 
1.2 Many phenomena occur at different times from 
year to year;  a sampling program at fixed 
calendar dates may miss the phenomena of 
interest.  In such cases, intensive sampling 
should bracket the range of variability in timing 
or be adapted to the beginning of the 
phenomenon of interest by recognizing early 
signals - spawning, for example, or start of 
migration - which then trigger the sampling 
program. 
 
1.3. Plankton distributions are heterogeneous in 
space;  concentrations are found in physically 
active areas - fronts, upwelling zones - sampling 
protocols should recognize this fact. 
 
Data requirements. 
 
2.1 The lack of information on ocean bottom 
properties (e.g. temperature and salinity) makes 
it difficult to study demersal creatures. 
 
2.2 Advection is extremely important at all trophic 
levels.  There is a need for better information on 
ocean currents.  TOPEX/POSEIDON satellite 
altimetry, now available over  the internet, may 
help in this respect. 
 
 
Processes 
 
3.1. On-off shelf.  Physical phenomena relevant in 
nutrient fluxes and concentrating organisms 
differ on and off shelf.  Need to recognize these 
differences in experimental design and 
sampling. 
 
3.2 Shelf break phenomena (internal wave 
generation, upwelling, canyon flows) are locally 
important and must be taken into account. 
 
3.3 Land-based processes may be quite relevant and 
cause regional regime shifts - the Three Gorges 
Dam was mentioned as a potential example of a 
change in runoff which may affect ocean 
ecosystem near the mouth of the Yellow River. 
 
3.4 Clarification required on relative roles of 
processes which determine upward nutrient flux 
in the coastal and deep ocean. 
 
Long-term variability 
 
Regime shifts 
 
There remains some concern that changes labeled 
"regime shifts" may be artifact of data interpretation 
rather than an actual qualitative changes in ocean 
properties and circulation.  There is a need to 
document further the details of the changes between 
regimes.  In particular, how do regime shifts differ in 
coastal areas on both sides of the Pacific? 
 
- Do strong El Niños, such as the current one, 
bring on regime shifts? 
 
- Since regime shifts are long period phenomena, 
recognized a posteriori within larger annual and 
shorter-period noise, there is little hope of 
recognizing them as they happen unless some 
rapid step-like change can be recognized.  It was 
suggested that some biological feature might be 
more apt for this than some physical property. 
28
Twenty years ago, El Niño was unpredictable.  
Now we have six-month forecasts.  Will this 
also happen to the lower frequency variability 
which we now call regime shifts? 
Anthropogenic changes : 
 
Are anthorpogenic changes confounded with natural 
environmental changes?  How do we separate them? 
 
29
LOWER TROPHIC LEVEL BREAKOUT SESSION 
 
Participants:  Tsutomu Ikeda (Chairman), Paul 
Harrison, David Welch, Bruce Frost, Vladimir I. 
Radchenko, David L. Mackas, Xian-Shi Jin, 
Muneharu Tokimura, Naonobu Shiga, Atsushi 
Tsuda, Toshiro Saino, Vera Alexander, Michael M. 
Mullin. 
 
Review of key scientific questions (inventory of 
long-term data) 
 
Presently available information about long-term 
variation of phytoplankton and zooplankton biomass 
in response to climate change was largely from 
subarctic waters.  Russia scientists have been 
collecting data in the Okhotosk Sea, Japan Sea, 
eastern-western Bering Sea, but these data have not 
been published in English.  Oshoro Maru cruises 
have sampled both the oceanic subarctic Pacific and 
coastal waters of Hokkaido since the late 1950s.  
Some limited time-series data are available from the 
Yellow Sea, Bohai Sea and East China Sea. 
 
For zooplankton, long-term variation data of species 
level, not biomass, are available from the following 
locations:  Station P (intermittent since 1970), 
northern Gulf of Alaska, off California (portions of 
CalCOFI time series), and both western and eastern 
Bering Sea.  The Oshoro Maru zooplankton samples 
are in the process of being analyzed for species 
composition. 
 
Data on phytoplankton species composition have 
been collected in the following locations:  off 
Vancouver Island since the late 1970s, in parts of the 
California Current since 1949, and in the eastern and 
western Bering Sea in the 1990s. 
 
It was suggested that size-fractionation may be an 
alternative method for species composition analysis.  
 
Long-term variation data on microzooplankton have 
been collected at Station P, Line P off Canada and in 
the Gulf of Alaska (primarily since early 1990). 
 
Hypotheses to be tested 
 
1. Bottom-up/top-down control and its temporal 
scales (bottom-up control may be more 
influential than top-down control on the decadal 
time scale).   
 
2. If bottom-up control is important, the dominant 
mechanism is: 
a) co-variation of total annual productivity of 
both prey and predator, or 
b) variation in seasonal match-mis-match of 
productivity / occurrence of predator and 
prey. 
 
Comparative approach 
 
1. Area: Eastern vs. Western Bering Sea 
 Eastern vs. Western Gyre of subarctic 
 
2.  Species/Nutrients: 
 Micronutrients (iron) 
 Euphausia pacifica 
Phytoplankton, zooplankton community 
structure 
 Life history pattern 
 Predatory zooplankton (Chaetognaths) 
Coastal calanoid copepods in continental 
margins 
Neocalanus spp. in oceanic gyres and deep 
coastal margins. 
 
Research barriers 
 
Sampling methodology: 
 
"Method inter-calibration" may be more feasible that 
"method standardization" for several reasons: 
 
• maintaining continuity of local time series, 
• differing requirements of different regions e.g. 
greenwater vs. blue water limits on mesh size, 
• cost and vessel restrictions on changing gear 
type, 
• differing requirements for different taxa.  It will 
probably be necessary to use multiple gears to 
gain unbiased results over the full zooplankton 
size and species range. 
30
ECOSYSTEM RESPONSE BREAKOUT SESSION 
 
Participants:  Patricia Livingston (Chairman), James 
Cowen, Kenneth L. Denman, Douglas E. Hay, Anne 
B. Hollowed, Shin-ichi Ito, Ling Tong, Allen 
Macklin, Sandy McFarlane, Kazuya Nagasawa, 
Vadim V. Navrotsky, Ian Perry, Qi-Sheng Tang, 
Tokio Wada, Warren S. Wooster. 
 
PICES CCCC key question 
 
How are subarctic Pacific ecosystems structured?  
Do higher trophic levels respond to climate 
variability solely as a consequence of bottom up 
forcing?  Are there significant intra-trophic level and 
top down effects on lower trophic level production 
and on energy transfer efficiencies? 
 
Related key questions 
 
1. What in an ecosystem can change in response to 
temperature?   
 
2. How do you distinguish between fishing effects 
vs. climate effects? 
 
3. If higher trophic levels change, this provides 
evidence that the ecosystem has shifted – but 
what provides an indicator of a shift in progress? 
 
4. How long does it take for a shift to occur? 
 
5. Were there indicators of the shift prior to the 
final ecosystem pattern? 
 
6. Can we forecast where the ecosystem is going? 
If so, what are the leading indicators of change? 
 
7. Have there been changes in total productivity of 
the system (i.e. a shift in the carrying capacity)? 
 
8. If ecosystems are in a constant state of flux, how 
do we distinguish between normal fluctuations 
around one equilibrium state and a shift to a new 
equilibrium state? 
 
9. What is the spatial and temporal scale of 
physical forcing (e.g. fronts, wind fields, etc 
occur on many spatial scales)? 
 
10. What are the food web flows between boxes?  
What does the trophic structure look like? 
 
11. Are all North Pacific ecosystems equally 
sensitive to climate change? 
 
Clearly the underlying mechanisms are critical to our 
ability to understand and to forecast.  We need to 
know are there changes in species dominance (the 
structure of the ecosystem), plus changes in systems 
productivity - are there large fluctuations in either or 
both?  This type of study must also incorporate 
studies of important processes at appropriate spatial 
and temporal scales of change. 
 
Ecosystem hypotheses: 
 
H1: Climate change introduces instability into the 
ecosystem Corollary:  "Ecosystem changes in 
response to climate change are likely to be more 
dramatic at the boundaries of the system. 
 
H2: Total system biomass remains constant through 
regime shifts. 
 
H3: Changes in upper trophic level species 
dominance are due to changes in the prey base. 
 
H4: Changes in upper trophic level species 
dominance are due to changes in spawning 
range. 
 
H5: Changes in upper trophic level species 
dominance are due to fishing pressure. 
 
H6: Ecosystems in the North Pacific are similar in 
structure and respond similarly to climate 
change. 
 
 
 
 
31
Data requirements 
 
The ecosystem response could be monitored using 
the following indices: 
  
- Species composition 
- Size structure 
- Food web structures and productivity at different 
trophic levels 
- Number of links in food webs 
- Dominant species 
- Fish catch composition and amount 
- Change in distribution and abundance of higher 
trophic levels 
 
Data requirements to address ecosystem questions: 
 
a)  Forcing: 
• Measurements of physical forcing at the 
appropriate spatial and temporal scales 
b) Lower trophic level response:  
• Phytoplankton abundance, production and 
species composition 
• Planktivore (e.g. zooplankton) abundance, 
production, consumption rates, diet, species 
composition 
c) Higher trophic level response:  
• Upper trophic level species abundance, 
production, consumption rates, diet, species 
composition 
 
Recommended comparative studies 
 
1.  Compare the role of walleye pollock in the 
Japan Sea and Bering Sea ecosystem.  
Contrasting the role of walleye pollock in these 
two regimes could reveal important differences 
because the trophic linkages and production 
systems are likely to be different. 
 
2.  Study shifts in species dominance in different 
regions (e.g. competition between pollock and 
other species or between sardine and anchovy). 
 
3.  Compare factors influencing the distribution and 
survival of anadromous species because the 
spatial extent of the response suggests basin 
forcing. 
 
4.  Compare the timing and spatial extent of 
changes in spawning distributions, and habitat 
boundaries. 
 
5.  Compare or develop conceptual models that 
have been developed by different groups for the 
same (or overlapping) regions.  One way to 
accomplish this goal would be to attempt to 
construct ECOPATH/ECOSIM models for each 
of the 10 regions.  Primary and secondary 
production was not collected before the regime 
shift in many regions.  However, the amount of 
primary and secondary production needed to 
balance the system could be estimated if 
information on upper trophic level species 
before and after a regime shift was available. 
 
6.  Develop ecosystem level models - coupled 
models looking at bottom-up and top-down 
processes.  Fully coupled models linked to upper 
trophic level species is a goal but may not be a 
fully achievable one in the near future. 
 
7.  Compare systems with very different physical 
forcings and ask what level do physical forcings 
affect the outcome of ecosystem structure? 
 
8.  Coordinate process oriented research ongoing in 
PICES member nations.  This may be an area 
that could be first initiated with a symposium on 
the research being performed by the GLOBEC 
and GLOBEC-like programs of the North 
Pacific. 
 
32
SUMMARY OF ONGOING RESEARCH PROGRAMS BY REGION 
 
General Environmental Data Sets:  U.S.A. 
 
Program: Gulf of Alaska Temperature/Salinity Time 
Series 
Agency: University of Alaska 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing 
Key Research Activities:  Observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  1970 
Contact:  Institute of Marine Science 
University of Alaka 
Fairbanks AK 99775-7220 
U.S.A 
http://www.ims.alaska.edu:8000/gak1/ 
 
Program:  National Snow and Ice Data Center 
Agency:  NSF Global Change Program 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing  
Key Research Activities:  Observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  on-going 
http://www-nsidc.colorado.edu/nsidc/ services.html 
 
Program:  Coastwatch Satellite Ocean Remote 
Sensing, California Current 
Agency:  National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL 
Key Research Activities:  Observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start Time:  On-going 
Contact:  Operations Manager 
Coastwatch West Coast Regional Node  
Southwest Fisheries Science Center 
P.O. Box 271 
La Jolla, CA 92038 
U.S.A. 
http://psbsgi1.nesdis.noaa.gov:8080/hsors.htm 
 
Program:  Comprehensive Ocean Atmosphere Data 
Set 
Agency:  National Center for Atmospheric Research 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing 
Key Research Activities:  Observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start Time:  1946 - present 
Contact:  Steve Worley 
Data Support Section 
National Center for Atmospheric Research 
P.O. Box 3000 
Boulder, CO 80307 
U.S.A. 
303-497-1248 
http://www.cdc.noaa.gov/~coads/ 
 
Program:  Coastwatch Satellite Ocean Remote 
Sensing, Alaska 
Agency:  National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL 
Key Research Activities:  Observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start Time:  On-going 
Contact:  Robert Robinson 
Coastwatch Manager 
National Weather Service- Alaska Region  
222 W. 7th Ave. #23 Rm. 517 
Anchorage, AK 99513-7575  
U.S.A. 
http://psbsgi1.nesdis.noaa.gov:8080/hsors.htm 
 
Caifornia Current System South:  U.S.A. 
 
Program:  Small Pelagic Fishes and Climate Change 
(SPACC) 
Agency:  International GLOBEC  
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL, HTL  
Ecosystem interactions 
Key Research Activities:  Retrospective, modeling, 
Process, Observation studies 
Funding:Some  proposed,  some  funded 
Start Time: on-going 
Contact:  John R. Hunter 
Southwest Fisheries Science Center 
PO Box 271, La Jolla, California 92038 
U.S.A. 
e-mail:  john.hunter@noaa.gov 
 
Program:  Pacific Fisheries Environmental Group 
(PFEG), Southwest Fisheries Science Center 
(SWFSC) 
Agency: National Marine Fisheries Service, NOAA 
33
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, HTL 
Research Activities:  Retrospective, modeling 
Funding:  Funded 
Start Time:  on-going 
Contact:  Geroge Boehlert 
Southwest Fisheries Science Center 
Pacific Fisheries Environmental Group 
P.O. Box 831 
Montery, CA 93942 
U.S.A. 
http://swfsc.ucsd.edu/swfscpg.html 
 
Program:  Southwest Fisheries Science Center 
(SWFSC) 
Agency: National Marine Fisheries Service, NOAA 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, HTL, Ecosystem 
interactions 
Research Activities:  Retrospective, modeling, 
process, observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start Time:  on-going 
Contact:  Michael Tillman 
Southwest Fisheries Science Center 
P.O. Box 271 
La Jolla, CA 92038 
U.S.A. 
http://swfsc.ucsd.edu/ 
 
Program:  Southwest Fisheries Science Center 
(SWFSC), Tiburon Laboratory 
Agency: National Marine Fisheries Service, NOAA 
Central Scientific Issues:  HTL 
Research Activities:  Retrospective, modeling, 
process, observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start Time:  on-going 
Contact:  Alce MacCall 
Southwest Fisheries Science Center 
3150 Paradise Drive 
Tiburon, CA 94920 
U.S.A. 
http://swfsc.ucsd.edu/swfsctb.html 
 
Program:  California Cooperative Oceanic and 
Fisheries Investigations (CalCOFI) 
Agency:  Shared by three institutions: Scripps 
Institution of Oceanography, California 
Department of Fish and Game, National Marine 
Fisheries Service 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL 
Research Activities:  Retrospective, modeling, 
process, observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start Time:  on-going 
Contact:  Tom Hayward or Michael Mullin 
Scripps Institution of Oceanography 
Marine Life Research Group 
La Jolla, CA 92093-0227 
U.S.A. 
e-mail:  mmullin@coast.ucsd.edu 
 
Program:  University of Santa Barbara Marine 
Science Institute 
Agency:  University of California Santa Barbara 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL 
Research Activities:  Retrospective, modeling, 
process, observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start Time:  on-going 
Contact:  Steven Gaines 
University of California, Santa Barbara 
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-6150 
U.S.A. 
E-mail:  gaines@lifesci.ucsb.edu 
 
Program:  Point Reyes Bird Observatory 
Central Scientific Issues:  HTL 
Research Activities: Retrospective, modeling, 
process, observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start Time:  on-going 
Contact:   
4990 Shoreline Highway 
Stinson Beach, CA 94970 
U.S.A. 
e-mail:  prbo@prbo.org 
http://www.igc.apc.org/prbo/ 
 
Program:  California Department of Fish and Game 
Central Scientific Issues:  HTL 
Research Activities:  Retrospective, modeling, 
process, observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start Time:  On-going 
Contact:  Doyle Hanan 
8604 La Jolla Shores Drive 
La Jolla, CA 92037-1508  
U.S.A. 
34
e-mail: dhanan@ucsd.edu 
http://www.dfg.ca.gov/dfghome.html 
 
Program:  Monterey Bay Aquarium Research 
Institute (MBARI) 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL 
Research Activities:  Process, observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  on-going 
Contact:  MBARI 
P.O. Box 628, 
Moss Landing, CA 95039-0628 
http://www.monterey.edu/history/mabari.html 
 
California Current North:  U.S.A. 
 
Program:  CoOP Project 
Agency:  National Science Foundation, NSF 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL 
Key Research Activities:  Modeling, observation 
studies, process studies, retrospective studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  On-going 
Contact:  Michael R. Roman  
Horn Point Environmental Laboratory 
2020 Horn Point Road 
Cambridge, MD 21613 
U.S.A. 
http://www.hpl.umces.edu/coop/index.htm 
 
Program:  Northwest Fisheries Science Center 
(NWFSC) 
Agency: National Marine Fisheries Service, NOAA 
Central Scientific Issues:  HTL 
Key Research Activities:  Modeling, observation 
studies, process studies, retrospective studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  On-going 
Contact:  Usha Varanasi, Director 
Northwest Fisheries Science Center 
2725 Montlake Blvd.  
Seattle, WA 98112-2097 
U.S.A. 
http://research.nwfsc.noaa.gov 
 
Program:  Alaska Fisheries Science Center (AFSC) 
Agency:  ational Marine Fisheries Service, NOAA 
Central Scientific Issues:  HTL 
Key Research Activities:  Modeling, observation 
studies, process studies, retrospective studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  On-going 
Contact:  James Balsiger, Director 
Alaska Fisheries Science Center 
7600 Sand Point Way NE  
Seattle, WA 98115 
U.S.A. 
http:/www.wrc.noaa.gov/afsc/home.html 
 
Program:  Pacific Northwest Coastal Ecosystem 
Regional Study (PNCERS) 
Agency:  Coastal Ocean Program, NOAA 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL, HTL, 
ecosystem interactions 
Research Activities:  Retrospective, modeling, 
process studies, observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start Time:  1997 
Contact:  Gregory McMurray 
Department of Environmental Quality 
811 SW 6th Ave 
Portland, OR 97204 
U.S.A. 
e-mail:  gregory.mcmurray@state.or.us 
http://seagrant.orst.edu/~pncers 
 
Program:  U.S. GLOBEC 
Agency:  U.S. GLOBEC Steering Committee - 
funding by: National Science Foundation/ 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL, HTL, 
Ecosystem interacitions 
Key Research Activities:  Retrospective, modeling, 
Process, Observation studies 
Funding:  Funded for retrospective studies, modeling 
and observation studies. 
Start Time:  1997 
Contact:  Michael Fogarty 
Chairman, U.S. GLOBEC Scientific Steering 
Committee 
University of Maryland 
Center for Environmental Science 
Chesapeake Biological Laboratory 
Solomons, MD, 20688-0038 
U.S.A. 
http://www.usglobec.berkeley.edu/usglobec/ 
 
35
Program:  International North Pacific Halibut 
Commission (INPHC) 
Central Scientific Issues:  HTL 
Key Research Activities:  Modeling, observation 
studies, retrospective studies, process studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  On-going 
Contact:  Bruce Leaman, Director 
International Pacific Halibut Commission 
P.O. Box 95009  
Seattle, WA 98145 
U.S.A. 
http://www.iphc.washington.edu:80/ 
 
Program:  Integrated Assessment of Climate Change, 
Climate Change Impacts, and Policy Response 
Strategies of the Pacific Northwest 
Agency:  NOAA Office of Global Programs 
Central Scientific Issues:  forcing, HTL, ecosystem 
studies 
Key Research Activities:  retrospective, modeling 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  1995 
Contact:  Nate Mantua 
Box 354235 
University of Washington 
Seattle, WA 98195 
e-mail: mantua@atmos.washington.edu 
http://www.atmos.washington.edu/~mantua/imp
acts/project.html 
 
California Current North:  Canada 
 
Program:  GLOBEC Canada 
Agency:  National Science and Engineering 
Research Council (NSERC) and Department of 
Fisheries and Oceans (DFO) 
Central Scientific Issues:  Response of marine 
ecosystems to ocean climate variability 
Funding:   funded 
Start time:  July 1996 
Contact:  David Mackas 
Institute of Ocean Sciences 
Sidney, British Columbia 
Canada 
MackasD@dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
 
 
Southeast, Central Alaska: 
 
Program:  Alaska Fisheries Science Center (AFSC) 
Agency: National Marine Fisheries Service, NOAA 
Central Scientific Issues:  HTL 
Key Research Activities:  Modeling, observation 
studies, retrospective studies, process studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  On-going 
Contact:  James Balsiger, Director 
Alaska Fisheries Science Center 
7600 Sand Point Way NE  
Seattle, WA 98115 
U.S.A. 
http:/www.wrc.noaa.gov/afsc/home.html 
 
Program:  Alaska Fisheries Science Center (AFSC), 
Ocean Carrying Capacity (OCC) 
Agency:  Auke Bay laboratory, National Marine 
Fisheries Service, NOAA 
Central Scientific Issues:  HTL, ecosystem 
interactions 
Key Research Activities:  Modeling, observation 
studies, process studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  1995 
Contact:  Michacel Dahlberg, Laboratory Director 
Auke Bay Laboratory 
11305 Glaicer Highway 
Juneau, AK 99801-8626 
U.S.A. 
e-mail:  mike_dahlberg@ccgate.ssp.nmfs.gov 
 
Program:  U.S. GLOBEC 
Agency:  U.S. GLOBEC Steering Committee - 
funding by: National Science Foundation/ 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL, HTL, 
Ecosystem interactions 
Key Research Activities:  Retrospective, modeling, 
Process, Observation studies 
Funding:  Funded for retrospective studies, modeling 
and observation studies. 
Start Time:  1997 
Contact:  Michael Fogarty 
Chairman, U.S. GLOBEC Scientific Steering 
Committee 
University of Maryland 
Center for Environmental Science 
36
Chesapeake Biological Laboratory 
Solomons, MD, 20688-0038 
U.S.A. 
http://www.usglobec.berkeley.edu/usglobec/ 
 
Program:  International Pacific Halibut Commission 
(IPHC) 
Central Scientific Issues:  HTL 
Key Research Activities:  Modeling, observation 
studies, process studies, retrospective studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  On-going 
Contact:  Donald McCaughran, Director 
International North Pacific Halibut Commission 
P.O. Box 95009  
Seattle, WA 98145 
U.S.A. 
http://www.iphc.washington.edu:80/ 
 
Program:  Alaska Department of Fish and Game 
(ADFG) 
Central Scientific Issues:  HTL 
Key Research Activities:  Modeling, observation 
studies, process studies, retrospective studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  On-going 
Contact:  Frank Rue, Commissioner 
1255 West 8th St.  
Juneau, AK 99802-5526 
U.S.A. 
http://www.state.ak.us/local/akpages/FISH.GA
ME/adfghome.html 
 
Program:  Sound Ecosystem Assessment (SEA) 
Agency:  Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Trustees 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL, HTL, 
ecosystem interactions 
Key Research Activities:  Modeling, process studies 
Funded:  funded 
Start time:  1994 - 1998 
Contact:  Ted Cooney, Chief Scientist 
Institute of Marine Sciences 
University of Alaska, Fairbanks 
Fairbanks, AK 99775-1080 
U.S.A. 
e-mail:  cooney@murre.ims.alaska.edu 
http://www.pwssc.gen.ak.us/sea/sea.html 
 
Program:  Apex Predator Ecosystem Response 
(APEX) 
Agency:  Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Trustees 
Central Scientific Issues:  HTL, ecosystem 
interactions 
Key Research Activities:  Modeling, process studies 
Funded:  funded 
Start time:  1994  
Contact:  David Duffy 
Department ofBiology 
University of Alaska, Anchorage 
707 A Street 
Anchorage, AK 99501 
U.S.A. 
 
Program:  National Biological Service (NBS) 
Agency:  United States Department of Interior 
Central Scientific Issues:  Ecosystem interactions 
Key Research Activities:  Observational studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  On-going 
Contact:  Scott Hatch 
Alaska Fish and Wildlife Research Center 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Center 
1011 E. Tudor Road 
Anchorage, AK 99503 
U.S.A. 
 
Program:  Prince William Sound Science Center 
(PWSSC) 
Agency:  Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Trustees 
Central Scientific Issues:  HTL, Ecosystem 
interactions 
Key Research Activities:  Modeling, process studies, 
observational studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  On-going 
Contact:  Gary Thomas 
Prince William Sound Science Center 
P. O. Box 705 
Cordova, AK 99574 
U.S.A. 
http://www.pwssc.gen.ak.us/pwssc/pwssc.html 
 
Eastern Bering Sea:  U.S.A. 
 
Program:  Alaska Fisheries Science Center (AFSC) 
Agency:  ational Marine Fisheries Service, NOAA 
Central Scientific Issues:  HTL 
Key Research Activities:  Modeling, observation 
studies, retrospective studies, process studies 
Funding:  Funded 
37
Start time:  On-going 
Contact:  James Balsiger, Director 
Alaska Fisheries Science Center 
7600 Sand Point Way NE  
Seattle, WA 98115 
U.S.A. 
http:/www.wrc.noaa.gov/afsc/home.html 
 
Program:  Southeast Bering Sea Carrying Capacity 
(SEBSCC) 
Agency:  Coastal Ocean Program, NOAA 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL, HTL, 
ecosystem interactions 
Key Research Activities:  Modeling, observation 
studies, retrospective studies, process studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  1996 
Contact:  James Overland 
Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory 
7600 Sand Point Way NE  
Seattle, WA 98115 
U.S.A. 
http:/www.pmel.noaa.gov/sebscc/home.html 
 
Program:  International North Pacific Halibut 
Commission (INPHC) 
Central Scientific Issues:  HTL 
Key Research Activities:  Modeling, observation 
studies, process studies, retrospective studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  On-going 
Contact:  Bruce Leaman, Director 
International North Pacific Halibut Commission 
P.O. Box 95009  
Seattle, WA 98145 
U.S.A. 
http://www.iphc.washington.edu:80/ 
 
Program:  Alaska Department of Fish and Game 
(ADFG) 
Central Scientific Issues:  HTL 
Key Research Activities:  Modeling, observation 
studies, process studies, retrospective studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  On-going 
Contact:  Frank Rue, Commissioner 
1255 West 8th St.  
Juneau, AK 99802-5526 
U.S.A. 
http://www.state.ak.us/local/akpages/FISH.GA
ME/adfghome.html 
 
Program:  Collaborative Study of Prolonged 
Production and Trophic Level Transfer to 
Predators: Processes at the Inner Front of the 
Southeastern Bering Sea 
Agency:  National Science Foundation (NSF) 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL, HTL 
Key Research Activities:  Process studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  1997 - 2000 
Contact:  George Hunt 
University of California Irvine 
Irvine, California 
U.S.A. 
 
Program:  National Biological Service (NBS) 
Agency:  United States Department of Interior 
Central Scientific Issues:  Ecosystem interactions 
Key Research Activities:  Observational studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  On-going 
Contact:  Scott Hatch 
Alaska Fish and Wildlife Research Center 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Center 
1011 E. Tudor Road 
Anchorage, AK 99503 
U.S.A. 
 
Program:  National Marine Mammal Laboratory 
(NMML) 
Agency:  AFSC, NMFS, NOAA 
Central Scientific Issues:  HTL, ecosystem 
interactions 
Key Research Activities:  Modeling, observation 
studies, retrospective studies, process studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  on-going 
Contact:  Howard Braham 
Alaska Fisheries Science Center 
7600 Sand Point Way NE  
Seattle, WA 98115 
U.S.A. 
http:/www.wrc.noaa.gov/afsc/home.html 
 
Project Name:  Bering Sea Impacts Study (BESIS) 
Funding Agency:  planning effort funded by IASC, 
funding requested from NSF (US), Russian 
Foundation for Basic Research (Russian 
participation), Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
38
and  agencies in Japan and elsewhere 
International Arctic Science Committee, IASC  
(main sponsor), plus other expected contributors 
(see Funding Status below) 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL, HTL, 
ecosystem interactions 
Key Research Activities:  Modeling, observation 
studies, retrospective studies, process studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  1997 
Contact:  Prof. Gunter Weller 
BESIS Project Office 
University of Alaska Fairbanks,  
Fairbanks AK  99775,  
U.S.A. 
Tel. 907 474 7371;  Fax. 907 474-7290 
e-mail:  gunter@gi.alaska.edu 
 
Project Name:  Arctic Research Initiative 
Funding Agency:  planning effort funded by IASC, 
funding requested from NSF (US), Russian 
Foundation for Basic Research (Russian 
participation), Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
and agencies in Japan and elsewhere 
International Arctic Science Committee, IASC  
(main sponsor), plus other expected contributors 
(see Funding Status below) 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL, HTL, 
ecosystem interactions 
Key Research Activities:  Modeling, observation 
studies, retrospective studies, process studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  1997 
Contact: Gunter Weller 
 BESIS Project Office 
University of Alaska Fairbanks 
Fairbanks, AK  99775,  
U.S.A. 
Tel. 907 474 7371;  Fax. 907 474-7290 
e-mail:  gunter@gi.alaska.edu 
 
 
 
Western Bering Sea / Sea Okhotsk:  Russia 
 
Program:  FES-LIRES (Ecosystem Study of Far-
Eastern Seas Living Resources) 
Agency:  TINRO-Center (Pacific Scientific 
Research Fisheries Center) 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL 
(zooplankton mainly), HTL, Ecosystem 
interactions 
Key Research Activities:  Retrospective, Modeling, 
Observation Study (Monitoring) 
Funding:  Funded 
Start Time:  1980 
Contact:  V.P. Shuntov, Principal Scientist of 
TINRO-Center 
V.V. Lapko, Head of Laboratory of Applied 
Biocenology  
TINRO-Center,  
4 Shevchenko Alley,  
Vladivostok 690600,  
Russia. 
e-mail:  root@tinro.marine.su 
 
Program:  Pacific Salmon, 1997-2000 (Far-eastern 
regional program on Pacific salmon marine life 
study, 1997-2000) 
Agency: TINRO-Center (Pacific Scientific Research 
Fisheries Center) 
Central Scientific issues:  LTL (salmon food 
supply), HTL (salmon and ecologically related 
species) 
Key Research Activities:  Retrospective, Modeling, 
Observation Study (Monitoring) 
Funding:  Funded 
Start Time:  1997 
Contact:  Vladimir I. Radchenko, Deputy Director 
Viktor G. Markovtsev, Head of International 
Department 
TINRO-Center,  
4 Shevchenko Alley,  
Vladivostok 690600,  
Russia. 
e-mail: root@tinro.marine.su 
 
Program:  STFF (Short-Term Fisheries Forecasting) 
Agency:  TINRO-Center (Pacific Scientific 
Research Fisheries Center) 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL, HTL 
Key Research Activities:  Retrospective, Modeling, 
Process Studies 
Funding:  Terminated 
Start Time:  1996 
Contact:  Yury I. Zuenko, Section Head, Japan Sea 
Oceanography  
TINRO-Center,  
4 Shevchenko Alley,  
39
Vladivostok 690600,  
Russia. 
e-mail: root@tinro.marine.su 
 
Oyashio Current System and Western Subarctic 
Gyre:  Japan 
 
Program:  Hokkaido National Fisheries Research 
Insititute 
Agency:  Fisheries Agency, MAFF 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL, HTL, 
Ecosystem interactions 
Key Research Activities:  Retrospective, modeling, 
process, observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  on-going 
Contact:  Takashi Sasaki, Director General 
Hokkaido National Fisheries Research Institute 
116 Katsurakoi,  
Kushiro, Hokkaido 085,  
Japan. 
http://ss.hnf.affrc.go.jp/ 
 
Program:  HUBEC 
Agency:  Faculty of Fisheries, Hokkaido University 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL, HTL, 
Ecosystem interactions 
Key Research Activities:  Retrospective, modeling, 
process, observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  on-going 
Contact:  Yasunori Sakurai 
Laboratory of Marine Ecology 
Dept. of Marine Biological Sciences 
Hokkaido University 
3-1-1, Minatocho,  
Hakodate 041,  
Japan. 
e-mail:  sakurai@pop.fish.hokudai.ac.jp 
 
 
Kuroshio-Oyashio Transition Area:  Japan 
 
Program:  Tohoku National Fisheries Research 
Insititute 
Agency:  Fisheries Agency, MAFF 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL, HTL, 
Ecosystem interactions 
Key Research Activities:  Retrospective, modeling, 
process, observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  on-going 
Contact:  Yasuaki Nakamura, Director General 
3-27-5, Shinhamacho,  
Shiogama 985,  
Japan. 
http://ss.myg.affrc.go.jp/ 
 
Program:  Comprehensive study of the variation of 
the oceanic environment and fish populations in 
the north-western Pacific (VENFISH) 
Agency: Tohoku National Fisheries Research 
Insititute, Fisheries Agency, MAFF 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL, HTL, 
Ecosystem interactions on walleye pollock and 
Pacific saury 
Key Research Activities:  Retrospective, modeling, 
process, observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  1997 
Contact:  Kuniaki Okuda 
3-27-5, Shinhamacho,  
Shiogama 985,  
Japan. 
http://ss.myg.affrc.go.jp/ 
 
Kuroshio Current System:  Japan 
 
Program:  National Research Insititute of Fisheries 
Science 
Agency:  Fisheries Agency, MAFF 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL, HTL, 
Ecosystem interactions 
Key Research Activities:  Retrospective, modeling, 
process, observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  on-going 
Contact:  Yoshiaki Sanbonsuga, Director General 
2-12-4, Fukuura,  
Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama 236,  
Japan. 
http://ss.nrifs.affrc.go.jp/ 
 
Program:  BIOCOSMOS 
Agency:  Fisheries Agency, MAFF 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL, HTL, 
Ecosystem interactions on Japanese sardine 
Key Research Activities:  Retrospective, modeling, 
process, observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
40
Start time:  1987 
Contact:  Yoshioki Oozeki 
2-12-4, Fukuura,  
Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama 236,  
Japan. 
e-mail:  Oozeki@ss.nrifs.affrc.go.jp 
 
East China Sea:  Japan 
 
Program:  Seikai National Fisheries Research 
Insititute 
Agency:  Fisheries Agency, MAFF 
Central Scientific Issues: Forcing, LTL, HTL, 
Ecosystem interactions 
Key Research Activities:  Retrospective, modeling, 
process, observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  on-going 
Contact:  Hiroshi Hatanaka, Director General 
49, Kokubucho,  
Nagasaki 850,  
Japan. 
http://www.snf.affrc.go.jp/ 
 
Japan Sea/East Sea:  Japan 
 
Program:  Japan Sea National Fisheries Research 
Insititute 
Agency:  Fisheries Agency, MAFF 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL, HTL, 
Ecosystem interactions 
Key Research Activities:  Retrospective, modeling, 
process, observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start time:  on-going 
Contact:  Minoru Fujimoto, Director General 
1-5939-22, Suidoucho,  
Niigata 951,  
Japan. 
http://ss.jsnf.affrc.go.jp/ 
 
Yellow Sea:  Korea 
 
Program:  Ministry of Maritime Affairs and 
Fisheries (MAFF)  
Agency:  NFRDA, West Sea Fisheries Research 
Institute 
Central Scientific Issue:  HTL, Ecosystem 
interactions, Red Tide 
Key Research Activity:  Retrospective, Process, 
Observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start Time:  1921 
Contact:  Dr. Jin-Yeong Kim 
National Fisheries Res. and Dev. Institute 
West Sea Fisheries Research Institute 
#98-36, 1Ga Bukseong-Dong, Jung-Gu,  
Incheon, 400-201,  
Korea. 
e-mail:  jiykim@haema.nfrda.re.kr  
 
Program:  YS-LME/KOREA 
Agency:  MOST (Ministry of Science and 
Technology) 
Central Scientific Issue:  Forcing, LTL, HTL, 
Ecosystem interactions 
Key Research Activity:  Process, Observation 
studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start Time:  1995 
Contact:  Dr. Hyung-Tack Huh 
Korea Ocean Res. & Dev. Inst. 
Seoul,  
Korea.  625-400 
e-mail:  hthuh@sari.kordi.re.kr 
 
Program:  YS-LME/GEF 
Agency:  UNDP 
Central Scientific Issue:  Forcing, LTL, HTL, 
Ecosystem interactions 
Key Research Activity:  Retrospective, Process 
Observations studies 
Funding:  Proposed 
Start Time:  1996 
Contact:  Dr. Hyung-Tack Huh 
Korea Ocean Res. & Dev. Inst. 
Seoul, Korea.  625-400 
e-mail:  hthuh@sari.kordi.re.kr 
Program:  YS-MSP 
Agency:  MOST (Ministry of Science and 
Technology) 
Central Scientific Issue:  Forcing, LTL 
Key Research Activity:  Modeling, Process, 
Observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start Time:  1995 
Contact:  Dr. Tong-Sup Lee 
Korea Ocean Res. & Dev. Inst. 
Seoul, Korea.  625-400 
e-mail:  tslee@sari.kordi.re.kr 
41
Program:  Korea Science and Engineering 
Foundation (KOSEF) 
Agency:  Pukyong National University 
Central Scientific Issue:  Forcing, LTD, HTL, 
Ecosystem interactions 
Key Research Activity:  Retrospective, Process, 
Observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start Time:  1997 (on-going) 
Contact:  Prof. Chang-Ik Zhang   
College of Fisheries Sciences 
Pukyong National University 
599-1, Daeyoun-Dong, Nam-Gu 
Pusan, Korea.  608-737 
e-mail:  cizhang@dolphin.pknu.ac.kr  
 
Program:  Ministry of Maritime Affairs and 
Fisheries (MAFF) 
Agency:  Pukyong National University (PKNU), 
NFRDA 
Central Scientific Issue:  LTH, HTL 
Key Research Activity:  Retrospective, Process, 
Observation studies 
Funding:  Proposed 
Start Time:  1998 
Contact:  Prof. Chang-Ik Zhang   
College of Fisheries Sciences 
Pukyong National University 
599-1, Daeyoun-Dong, Nam-Gu 
Pusan, Korea.  608-737 
e-mail:  cizhang@dolphin.pknu.ac.kr  
 
Japan Sea/East Sea:  Korea 
 
Program: Ministry of Maritime Affairs and 
Fisheries (MAFF)  
Agency:  NFRDA, East Sea Fisheries Research 
Institute 
Central Scientific Issue:  HTL, Ecosystem 
interactions, Red Tide 
Key Research Activity:  Retrospective, Process, 
Observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start Time:  1921 
Contact:  Mr. Bok-Ki  Kim 
National Fisheries Research and Development 
Institute,  
East Sea Fisheries Research Institute 
#8-6, YeonKok-Meon, Kangreong,  
Kangwon, 210-860 
Korea 
e-mail:  esfri@chollian.dacom.co.kr  
 
Program:  Korea Science and Engineering 
Foundation (KOSEF) 
Agency:  Pukyong National University 
Central Scientific Issue:  Forcing, LTD, HTL, 
Ecosystem interactions 
Key Research Activity:  Retrospective, Process, 
Observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start Time:  1997 (on-going) 
Contact:  Prof. Chang-Ik Zhang   
College of Fisheries Sciences 
Pukyong National University,  
599-1, Daeyeon-Dong,  
Nam-Gu, Pusan,  
Korea  608-737 
e-mail:  cizhang@dolphin.pknu.ac.kr  
 
Program:  Ministry of Maritime Affairs and 
Fisheries (MAFF) 
Agency:  Pukyong National University (PKNU), 
NFRDA 
Central Scientific Issue:  LTH, HTL 
Key Research Activity:  Retrospective, Process, 
Observation studies 
Funding : Funded 
Start Time : 1998 
Contact :  Prof. Chang-Ik Zhang   
College of Fisheries Sciences 
Pukyong National University, 599-1, 
Daeyeon-Dong,  
Nam-Gu, Pusan,  
Korea  608-737 
e-mail:  cizhang@dolphin.pknu.ac.kr  
 
East China Sea:  Korea 
 
Program:  Ministry of Maritime Affairs and 
Fisheries (MAFF)  
Agency:  NFRDA 
Central Scientific Issue:  HTL, Ecosystem 
interactions 
Key Research Activity:  Observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start Time:  1995 
Contact:  Mr. Cha-Soo Park 
National Fisheries Res. and Dev. Institute 
Coastal and Offshore Resources Division 
42
#408-1, Shirang-Ri, Kijang,  
Pusan 619-900, Korea.   
 
Program:  Ministry of Maritime Affairs and 
Fisheries (MAFF)  
Agency:  NFRDA, South Sea Fisheries Research 
Institute 
Central Scientific Issue:  HTL, Ecosystem 
interactions 
Key Research Activity:  Retrospective, Process, 
Observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start Time:  1921 
Contact:  Mr. Cheol-In Baek 
National Fisheries Res. and Dev. Institute 
South Sea Fisheries Research Institute 
#26, Namsan-Dong, Yeosu,  
Cheonnam, 550-120, 
Korea.   
e-mail:  wsfri@chollian.dacom.co.kr. 
 
Program: COPEX-ECS (Coastal Ocean Processes 
Experiment) 
Agency:  MOST (Ministry of Science and 
Technology) 
Central Scientific Issue:  Forcing, LTL 
Key Research Activity:  Modeling, Process 
Funding:  Funded 
Start Time:  1994 
Contact:  Dr. Heung-Jae Lee 
Korea Ocean Res. & Dev. Inst. 
Seoul,  
Korea.  625-400 
e-mail:  hjlee@sari.kordi.re.kr 
Program:  Korea Science and Engineering 
Foundation (KOSEF) 
Agency:  Pukyong National University 
Central Scientific Issue:  Forcing, LTD, HTL, 
Ecosystem interactions 
Key Research Activity:  Retrospective, Process, 
Observation studies 
Funding:  Funded 
Start Time:  1997 (on-going) 
Contact:  Prof. Chang-Ik Zhang   
College of Fisheries Sciences 
Pukyong National University 
599-1, Daeyeon-Dong,  
Nam-Gu, Pusan,  
Korea. 608-737 
e-mail:  cizhang@dolphin.pknu.ac.kr 
 
Program:  Ministry of Maritime Affairs and 
Fisheries (MAFF) 
Agency:  Pukyong National University (PKNU), 
NFRDA 
Central Scientific Issue:  LTH, HTL 
Key Research Activity:  Retrospective, Process, 
Observation studies 
Funding : Funded 
Start Time : 1998 
Contact :  Prof. Chang-Ik Zhang   
College of Fisheries Sciences 
Pukyong National University,  
599-1, Daeyeon-Dong,  
Nam-Gu, Pusan,  
Korea  608-737 
e-mail:  cizhang@dolphin.pknu.ac.kr  
 
Bohai Sea:  China 
 
Program:  Bohai Sea Program 
Agency:  National Natural Science Foundation of 
China.  Conducted by State Oceanic Adminis-
tration, Minstry of Agriculture, Academia Sincia 
and Universities. 
Central Scientific Issues:  Forcing, LTL, HTL, 
ecosystem response 
Key Research Activities:  Retrospective, Modeling, 
Observation Study (Monitoring) 
Funding:  Funded 
Start Time:  1996 - 2000 
Contact:  Dr. Qi-Sheng Tang, Director  
Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute  
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences 
106 Nanjing Road,  
Qindao, Shandong, 
Peoples Republic of China.  266071 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43
PARTICIPANTS:  REX TASK TEAM 
Dr. Brent Hargreaves 
Recruitment Assessment Section 
Pacific Biological Station 
Hammond Bay Road,  
Nanaimo, B.C.,   
Canada.  V9R 5K6 
 
Dr. Rong Wang 
Institute of Oceanology 
Academia Sinica 
7 Nanhai Road, 
Qingdao, Shandong, 
P. R. China.  266071 
 
Dr. Anne B. Hollowed 
National Oceanic andAtmospheric Administration 
National Marine Fisheries Service 
Alaska Fisheries Science Center 
7600 Sand Point Way NE, 
Seattle, WA 98115 
U.S.A. 
 
Dr. Tokio Wada 
Bio-Ecology Division 
National Research Institute of Fisheries Science 
2-12-4 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, 
Yokohama,  
Japan.  236 
 
Dr. George L. Hunt, Jr. 
Department of Ecology 
School of Biological Sciences 
University of California, Irvine 
Irvine, CA  92697 
U.S.A. 
 
Prof. Chang-Ik Zhang 
Department of Marine Production Management 
College of Fisheries Sciences 
Pukyong National University 
599-1, Daeyoun-Dong, Nam-Gu, 
Pusan 608-737, 
Republic of Korea. 
 
Dr. Vladimir I. Radchenko 
Head, Applied Biocenology Laboratory 
Pacific Research Institute of Fisheries and 
Oceanography (TINRO) 
4 ShevChenko Alley 
Vladivostok,  
Russia.  690600 
 
Prof. Qi-Sheng Tang 
Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute 
106 Nanjing Road, 
Qingdao, Shandong, 
P. R. China.  266071 
 
 
44
PARTICIPANTS:  CCCC IP AND CCCC NATIONAL MEMBERS 
Ms. Patricia Livingston, Co-Chairman CCCC IP 
Alaska Fisheries Science Center 
National Marine Fisheries Service 
7600 Sand Point Way NE, 
Seattle, WA 98115 
U.S.A. 
 
Prof. Paul H. LeBlond 
S42, C7 RR#2, 
Galiano Island, B.C. 
Canada.  V0N 1P0 
 
Dr. Richard J. Beamish 
Pacific Biological Station 
Hammond Bay Road, 
Nanaimo, B.C., 
Canada.  V9R-5K6 
 
Dr. Vadim V. Navrotsky 
Pacific Oceanological Institute 
43 Baltiyskaya Street, 
Vladivostok, 
Russia.  690041 
 
Dr. Michael L. Dahlberg 
Auke Bay Laboratory 
NOAA Fisheries 
11305 Glacier Highway, 
Juneau, AK 99801-8626 
U.S.A. 
 
Dr. Ian Perry 
Ocean Environment and Fisheries Section 
Pacific Biological Station 
Hammond Bay Road, 
Nanaimo, B.C., 
Canada.  V9R 5K6 
 
Dr. Bruce W. Frost 
College of Fisheries and Ocean Sciences 
School of Oceanography WB-10 
University of Washington 
Seattle, WA 98195-6000 
U.S.A. 
 
Prof. Ji-Lan Su 
Second Institute of Oceanology 
State Oceanic Administration 
P.O. Box 1207, 
9 Xixihexia, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 
P. R. China.  310012 
 
Dr. Suam Kim 
Antactic Research Center 
Korea Ocean Research and Development Institute 
Ansan, P. O. 29, 
Seoul 425-600, 
Republic of Korea. 
 
Dr. Makoto Terazaki 
Ocean Research Institute 
University of Tokyo 
1-15-1 Minamidia, Nakano-ku, 
Tokyo,  
Japan.  164 
 
45
PARTICIPANTS:  GENERAL PICES COMMUNITY 
Dr. Yu-Hwan Ahn 
National Fisheries Research Development Institute 
(NFRDI) 
Fisheries Oceanography Division 
408-1 Shirang-Ri, Kijang-Up, Kijang-County, 
Pusan 619-900, 
Republic of Korea. 
 
Dr. James H. Cowan, Jr.            
Dauphin Island Sea Lab            
P.O. Box 369-370,             
101 Bienville Blvd.,              
Dauphin Island, AL  36528  
U.S.A.    
 
Dr. Vera Alexander 
Dean, School of Fisheries and Ocean Sciences 
University of Alaska 
245 O’Neill Building, 
Fairbanks, AK  99775-7220 
U.S.A. 
 
Dr. Kenneth L. Denman 
Head, Ocean Physics Division 
Institute of Ocean Sciences 
P.O. Box 6000, 
Sidney, B.C., 
Canada.  V8L 4B2 
 
Dr. Kenji Asano 
Seikai National Fisheries Research Institute 
49, Kokubu-cho, 
Nagasaki,  
Japan.  850 
 
Li-Xian Dong 
Second Institute of Oceanology 
State Oceanic Administration 
P.O. Box 1207, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 
P. R. China.  310012 
 
Dr. Richard D. Brodeur 
National Marine Fisheries Service 
Alaska Fisheries Science Center 
7600 Sand Point Way NE, 
Seattle, WA 98115 
U.S.A. 
 
Dr. Yoshinari Endo 
Faculty of Agriculture 
Tohoku University 
1-1 Amamiya-cho, 
Aobaku, Sendai, 
Japan.  981 
 
Dr. Alexander Bychkov (JGOFS SSC; Chairman, 
North Pacific Tast Team)  
Assistant Executive Secretary, PICES 
Institute of Ocean Sciences  
P.O. Box 6000,  
Sidney, B.C., 
Canada.  V8L 4B2  
 
Shi-Zuo Feng 
Ocean University of Qingdao 
5 Yushan Road, 
Qingdao, Shandong, 
P. R. China.  266003 
 
Prof. Kimio Hanawa 
Department of Geophysics 
Graduate School of Science 
Tohoku University 
Sendai, 
Japan.  980-77 
 
Prof. Koji Iida 
Hokkaido University 
Faculty of Fisheries, Hokkaido University 
3-1-1 Minato-cho, Hakodate, 
Hokkaido,  
Japan.  041 
 
46
 
Dr. Steven R. Hare 
International Pacific Halibut Commission 
P. O. Box 95009, 
Seattle, WA 98145-2009 
U.S.A. 
 
Prof. Tsutomu Ikeda 
Biological Oceanography Laboratory  
Faculty of Fisheries  
Hokkaido University 
1-1 Minato-cho, 3 chome, 
Hakodate, Hokkaido, 
Japan.  041 
 
Dr. Paul J. Harrison 
Dept. of Oceanography 
University of British Columbia 
#1461, 6270 University Blvd., 
Vancouver, B.C., 
Canada.  V6T 1Z4 
 
Dr. Yutaka Isoda 
Faculty of Fisheries, Hokkaido University 
3-1-1, Minato-cho,  
Hakodate, Hokkaido, 
Japan.  041 
 
Dr. Douglas E. Hay 
Pacific Biological Station 
Hammond Bay Road, 
Nanaimo, B.C.,  
Canada.  V9R 5K6 
 
Dr. Shin-ichi Ito 
Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute 
3-27-5, Shinhama-cho, 
Shiogama, Hokkaido, 
Japan.  085 
 
Dr. Yoshiaki Hiyama 
Japan Sea National Fisheries Research Institute 
1-5939-22, Suido-cho, 
Niigata,  
Japan.  951 
 
Dr. Young-Shil Kang 
National Fisheries Research Development Institute 
(NFRDI) 
South Sea Fisheries Research Institute 
Marine Fisheries Resources Division 
#26, Namsan-Dong, Yeosu, 
Jeonnam 530-120, 
Republic of Korea. 
 
Da-Ji Huang  
Second Institute of Oceanology 
State Oceanic Administration 
P.O. Box 1207, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 
P. R. China.  310012 
 
Dr. Makoto Kashiwai 
Hokkaido National Fisheries Res. Inst. 
116 Katsurakoi,  
Kushiro, Hokkaido,  
Japan.  085 
 
Dr. Hak-Gyoon Kim 
National Fisheries Res. Dev. Inst. (NFRDI) 
Harmful Agal Blooms & Environment Dept. 
408-1 Shirang-Ri, Kijang-Up, Kijang-County, 
Pusan 619-900, 
Republic of Korea. 
 
Dr. Jang-Uk Lee 
National Fisheries Research and Development 
Institute (NFRDI) 
Marine Fisheries Resources Department  
408-1 Shirang-Ri, Kijang-Up, Kijang-County, 
Pusan 619-900, 
Republic of Korea. 
 
47
 
Dr. Jin-Yeong Kim 
National Fisheries Research Development Institute 
(NFRDI) 
South Sea Fisheries Research Institute 
Marine Fisheries Resources Division 
#26, Namsan-Dong, Yeosu, 
Jeonnam 530-120, 
Republic of Korea 
 
Dr. David L. Mackas 
Head, Ocean Environment and Fisheries 
Institute of Ocean Sciences 
P.O. Box 6000, 
Sidney, B.C., 
Canada.  V8L 4B2 
 
Prof. Kuh Kim 
Deparment of Oceanography  
College of Natural Sciences 
Seoul National University 
San 56-1 Shillim-dong, Kwanaka-ku,  
Seoul,  
Republic of Korea.  151-742 
 
Dr. Allen Macklin 
Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory 
7600 Sand Point Way NE, 
Seattle, WA 98115 
U.S.A. 
 
Dr. Zang-Geun Kim 
National Fisheries Research Development Institute 
(NFRDI) 
Coastal & Offshore Resources Research Division 
408-1 Shirang-Ri, Kijang-Up, Kijang-County 
Pusan 619-900, 
Republic of Korea. 
 
Dr. G.A. McFarlane 
Department of Fisheries and Oceans 
Pacific Biological Station 
Hammond Bay Road, 
Nanaimo, B.C.  
Canada.  V9R 5K6 
 
Prof. Michio J. Kishi 
Ocean Research Institue 
University of Tokyo 
1-15-1 Minamidai, Nakano-ku, 
Tokyo,  
Japan.  164 
 
Tian-Xiang Meng 
Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute 
106 Nanjing Road, 
Qingdao, Shandong, 
P. R. China.  266071 
 
Prof. Michael M. Mullin 
Marine Life Research Group 
Scripps Institution of Oceanography 
MCRG/SIO/UCSD 
LaJolla, CA 92093-0227 
U.S.A. 
 
Dr. Thomas C. Royer 
The Center for Coastal Physical Oceanography 
Old Dominion University 
Crittenton Hall, 768 52nd Street, 
Norfolk, VA 23529  
U.S.A. 
 
Dr. Kazuya Nagasawa 
North Pacific Ecosystem Section 
National Research Institute of Far Seas Fisheries 
7-1-5-chome, Orido, 
Shimizu, Shizuoka, 
Japan.  424 
 
Ki-Back Seong 
National Fisheries Research Development Institute 
(NFRDI) 
Yang Yang Inland Fisheries research Institute 
424-1, Songyun-Ri, Sonyang-Myun  
Yangyang-Gun, Kangwon-Do, 215-820 
Republic of Korea. 
 
48
 
Dr. Kaoru Nakata 
National Research Institute of Fishery Science 
2-12-4, Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, 
Yokohama, 
Japan.  236 
 
Dr. Naonobu Shiga 
Biological Oceanography  
Faculty of Fisheries 
Hokkaido University 
1-1 Minato-cho, 3 chome, 
Hakodate, Hokkaido, 
Japan.  041 
 
Dr. Kuniaki Okuda 
Thohoku National Fisheries Research Institute 
3-27-5, Shinhama-cho 
Shiogama, Hokkaido,  
Japan.  085 
 
Prof. Takashige Sugimoto 
Ocean Research Institute 
University of Tokyo 
1-15-1 Minamidai, Nakano-ku, 
Tokyo,  
Japan.  164 
 
Dr. Robert S. Otto 
National Marine Fisheries Service 
Kodiak Laboratory 
P.O. Box 1638, 
Kodiak, AK 99615 
U.S.A. 
 
Song Sun 
Institute of Oceanology 
Academia Sinica 
7 Nanhai Road, 
Qingdao, Shandong, 
P. R. China.  266071 
 
Prof. Akira Taniguchi 
Faculty of Agriculture 
Tohoku University 
1-1 Amamiya-cho, 
Aobaku, Sendai, 
Japan.  981 
 
Dr. Zeng- Mao Wu 
Ocean University of Qingdao 
5 Yushan Road, 
Qingdao, Shandong, 
P. R. China.  266003 
 
Dr. Atsushi Tsuda 
Hokkaido National Fisheries Research Institute 
11-6 Katsurakoi, 
Kushiro, Hokkaido, 
Japan.  085 
 
Dr. Orio Yamamura 
Hokkaido National Fisheries Research Institute 
116 Katsurakoi,  
Kushiro, Hokkaido, 
Japan.  085 
 
Dr. Anatoly F. Volkov 
TINRO - Center 
4 Shevchenko Alley, 
Vladivostok,  
Russia.  6900600 
 
Dr. In-Ja Yoen 
National Fisheries Research Development Institute 
(NFRDI) 
West Sea Fisheries Research Institute 
Dept. of Marine Fisheries Biology 
98-36, Bukseong-Dong 1Ga Jang-Gu,  
Inchon, 400-201 
Republic of Korea. 
 
49
 
Dr. Kazutoshi Watanabe 
Hokkaido National Fisheries Research Inst. 
116 Katsurakoi,  
Kushiro, Hokkaido, 
Japan.  085 
 
Dr. Yoshiaki Hiyama  
Resources Management 
Japan Sea National Research Institute 
1-5939-22 Suido-cho, 
Niigata, 
Japan.  951 
 
Dr. David Welch 
Pacific Biological Station 
Hammond Bay Road, 
Nanaimo, B.C., 
Canada.  V9R 5K6 
 
Dr. Xou-Xian Yuan 
Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute 
106 Nanjing Road, 
Qingdao, Shandong, 
P. R. China.  266071 
 
Dr. Warren S. Wooster  
School of Marine Affairs HF-05 
University of Washington 
3707 Brooklyn Ave. NE, 
Seattle, WA 98105-6715 
U.S.A. 
 
Dr. Zhi-Nan Zhang 
Ocean University of Qingdao 
5 Yushan Road, 
Qingdao, Shandong, 
P. R. China.  266003 
 
 
50
